Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MIAMI, FL
Accident Number:
MIA95LA032
Date & Time:
12/03/1994, 1246 EST 
Registration:
N707PP
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172D
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he was in cruise flight at 5,000 feet agl and had slowed to 70 mph. The 
passenger stated that she was taking off her headset and moving her seat back so she could get 
a good photograph. The pilot heard what sounded like a yell, and simultaneously felt wind and 
noise in the cabin. He looked towards the sound, and observed the passenger partially out of 
the airplane. When their eyes met, she jumped. Review of ATC transcripts verified that the 
pilot departed and returned to the departure airport without any intermediate stops. Another 
pilot wrote a letter to the Safety Board describing a similar incident that occurred 4 days prior 
to the accident with the same passenger. During that flight, she unlatched the door gunner's 
safety belt while sitting on the floor with her feet outside the airplane on the landing gear. At 
the time, she was wearing a parachute with a hidden automatic opener on the reserve 
parachute. She was subsequently pulled back into the airplane by a safety crewmember and 
restrained for the return flight. The passenger's airman and medical certificates had been 
revoked 8/12/91 for failing to disclose a history of, among other conditions, a personality 
disorder and for the taking of numerous prescribed medications. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The passenger committed suicide. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) SUICIDE - INTENTIONAL - PASSENGER
Page 2 of 5MIA95LA032
Factual Information
 On December 3, 1994, about 1246 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172D, N707PP, registered 
to Hodelin F. Rene, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 aerial photography flight, reported to FAA 
air traffic control while in cruise flight, that his female passenger jumped out of the airplane in 
the vicinity of Miami, Florida. The passenger was not located and is presumed to be fatally 
injured. The airplane was not damaged. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan was filed. The flight originated from Opa Locka Airport, Opa Locka, Florida, about 1 
hour 6 minutes before the accident.
     Charles J. Flowers, President of Flowers Air Charter, Opa Locka, Florida, stated his office 
was contacted on three separate occasions in November 1994, by Christine M. Pascale, who 
asked  to rent an airplane with a pilot to take some aerial photographs. Mr. Flowers stated he 
was unable to support her request, and he contacted a private owner, Hodelin F.Rene, who 
agreed to make the flight.
     The pilot, Hodelin F. Rene, stated he arrived at Flowers Air Charter, on December 3, 1994, 
at about 1000, and was introduced to his passenger by Mr. Flowers. Miss Pascale stated she 
wanted to take several pictures of a couple of houses in the Cutler Ridge area, and drew a circle 
around the area on an aeronautical chart. He went to Terminal One, taxied  his airplane to 
Flowers Air Charter, and did a preflight inspection. The passenger did her own preflight 
inspection, and asked several questions about the operations of the right passenger door. They 
departed Opa Locka Airport and flew to the area previously marked on the map. He leveled off 
at 5,000 feet agl, slowed the airplane to 70 mph, and asked her where she wanted to go. She 
stated she would look outside to make sure. A short time later, she stated she was going to take 
off the headset and move the seat back so she could get a good shot. He then heard what 
sounded like a yell, felt wind and noise simultaneously in the cabin area. He looked towards the 
sound, she was already partly out of the airplane, and when their eyes met, she jumped out. "I 
was in total amazement, shock and just froze for a moment, not knowing what to do. I could 
not believe what had happened. After about ten seconds, I called ATC and requested a descent 
as I struggled to close the door." He then informed ATC that he would like to declare an 
emergency, that his passenger had jumped out of the airplane.
     Review of communications on December 3, 1994, for the time period between 1640 UTC 
(1140 EST) to 1807 UTC (1307 EST) between Miami ATCT, Fort Lauderdale South 
Arrival/Departure Radar, Arrival/Departure Interphone, South Departure Radar, Opa Locka 
ATC Tower, and N707PP indicate the airplane departed Opa Locka Airport, landed at Opa 
Locka Airport without any intermediate stops and confirmed ATC statements made by the 
pilot.
     Mr. Thomas D. Manning, Skydive, Inc., Homestead, Florida, wrote a letter to the NTSB on 
December 4, 1994, stating that Christine M.Pascale attempted to jump out of his airplane on 
November 29, 1994, while on an aerial photography flight in the vicinity of Burger King 
Headquarters, on Old Cutler Road in Miami, Florida. After landing at the Homestead General 
Aviation Airport, Homestead, Florida, a confrontation ensued, and the Metro Dade Police 
Department was called. Mr. Manning informed the two police officers who responded to the 
call that he thought Miss Pascale was trying to commit suicide.
     Review of airman records on file with the FAA Airmen Certification Branch, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, revealed the passenger, Christine M. Pascale, was issued private pilot certificate No. 
Page 3 of 5MIA95LA032
85526189, on October 22, 1990, with ratings for airplane single engine land. The Administrator 
of the Federal Aviation Administration, issued an emergency order of revocation of any airman 
pilot certificate or airman medical certificate held by the passenger on August 12, 1991. The 
airman and medical certificates were revoked for falsification of airman medical application 
dated March 23, 1990, October 27, 1990, and general medical condition. She failed to disclose 
that she had a history of the following:      a. Seizures      b. Personality disorder      c. 
Uncontrolled hypertension      d. Myasthenia gravis      e. Asthma      f. Stroke      g. Steroid 
dependency      h. Multiple allergies      i. Cerebral hemorrhage secondary to ruptured aneurism      
j. Taking numerous prescribed medications
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/04/1993
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
246 hours (Total, all aircraft), 157 hours (Total, this make and model), 129 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 28 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N707PP
Model/Series:
172D 172D
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17249752
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/1994, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
15 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3345 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONTINENTAL
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-300-D
Registered Owner:
RENE, HODELIN  F.
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
RENE, HODELIN  F.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5MIA95LA032
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MIA, 11 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1250 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 25000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
OPA LOCKA, FL (OPF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1140 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
CARROL     A SMITH
Adopted Date:
10/31/1995
Additional Participating Persons:
CARLENTINE   SINGLETARY; MIAMI, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5MIA95LA032
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
