National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fairbanks, AK
Accident Number: ANC08CA114
Date & Time: 09/01/2008, 1415 AKD
Registration: N91027
Aircraft: CESSNA 207
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Landing area overshoot
Injuries: 4 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The commercial pilot related that he was attempting to land at a rough and uneven remote airstrip, which was surrounded by mountainous terrain.
He added that the southerly approach to the airstrip required a correction for variable, easterly winds between 5 and 10 knots.
He said that just before touchdown he elected to add engine power to avoid an area of rough terrain on the northern end of the site.
The airplane ballooned, and landed about mid-length along the 1,500 foot-long, by 30 feet-wide airstrip.
After touchdown, the pilot realized that he would be unable to stop the airplane before reaching the end of the airstrip, and he added full engine power to abort the landing, but the airplane failed to become airborne again.
The airplane continued off the south end of the site, down an embankment, and into a creek bed.
The airplane sustained structural damage to the wings, fuselage, and empennage.
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's delay in aborting the landing.
A factor contributing to the accident was a variable wind.
: 3800 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 32 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 13457 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Teledyne Continental Motors ELT: Installed, activated, aided in locating accident Engine Model/Series: IO-550-F Registered Owner: Wright Air Service, Inc.
Type of Clearance: None Departure Time: 1340 ADT Type of Airspace: Airport Information Airport: Peede Airstrip (.)
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
