The accident flight was the pilot's first solo flight in the experimental amateur-built airplane, 
which had not been flown for about 6 months. The airplane departed without incident; 
however, about 10 minutes after takeoff, it experienced a total loss of engine power (as 
reported by a witness) and subsequently impacted in a tidal marsh. Postaccident examination 
of the airplane, which included disassembly of its engine, did not reveal evidence of any 
preimpact mechanical malfunctions; however, the fuel system was completely compromised 
and the majority of the ignition system was not recovered. While the airplane had a reported 
history of fuel system issues, the logbooks were not located, and the airplane's maintenance 
and operational history could not be verified. Therefore, the reason for the loss of engine power 
could not be determined.
The pilot had no record of a Federal Aviation Administration medical certification 
examination. A limited autopsy did not identify any natural disease. Toxicology testing 
detected ethanol in muscle (0.082 gm/dl) and liver (0.082 gm/dl), as well as n-butanol and n-
propanol. While the distribution of ethanol in the muscle and liver is not inconsistent with 
ingestion, decomposition and the finding of n-butanol and n-propanol in tissues suggests that 
some or all of the ethanol came from microbial action after death. 
Additionally, diphenhydramine and citalopram and its metabolite were detected in liver and 
muscle. Although diphenhydramine can cause significant psychomotor impairment, no blood 
was available for analysis, thus it could not be determined if the pilot was impaired by the 
diphenhydramine at the time of the accident. Citalopram is an antidepressant that is not 
generally considered impairing; however, it was unknown if the pilot's underlying psychiatric 
condition was under control.
A total loss of engine power during cruise flight for reasons that could not be determined due 
to the postaccident condition of the engine and its associated fuel and ignition systems.
