The pilot was conducting an aerial pipeline observation flight when the helicopter suddenly 
yawed to the right and he received a low rotor rpm warning. The pilot applied left pedal to 
correct the yaw; however, the helicopter continued its right turn, impacted the ground, and 
rolled onto its side, resulting in substantial damage. Examination of the wreckage and testing 
of components did not reveal any preimapct anomalies that would have precluded normal 
helicopter operation. 
Nonvolatile memory obtained from the helicopter indicated that its groundspeed varied during 
the last 10 seconds of recorded data to a low of about 9 knots, increasing to about 25 knots, 
then decreasing to about 12 knots. During this time period, the helicopter™s altitude decreased 
to about 50 feet above ground level (agl). The last recorded point showed the helicopter about 
30 feet agl at a groundspeed of about 15 knots on a northwesterly heading. Weather 
observations from a nearby airport indicated variable wind from the south at 10 knots with 
gusts to 21 knots about the time of the accident.
The helicopter's orientation to the prevailing wind and its slow airspeed made the helicopter 
susceptible to a loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE). Additionally, the helicopter's low altitude 
at the time of the LTE encounter was inadequate to allow for recovery before its impact with 
terrain. 
The pilot™s failure to recognize and correct for flight conditions conducive to a loss of tail rotor 
effectiveness, which resulted in a rapid, uncommanded right yaw and subsequent hard landing.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 2, 2014, about 1255 central daylight time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N49746, had a 
hard landing following a loss of tail rotor effectiveness near Woodsboro, Texas. The airline 
transport rated pilot and two passengers received serious injuries. The helicopter sustained 
substantial damage during a subsequent roll over. The helicopter was registered to and 
operated by an individual doing business as Heartland Helicopters under the provisions of 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an aerial observation flight. Day visual flight rules 
conditions prevailed for the flight, which did not operate on a flight plan. The flight originated 
from the Alfred C 'Bubba' Thomas Airport (T69), near Sinton, Texas, about 1200, and was 
destined for the Beeville Municipal Airport, near Beeville, Texas.
According to the pilot's accident report, the purpose of the flight was a laser examination of a 
pipeline to detect methane gas. He indicated that he was flying the helicopter between 35 and 
40 meters above ground level. The pilot reported that the helicopter suddenly yawed to the 
right without warning. He indicated that he did not recall "when a warning horn went off, but 
there was a warning horn." He recalled it as a low rotor rpm warning. The pilot stated that 
there were wires to his right side and building structures on his left. The pilot reported the 
helicopter yawed, he indicated he was sure he applied pressure to the left pedal, and a loss of 
tail rotor effectiveness occurred. The pilot said that the helicopter hesitated turning right for a 
"short" period of time and then continued the turn to the right. He intended to guide the 
helicopter away from the wires and structure. However, the helicopter continued one full 
revolution to the right. The pilot, in part, stated:
It was at this point I had two thoughts. I need to reduce collective in order to maintain 
sufficient rotor speed to cushion the landing. I also did not roll off the throttle because I did not 
want to shut down a good engine if I had one. I did my best to land the aircraft in a level and 
stable manner. The aircraft impacted the ground. I do not remember bouncing, but we 
impacted and rolled to the right and ended up with the aircraft positioned on the right side.
According to a passenger on the pipeline inspection flight, he heard another passenger guide 
the pilot to make a right turn as the helicopter approached a set of power lines. He felt the 
helicopter change "position" while making the turn. The passenger then "heard a change, 
decrease, in the engine RPM, followed almost immediately by a warning horn" and he "heard 
the pilot say that he had a low tail rotor warning." The helicopter started to spin and the he 
braced for impact. When asked to describe the sounds he heard, the passenger reported that 
the engine sounded "similar to that of a lawnmower, running at a normal speed and how it 
bogs down in tall weeds or grass. The engine bogging was immediately followed by the master 
warning horn."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 47, held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airline transport pilot 
certificate with an airplane multi-engine land rating. He held commercial pilot airplane single-
engine land, rotorcraft helicopter, and instrument helicopter privileges. He held a flight 
instructor certificate with airplane single-engine and rotorcraft helicopter ratings. He also held 
a flight engineer certificate with a turbojet powered airplane rating. He reported that he held a 
FAA second-class medical certificate dated August 15, 2014, with a limitation that he must 
wear corrective lenses. His most recent flight review was completed on May 20, 2014. The 
pilot's report indicated that he accumulated a total flight time of 13,916 hours, of which 2,376 
hours were in rotorcraft and 35 hours were in the same make and model as the accident 
helicopter.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N49746 was a 1976 model Bell 206B helicopter with serial number 1928. A 420-shaft 
horsepower Rolls Royce 250-C20B engine with serial number CAE-834605 powered the 
helicopter. It was a five-place, single main rotor helicopter with a tail mounted anti-torque 
rotor. According to the pilot's accident report, the helicopter was maintained under a 
manufacturer's inspection program and its last inspection was a 100-hour inspection dated 
June 5, 2014. The helicopter accumulated 18,323.2 hours of total flight time at the time of the 
inspection. According to National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) report FTW81DRA33, 
the helicopter was involved in a prior accident on May 19, 1981, when it sustained substantial 
damage during a takeoff accident in the Gulf of Mexico.
The helicopter was fitted with a Pergam Aerial Laser Methane Assessment (ALMA) device. The 
Pergam website indicated the system is a laser based natural gas detection system. ALMA 
consists of an on-board laptop that manages the data acquisition and data processing, an on-
board electronic laser-control system, a GPS receiver, and a helicopter belly-mounted optical 
unit. The optical unit is a refraction-based system, which consists of a laser, a reference 
channel, and three digital video recording cameras. The cameras are integrated into the ALMA 
system and indicate the location that is scanned by the system's laser beam. According to the 
website, it is simultaneously used to help the pilot position the helicopter over the object that 
needs inspection.
A copy of a fuel receipt indicated the helicopter was serviced on October 2, 2014, with 60.1 
gallons of Jet A fuel at T69.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1353, the recorded weather about 17 miles and 122 degrees from the accident site at the 
Aransas County Airport, near Rockport, Texas, was: Wind 170 degrees at 10 knots, gusting to 
21 knots with winds varying from 130 degrees to 190 degrees; visibility 10 statute miles; sky 
condition few clouds at 1,600 feet, scattered clouds at 2,400 feet, broken clouds at 2,900 feet; 
temperature 32 degrees C; dew point 26 degrees C; altimeter 29.86 inches of mercury. The 
field elevation at the airport was about 24 feet above mean sea level (MSL).
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The helicopter was not equipped with a cockpit voice recorder or flight data recorder nor was it 
required to be. However, the ALMA system included a Lenovo ThinkPad, Hitachi Hard Drives, 
an Argosy PCMCIA Card, and a Garmin GPSMAP 296. These items were shipped to the NTSB 
Vehicle Recorder Laboratory for examination and downloading.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The helicopter impacted a field near Woodsboro, Texas, and was relocated to a local salvage 
yard. The NTSB investigator in charge (IIC) examined the wreckage at the salvage yard with 
the engine manufacturer. The observed damage and deformation was consistent with the 
pilot's report of the helicopter coming to rest on its right side. The helicopter's mast exhibited a 
separation, which was consistent with overload. The main rotor blades exhibited damage 
consistent with impact with terrain. The helicopter's transmission rotated when manipulated 
by hand. The tailboom was separated from the helicopter fuselage and the tail rotor driveshaft 
inside exhibited a separation consistent with being cut by recovery personnel. The tailboom 
separation exhibited deformation consistent with its contact with terrain during a helicopter 
rollover to the right. The tail rotor blades were intact on the aft portion of the tailboom. The 
skids exhibited deformation and separations consistent with overload. There was a tear 
observed in the lower portion of the fuel cell. Both of the cell's fuel boost pumps were intact 
and they pumped fuel when electrical power was applied to them. Airframe filters were opened 
and no anomalies were observed within them. The tail rotor and main rotor systems moved 
when the turbine blades inside the exhaust were rotated by hand. No airframe pre-impact 
anomalies were observed. The engine did not exhibit any exterior damages and it was 
separated from the airframe for a teardown examination.
The engine was examined under supervision of the IIC at the engine manufacturer. 
Disassembly did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded engine operation. The 
engine's fuel control and governor were hand carried by the IIC for testing at their 
manufacturer.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The GPS, hard drives, and PCMCIA card were examined by an NTSB Recorder Laboratory 
specialist. No useable data was able to be extracted from them that assisted in the 
investigation. However, the recorder specialist found that the laptop contained flight position 
data. This data was decoded and plotted in the specialist's factual report.
The data showed that during the time between 1249 and 1255, the helicopter flew south before 
executing a left 270-degree turn to the west on a path along a roadway. The helicopter then 
turned right 90 degrees and its path paralleled another roadway toward the north.
The helicopter then turned left 90 degrees and its path followed another roadway to the west. 
The helicopter's recorded groundspeed was varied between about 50 to 70 knots during this 
segment of the flight. The altitude flown began at about 200 feet MSL and trended down to 
about 70 feet before trending back up to about 120 feet. About 1255, the helicopter's ground 
track began to head to the north away from the road it had been flying along and its 
groundspeed decreased to about 15 knots. Simultaneously, the helicopter's altitude dropped 
from about 130 feet MSL to about 100 fee and then again to about 55 feet before it came back 
up to about 80 feet. The helicopter's groundspeed varied during its last 10 seconds of recorded 
data to a low of 9.4 knots, increasing to 25.2 knots one second later, and decreasing again to 
12.3 knots. During this time period, the helicopter's altitude decreased to the 50-foot range. 
The last recorded point showed the helicopter was about 4.1 miles southeast of Woodsboro, 
Texas, on a track of 304 degrees true, an altitude of 53 feet MSL, and a groundspeed of 15.4 
knots.
Both the fuel control and governor were operational during testing on test benches.
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION
FAA Advisory Circular 90-95 - Unanticipated Right Yaw in Helicopters and the Helicopter 
Flying Handbook describe the phenomenon of loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE). The 
handbook, in part, stated:
LTE or an unanticipated yaw is defined as an uncommanded, rapid yaw
towards the advancing blade which does not subside of its own accord.
It can result in the loss of the aircraft if left unchecked. It is very
important for pilots to understand that LTE is caused by an
aerodynamic interaction between the main rotor and tail rotor and not
caused from a mechanical failure. Some helicopter types are more likely
to encounter LTE due to the normal certification thrust produced by
having a tail rotor that, although meeting certification standards, is not
always able to produce the additional thrust demanded by the pilot.
...
LTE is an aerodynamic condition and is the result of a control margin
deficiency in the tail rotor. It can affect all single rotor helicopters that
utilize a tail rotor of some design. The design of main and tail rotor
blades and the tail boom assembly can affect the characteristics and
susceptibility of LTE but will not nullify the phenomenon entirely.
Translational lift is obtained by any amount of clean air through the
main rotor system. Chapter 3 discusses translational lift with respect to
the main rotor blade, explaining that the more clean air there is going
through the rotor system, the more efficient it becomes. The same
holds true for the tail rotor. As the tail rotor works in less turbulent air,
it reaches a point of translational thrust. At this point, the tail rotor
becomes aerodynamically efficient and the improved efficiency
produces more antitorque thrust. The pilot can determine when the tail
rotor has reached translational thrust. As more antitorque thrust is
produced, the nose of the helicopter yaws to the left (opposite
direction of the tail rotor thrust), forcing the pilot to correct with right
pedal application (actually decreasing the left pedal). This, in turn,
decreases the [angle of attack] AOA in the tail rotor blades. Pilots
should be aware of the characteristics of the helicopter they fly and be
particularly aware of the amount of tail rotor pedal typically required
for different flight conditions.
LTE is a condition that occurs when the flow of air through a tail rotor is
altered in some way, either by altering the angle or speed at which the
air passes through the rotating blades of the tail rotor system. An
effective tail rotor relies on a stable and relatively undisturbed airflow in
order to provide a steady and constant antitorque reaction as discussed
in the previous paragraph. The pitch and angle of attack of the
individual blades will determine the thrust output of the tail rotor. A
change to any of these alters the amount of thrust generated. A pilot's
yaw pedal input affects a thrust reaction from the tail rotor. Altering
the amount of thrust delivered for the same yaw input creates an
imbalance. Taking this imbalance to the extreme will result in the loss
of effective control in the yawing plane, and LTE will occur.
This alteration of tail rotor thrust can be affected by numerous external
factors. The main factors contributing to LTE are:
1. Airflow and downdraft generated by the main rotor blades
interfering with the airflow entering the tail rotor assembly.
2. Main blade vortices developed at the main blade tips entering the
tail rotor.
3. Turbulence and other natural phenomena affecting the airflow
surrounding the tail rotor.
4. A high power setting, hence large main rotor pitch angle, induces
considerable main rotor blade downwash and hence more turbulence
than when the helicopter is in a low power condition.
5. A slow forward airspeed, typically at speeds where translational lift
and translational thrust are in the process of change and airflow
around the tail rotor will vary in direction and speed.
6. The airflow relative to the helicopter;
a. Worst caseŠrelative wind within ±15 degrees of the 10 o'clock
position, generating vortices that can blow directly into the tail rotor.
This is dictated by the characteristics of the helicopters aerodynamics
of tailboom position, tailrotor size and position relative to the main
rotor and vertical stabilizer, size and shape.
b. Weathercock stabilityŠtailwinds from 120 degrees to 240 degrees,
such as left crosswinds, causing high pilot workload.
c. Tail rotor vortex ring state (210 degrees to 330 degrees). Winds
within this region will result in the development of the vortex ring
state of the tail rotor.
7. Combinations (a, b, c) of these factors in a particular situation can
easily require more anti-torque than the helicopter can generate and in
a particular environment LTE can be the result.
Certain flight activities lend themselves to being more at high risk to
LTE than others. For example, power line and pipeline patrol sectors,
low speed aerial filming/photography as well as in the Police and
Helicopter Emergency Medical Services (EMS) environments can find
themselves in low and slow situations over geographical areas where
the exact wind speed and direction are hard to determine.
Unfortunately, the aerodynamic conditions that a helicopter is
susceptible to are not explainable in black and white terms. LTE is no
exception. There are a number of contributing factors but what is
more important to understanding LTE are taking the contributing
factors and couple them with situations that should be avoided.
Whenever possible, pilots should learn to avoid the following
combinations:
1. Low and slow flight outside of ground effect.
2. Winds from ±15 degrees of the 10 o'clock position and probably on
around to 5 o'clock position
3. Tailwinds that may alter the onset of translational lift and
translational thrust hence induce high power demands and demand
more anti-torque (left pedal) than the tail rotor can produce.
4. Low speed downwind turns.
5. Large changes of power at low airspeeds.
6. Low speed flight in the proximity of physical obstructions that may
alter a smooth airflow to both the main rotor and tail rotor.
Pilots who put themselves in situations where the combinations above
occur should know that they are likely to encounter LTE. The key is to
not put the helicopter in a compromising condition but if it does
happen being educated enough to recognize the onset of LTE and be
prepared to quickly react to it before the helicopter cannot be
controlled.
Early detection of LTE followed by the immediate flight control
application of corrective action; applying forward cyclic to regain
airspeed, applying right pedal not left as necessary to maintain rotor
RPM and reducing the collective thus reducing the high power demand
on the tail rotor is the key to a safe recovery. Pilots should always set
themselves up when conducting any maneuver to have enough height
and space available to recover in the event they encounter an
aerodynamic situation such as LTE.
Understanding the aerodynamic phenomenon of LTE is by far the most
important factor, and the ability and option to either go around if
making an approach or pull out of a maneuver safely and re-plan, is
always the safe option. Having the ability to fly away from a situation
and re-think the possible options should always be part of a pilot's
planning process in all phases of flight.
