Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MYERSTOWN, PA
Accident Number:
NYC97LA024
Date & Time:
12/02/1996, 1521 EST 
Registration:
N394PM
Aircraft:
Piper PA-46-350P
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During the climb after takeoff, between 3,500 and 4,000 feet, the pilot noticed the engine oil 
pressure decreasing and the oil temperature increasing. The pilot advised the controller that he 
was experiencing a problem, and he was provided radar vectors to the nearest airport. During 
vectors, the engine failed, and oil covered the windshield and pilot's side window. Unable to see 
the airport, the pilot completed a forced landing to an open field, where the airplane impacted 
the ground. The engine had accumulated about 440 hrs of flight time, since it was last 
overhauled (by the manufacturer). Investigation revealed that remanufactured connecting rods 
had been installed. Examination of the engine revealed four of the six connecting rod bearings 
had melted at the crankshaft, and fatigue cracks were found on the number four connecting 
rod and end cap. When the connecting rod end cap retaining nuts were removed, rings of 
moderate wear and fretting were found in the nut recesses where the nuts contacted the rods. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
fatigue failure of the connecting rod to crankshaft attachments, due to inadequate overhaul of 
the engine by the manufacturer, which resulted in a loss of engine power and a forced landing.  
Factors relating to the accident included the discharge of oil from the ruptured engine, which 
subsequently obstructed the pilot's view through the windshield and side window, preventing 
him from having an unobstructed view of the emergency landing area. 
Page 2 of 7NYC97LA024
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CONNECTING ROD BOLT - LOOSE
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,REBUILD/REMANUFACTURE - INADEQUATE - MANUFACTURER
3. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CONNECTING ROD - FATIGUE
4. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CONNECTING ROD CAP - FATIGUE
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
5. (F) FLUID,OIL - DISCHARGED
6. (F) WINDOW,FLIGHT COMPARTMENT WINDOW/WINDSHIELD - OBSTRUCTED
7. (F) VISUAL/AURAL DETECTION - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 7NYC97LA024
Factual Information
 On December 2, 1996, at 1521 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-46-350P, N394PM, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing near the Decks Airport, Myerstown, 
Pennsylvania.  The certificated private pilot received serious injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the personal flight that originated at Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, about 
1508.  A visual flight rules flight plan had been filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 
91.
    In the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot/owner stated that he flew an uneventful proficiency 
flight from Somerset, New Jersey, to Harrisburg.  After landing, without shutting the engine 
down, he received taxi and flight following instructions for a return flight to Somerset.  During 
the climb after takeoff, between 3,500 and 4,000 feet, the pilot noticed the engine oil pressure 
decreasing, and the oil temperature increasing.   The pilot advised the controller that he was 
experiencing a problem, and after a discussion with the controller, he was provided a heading 
to the Decks Airport.
    The pilot further stated:
"...He vectored me toward the Decks Airport and about the time I made the turn to the proper 
heading, the engine stopped running and oil was thrown on the left windscreen.  I was having 
trouble seeing.  The only thing I was able to see in front of me was a row of houses.  I looked 
out the right side window and saw a field and I decided I would try to put the plane down on 
the field..."
    Several witnesses observed the airplane near the Decks Airport.  Three of the witnesses 
stated that they observed the airplane heading east, about 2 miles south of the airport, at 3,000 
feet.  They observed white smoke trailing the airplane.  The airplane made an abrupt turn to 
the north, and when the airplane was about mid-field,  black smoke was observed trailing the 
airplane. 
    The witnesses further stated:
"...At that time he made a hard left turn toward the southwest, the engine had locked-up and 
the gear was down.  It appeared that he was trying to make the field but could not.  He stalled 
the airplane approximately 40 feet above the ground at which time the right wing dropped.  
Then he impacted the ground..."
    On January 8, 1997, the engine was disassembled at Executive Air, Hagerstown, Maryland.  
Present during the examination was the NTSB investigator-in-charge, and parties to the 
investigation.  The engine examination revealed that the numbers one, two, and five 
connecting rod ends and bearings had melted from the crankshaft.  The number six connecting 
rod crankshaft bearing was melted to the crankshaft.  The number three connecting rod rotated 
freely on the crankshaft; however, when disassembled, the bearing was worn and grooved.  The 
number four connecting rod crankshaft bearing was broken in several pieces and partially 
melted to the crankshaft.  The numbers three and four connecting rods and bearings were 
removed for further examination. 
    Several pieces of metal were found in the valve covers of the numbers two, four, and six 
cylinders.  The suction oil screen was packed with metal particles similar to the connecting rod 
ends.  Large quantities of metal particles were also found in the oil filter, lines and sump.  One 
Page 4 of 7NYC97LA024
turbo charger rotated freely.  The other turbo charger contained caked mud.  When the mud 
was removed, the turbo charger rotated freely.
NTSB Materials Laboratory 
    The connecting rod components were sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory Division for 
examination.  The Metallurgist's Factual Report addressed the number four connecting rod.  
The report stated:
"...fractures were located at the machined recess for the rod bolt nuts.  Optical examinations 
revealed features indicative of fatigue progression along two fronts for each fracture...fatigue 
fronts initiated at multiple origins on the machined sides of the nut recess...fatigue fronts 
initiated at the corners between the recess and the exterior surface of the rod...The rod cap was 
transversely fractured approximately equidistant from the split line faces...Optical examination 
of the fracture showed characteristics of multiple independent fatigue cracks emanating from 
the bearing surface..."
    The Metallurgist's report also stated:
"...the rod bolt nuts were cut and removed...Visual examination found moderate fretting and 
some galling on the contact faces...With the nuts removed, rings of moderate wear and fretting 
were noted in the nut recesses where the nuts contacted the rods..."
Engine History
    The Lycoming engine installed in N394PM had been overhauled by Textron-Lycoming, on 
September 25, 1995.  The Lycoming certificate in the engine log book stated, "...All parts have 
been inspected and have been determined airworthy to return to service..."  The engine was 
installed with zero total time.  At the time of installation a new oil cooler, oil cooler hoses, and 
oil filter were also installed.  The engine examination revealed that the connecting rods were 
stamped with "-85."  According to the Lycoming investigator, the -85 represented 
remanufactured parts.  The engine had accumulated about 440 hours since installation.  The 
engine log book revealed that the engine oil had been changed on the average about every 18 
hours for the first 100 hours of operation, and every 27 hours for the next 350 hours.
Fuselage
    The airplane fuselage was also examined on January 8, 1997.  An oil coating obstructed 
vision out the front windshield and pilot's side window.  The examination also revealed that the 
pilot's shoulder harness reel and attachment bracket had separated from the fuselage.
    This accident, and another fatal PA-46 accident, were review with the New Piper Aircraft, 
Inc.  As a result of the information, the New Piper Aircraft, Inc., issued a PA-46 service bulletin 
for a shoulder harness mounting bracket replacement kit.
Page 5 of 7NYC97LA024
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
70, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/12/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1924 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300 hours (Total, this make and model), 1707 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 64 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N394PM
Model/Series:
PA-46-350P PA-46-350P
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
4622153
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/16/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
233 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1433 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540-AE2A
Registered Owner:
MARK J. ANTON
Rated Power:
350 hp
Operator:
MARK J. ANTON
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7NYC97LA024
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
RDG, 344 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1455 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 8000 ft agl
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
HARRISBURG INTL, PA 
(MDT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
SOMERSET, NJ (N52)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1508 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     L PEARCE
Adopted Date:
04/15/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
JOSEPH   GREEN; HARRISBURG, PA
JAMES   BROWN; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
DANIEL   MCANALLY; VERO BEACH, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7NYC97LA024
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
