National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: COLUMBIA, NC
Accident Number: ATL99LA027
Date & Time: 12/03/1998, 1430 EST
Registration: N18022
Aircraft: Cessna 150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Approximately one hour into the flight, the flight instructor reported that the engine developed a rough condition and a reduction in power.
Since normal flight could not be maintained, the flight instructor selected a field that he believed would be suitable for a forced landing.
During the landing roll, the flight instructor attempted to avoid a collision with a drainage ditch and trees.
After the airplane went through several gyrations, it rested180 degrees from the initial landing direction.
Examination of the engine disclosed that the #2 exhaust valve had failed, and pieces if the valve head  were lodged in the cylinder and the exhaust system.
The examination of the valve revealed that the valve head separated at the valve stem attach point.
The valve stem remained in a normally installed position, and functioned normally when the engine drive train was rotated.
A review of the engine maintenance logs disclosed that this engine had a previous exhaust valve failure 931 hours ago.
The exhaust valve Part Number was SA-646612.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the #2 exhaust valve that resulted in the total loss of engine power.
A factor is the lack of suitable emergency landing terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,VALVE,EXHAUST - FAILURE,TOTAL ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On December 3, 1998, at 1430 eastern standard time, a Cessna 150, N18022, collided with the ground during an emergency landing, near Columbia, North Carolina.
The instructional flight was operated by the flight instructor under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed.
A review of weather data from the nearest reporting facility disclosed that visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
According to the operator, the airframe sustained substantial structural damage.
The certified flight instructor and the student pilot, were not injured.
The local flight departed Manteo, North Carolina, at 1330.
According to the flight instructor, before the initial takeoff, he and the student pilot completed a preflight inspection and a normal engine run-up.
The flight instructor reported that after the initial takeoff they flew to Elizabeth City, North Carolina, where they made a touch and go landing.
The flight instructor and student pilot made another touch and go landing at Edenton, North Carolina.
Approximately one hour into the flight, the flight instructor reported that the engine developed a rough condition and a reduction in power.
Since normal flight could not be maintained, the  flight instructor selected a field that he believed would be suitable for a forced landing.
During the landing roll the flight instructor attempted to avoid a collision with a drainage ditch and trees.
After the airplane went through several gyrations, it rested 180 degrees from the initial landing direction.
Examination of the engine disclosed that the #2 exhaust valve had failed, and pieces of the valve head  were lodged in the cylinder and the exhaust system.
The examination of the valve revealed that the valve head separated at the valve stem attach point.
The valve stem remained in a normally installed position, and functioned when the engine drive train was rotated.
A review of the engine maintenance logs disclosed that this engine had a previous exhaust valve failure 931 hours ago.
The exhaust valve Part Number was SA-646612 (see attached FAA inspector's report).
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 31, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
