National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MASON, MI
Accident Number: CHI99LA044
Date & Time: 12/01/1998, 1650 EST
Registration: N36700
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-181
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported the engine lost power while in the traffic pattern after having flown two hours.
The airplane was landed in a field during which time the right main landing gear collapsed.
Post accident inspection revealed the left fuel tank was full of fuel and the right fuel tank was empty.
A post accident test run of the engine failed to reveal any anomalies.
The pilot reported that he did not switch fuel tanks in a timely manner during the flight.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inattention to fuel management in that he failed to switch fuel tanks in a timely manner which resulted in fuel starvation.
A factor related to the accident was the low altitude at which the loss of engine power occurred.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION 2.
(C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - INATTENTIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 4.
(F) ALTITUDE - LOW - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 5.
LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - OVERLOAD Factual Information On December 1, 1998, at 1650 eastern standard time, a Piper PA- 28-181, N36700, operated by a private pilot collided with the terrain during an off airport forced landing 2 miles east of the Jewett Airport, Mason, Michigan.
The pilot reported the forced landing was a result of a loss of engine power.
The pilot was not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.
The flight originated from Muskegon, Michigan.
The pilot departed Mason, Michigan, at 1445 est and flew to Muskegon, Michigan, where he made a touch and go landing prior to heading back to Mason.
The pilot reported that while at 1,800 feet, on base leg for landing on runway 27 at the Jewett Airport, the engine lost power.
The pilot landed the airplane in an open field during which time the right main landing gear collapsed.
Post accident inspection of the airplane revealed the right fuel tank was empty and the left fuel tank was full.
The airplane had been refueled prior to departing Mason, Michigan.
The hobbs time at departure was 3260.5 and the hobbs time noted at the accident site was 3262.5.
Each fuel tank holds 24 gallons of usable fuel.
According to an Inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Belleville, Michigan, Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), this airplane uses approximately 10.5 gallons per hour.
The airplane was removed from the accident site and the engine was started using the left fuel tank.
He reported, "Although high power was not attempted, the engine ran satisfactorily."
In a written statement to the FAA, the pilot stated, "I believe that the right fuel tank was not switched in a timely manner which led to the fuel starvation to the engine and the eventual forced landing."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 44, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
