National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FORT LAUDERDALE, FL
Accident Number: MIA99LA039
Date & Time: 12/01/1998, 1030 EST
Registration: N414WF
Aircraft: Aerospatiale ATR-72-212
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 51 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis The flight was at 4,000 feet when Air Traffic Control gave the crew a traffic report.
The crew could not locate the traffic, because at the time they were flying in instrument meteorological conditions.
About 3 minutes later the crew received a TCAS (traffic collision avoidance system) alert to climb.
The flight climbed from 4,000 feet and leveled off at 5,300 feet.
During the climb both flight attendants fell.
One flight attendant broke her leg, the other was not injured.
The flight attendants were standing completing their pre-landing duties when the event occurred.
The pilot radioed ATC that he needed to have an ambulance meet the flight when it landed.
The flight landed without further incident, and the flight attendant was taken to a local hospital.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: an abrupt maneuver in response to a traffic avoidance system alert, resulting in a flight attendant falling and breaking a leg.
Findings Occurrence #1: ABRUPT MANEUVER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
PULL-UP - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On December 1, 1998, about 1030 eastern standard time, an Aerospatiale ATR-72-212, N414WF, registered to AMR Leasing Corporation Inc., and operated by American Eagle Inc., had a flight attendant injured while maneuvering, about 30 miles southeast of Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time, and an IFR flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 121 scheduled passenger flight.
The airplane was not damaged.
The flightcrew of 2, 1 flight attendant, and 48 passengers reported no injuries.
One flight attendant was seriously injured.
The flight had departed from Nassau, Bahamas, at 0945.
The flight was at 4,000 feet when Air Traffic Control gave the crew a traffic report.
The crew could not locate the traffic, because at the time they were flying in instrument meteorological conditions.
About 3 minutes later the crew received a TCAS (traffic collision avoidance system) alert to climb.
The flight climbed from 4,000 feet and leveled off at 5,300 feet.
During the climb both flight attendants fell.
One flight attendant broke her leg, the other was not injured.
The flight attendants were standing completing their pre-landing duties when the event occurred.
The pilot radioed ATC that he needed to have an ambulance meet the flight when it landed.
The flight landed without further incident, and the flight attendant was taken to a local hospital.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Flight Instructor Age: 42, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 48567 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time: 10184 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: PW 127 Registered Owner: AMR LEASING CORP.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
