National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ENGLAND, AR
Accident Number: FTW99LA042
Date & Time: 12/02/1998, 1425 CST
Registration: N396S
Aircraft: HOLIMAN PIETENPOL AIRCAMPER
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot of the high wing tailwheel equipped airplane lost control of the airplane after impacting a powerline that was suspended 30 feet above the ground.
Witnesses near the accident site observed the airplane maneuvering at low altitude prior to the accident.
A nearby resident reported to law enforcement officers that he heard the sound of the airplane engine flying near his residence.
The resident reported that the sound of the engine stopped about the same time that his home lost electrical power.
The resident went outside and found that the single powerline servicing his home was down on the ground.
The remains of the wood and fabric airplane came to rest on a southerly heading, about 200 feet beyond the point where the wire was severed.
The commercial pilot was occupying the front seat of the 2-seat tandem airplane.
Flight control continuity was established to all flight surfaces.
Likewise, continuity was established to all engine controls.
Fuel was found at the site and there was no fire.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the powerline while maneuvering.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION 2.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was seriously injured.
The experimental airplane was owned and operated by the pilot/builder under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed throughout the area for the local personal flight.
The flight originated from the Saline County Airport, in Benton, Arkansas, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.
According to witnesses near the accident site, the high wing tailwheel equipped airplane was observed maneuvering at low altitude in the vicinity of the accident.
A nearby resident reported to law enforcement officers that he heard the sound of the airplane engine flying near his residence.
The resident reported that the sound of the engine stopped about the same time that his home lost electrical power.
The resident went outside and observed that the single powerline servicing his home was down on the ground and the remains of the wood and fabric airplane came to rest on a southerly heading, approximately 200 feet beyond the point where the wire was severed.
The property owner estimated that the severed power line was suspended about 30 feet above the ground.
The 74 year old commercial pilot was occupying the front seat of the 2-seat tandem airplane.
He was reported to have been hospitalized for over 2 months as result of injuries sustained.
In a statement to his daughter, who completed the attached NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot stated that he did not have any recollection about the flight or the accident.
Examination of the wreckage by the FAA inspector who traveled to the accident site revealed that the fuselage and both wings sustained structural damage.
The inspector further noted continuity to all flight controls.
Likewise, continuity was established to all engine controls.
Fuel was found at the site and there was no fire.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 74, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
