National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FORT WORTH, TX
Accident Number: FTW99LA040
Date & Time: 12/01/1998, 1203 CST
Registration: N4755B
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During the full stop landing, the airplane exited the runway and traveled down an incline before coming to rest.
The student pilot, sole occupant, reported that this was his second solo flight and that he applied the wrong rudder during the landing roll.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's loss of directional control due to improper use of the rudder.
A factor was the hilly terrain beyond the departure end of the runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) RUDDER - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The airplane was owned by a private individual and operated by Aer Mistral, Fort Worth, Texas, under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The student pilot, sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the local solo instructional flight which departed the airport approximately 1130.
The 25 hour student pilot reported to the FAA inspector that this flight was his second solo flight in the aircraft.
He had practiced pattern work at the Fort Worth Alliance Airport and returned to the Meacham Airport.
During the full stop landing at Meacham, he performed a "normal landing and then applied the wrong rudder."
The airplane exited the right side of the runway and traveled down an incline before coming to rest.
The FAA inspector found the nose gear trunion and the engine mount bent.
The operator reported that the lower left portion of the engine mount was bent 25 to 30 degrees.
A review of the air traffic data by the investigator-in-charge revealed that the inbound flight requested a full stop landing at the Meacham Airport.
Following a landing clearance for runway 16L, the pilot performed a go-around.
Subsequently, the tower controller reissued the clearance for runway 16L and requested that the pilot execute a short approach to the runway.
The pilot requested and was approved to extend the left downwind pattern; however, due to other landing traffic, the controller changed the landing runway to 16R.
The pilot performed a go-around from runway 16R, and the controller issued a clearance for a right downwind pattern to runway 16R.
During the landing roll, the airplane exited runway 16R and traveled down a hill before stopping.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 19, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
