Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Monongahela, PA
Accident Number:
ERA15LA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2014,  EDT 
Registration:
NONE
Aircraft:
AIR COMMAND 582
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Unknown or undetermined
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness saw the unregistered, amateur-built gyroplane flying in the airport traffic pattern. 
When the gyroplane pilot could not be located by friends later that day, a search was initiated, 
and the wreckage was subsequently located in an area of vegetation about 750 ft from the 
runway. 
Examination of the airframe revealed no evidence of any obvious mechanical deficiencies that 
would have precluded normal operation, and during a postaccident test run, the engine ran 
with no anomalies noted.
Although the pilot held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating, he 
did not hold a rotorcraft-gyroplane rating. About 2 months before the accident, he sought flight 
training from a gyroplane flight instructor, and after that 1-day training session, he received an 
endorsement to conduct solo gyroplane operations on and just above the ground. The 
endorsement did not allow the pilot to fly in and around the airport traffic pattern solo. In the 
2 months leading up to the accident flight, the pilot's logbook documented several flights 
consistent with adhering to the endorsement's limitations; however, beginning about 1 week 
before the flight, the entries showed that the pilot likely conducted flight maneuvers 
inconsistent with the endorsement's limitations. Although the specific circumstances about the 
accident could not be determined, the pilot's inexperience and failure to obtain additional 
training to get his authorization for additional flight operations in the accident aircraft type 
likely contributed to the outcome.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 6ERA15LA001
The amateur-built gyroplane's collision with terrain for reasons that could not be determined 
based on the available information. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's decision to 
conduct the flight without obtaining additional training.
Findings
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Training with equipment - Pilot (Factor)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6ERA15LA001
Factual Information
On October 1, 2014, at an unknown time, an unregistered amateur-built Air Command 582 
gyroplane was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain near Rostraver Airport (FWQ), 
Monongahela, Pennsylvania. The private pilot was fatally injured. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the presumed local personal flight, which 
was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
During a telephone interview, a friend of the accident pilot stated that the pilot had purchased 
the single-seat gyroplane in the spring of 2014 and wanted to get additional training with a 
flight instructor. After the training, the pilot advised his friend that he was "good to go," and he 
subsequently made several flights in the vicinity of FWQ. On the day of the accident, the pilot 
was scheduled to meet some friends around 1800, and the friend became concerned when the 
pilot could not be located by 2030. He called 911 around 2100. According to the Westmorland 
County, Pennsylvania Coroner's Summary Report, the wreckage was located on October 2 
about 0915, in an area of vegetation located about 750 feet east of the runway 26 threshold at 
FWQ.
A witness, who was flying his helicopter in the traffic pattern at FWQ on the day of the 
accident, stated that he watched the pilot depart and fly around the vicinity of the airport for at 
least 45 minutes to 1 hour. He did not witness the accident, but did recall seeing the pilot still 
flying later that day as he conducted business on the airport ramp and in the terminal building.
Examination of the airframe by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors did not 
reveal evidence of any obvious mechanical deficiencies. Two of the three propeller blades were 
separated about 1-foot outboard of the propeller hub, while the third blade remained intact. 
The gyroplane was recovered from the accident site and its engine was separated from the 
airframe and test run. The engine started normally and ran with no anomalies noted.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single engine land, and his 
most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued on August 12, 2014. According to 
the accident pilot's gyroplane flight instructor, who was located in Georgia, the accident pilot 
came to him in August 2014 seeking flight instruction. The flight instructor conducted 4.8 
hours of dual flight instruction with the accident pilot, along with some ground instruction. 
After their last flight together, the flight instructor endorsed the pilot's logbook for solo flight, 
but prescribed a restriction that the pilot could not fly higher than 5 feet. The endorsement also 
did not allow the pilot to fly in an airport traffic pattern solo. The flight instructor further 
advised the pilot to bring the accident gyroplane back to Georgia so that they could continue 
their training. When asked about the accident gyroplane, the flight instructor stated that the 
pilot had recently purchased it and was waiting for the registration paperwork to be completed 
by the FAA, and to have it inspected by a mechanic before he flew it. When asked about the 
circumstances of the accident flight, the flight instructor was surprised to hear that the 
wreckage was located so far from the runway.
Review of a pilot logbook revealed that the pilot had logged 3.0 hours of ground instruction 
and 6.1 hours of flight training with the flight instructor on August 15, 2014. The flight was 
Page 4 of 6ERA15LA001
logged over two entries, both of which occurred at Macon Downtown Airport (MAC), Macon, 
Georgia. An endorsement in the logbook signed by the flight instructor stated, that he had 
flown with the pilot and, "–found him safe and competent to operate his Air Command Gyro 
Plane. Ground taxi, balance and in ground effect. Wind restriction of 10 mph, daytime."
The logbook contained 14 additional entries for flights conducted between August 20 and 
September 29, 2014, with a total flight time logged of 11.6 hours. None of the flights were 
logged as dual instruction received, nor did any of the entries contain an endorsement of a 
flight instructor. The first 7 entries had accompanying remarks that included comments similar 
to, runway, taxiing, spinning rotors, balancing on mains, hops, crosswind control, rotor brake 
control. Beginning on September 20, 2014, the final 7 flights logged over the course of 6.7 flight 
hours contained remarks that included descriptions similar to, closed pattern, landings, turns, 
slow flight, 8 gust 11 at 220, turns at point, flat spins, vertical descents.
No airworthiness history, maintenance, or aircraft registration records could be located for the 
accident gyroplane.
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by Cyril H. Wecht and Pathology Associates, Inc. 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. According to a summary report prepared by the Office of the 
Coroner, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania, the cause of death was blunt force injuries. 
Toxicological testing performed by the FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute found no trace 
of ethanol, carbon monoxide, or other drugs present in the samples submitted for the pilot.
History of Flight
Unknown
Unknown or undetermined (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/12/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 3800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 18.3 hours (Total, this make and model), 24.4 hours 
(Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15.5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA15LA001
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AIR COMMAND
Registration:
NONE
Model/Series:
582 
Aircraft Category:
Gyroplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
NONE
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
275 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
582
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
67 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Not Reported
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Monongahela, PA (FWQ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Monongahela, PA (FWQ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
ROSTRAVER (FWQ)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
1228 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Page 6 of 6ERA15LA001
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
40.212222, -79.822222
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis Diaz
Adopted Date:
04/09/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Joe McBride; FAA/FSDO; Pittsburgh, PA
Publish Date:
04/09/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90194
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
