The airplane landed hard and porpoised down the runway.  The pilot reported that after a 
normal approach and touchdown on runway 25R, the nose gear collapsed and the airplane 
veered off the runway and nosed over.  A certified flight instructor in the traffic pattern behind 
and above the accident airplane observed the accident sequence.  He reported that the accident 
airplane appeared fast and was not on a stabilized approach.  After the airplane touched down, 
it began to porpoise, with each oscillation getting larger.  A mechanic stated that there was no 
evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane.  He said the 
airplane appeared to have sustained a hard landing.
the pilot's misjudged landing flare, which led to a hard touchdown and a porpoise.
On February 6, 2004, about 1645 mountain standard time, a Cessna 182S, N2462X, veered off 
the runway following a hard landing at Phoenix Deer Valley Airport (DVT), Phoenix, Arizona.  
Westwind School of Aeronautics was operating the rental airplane under the provisions of 14 
CFR Part 91.  The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured; the airplane sustained 
substantial damage.  The personal local flight departed DVT about 1530.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local area flight, and a flight plan had not been filed.
During a telephone interview with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the pilot reported that she was attempting to land on runway 25.  After making a 
normal approach, she flared and touched down.  The nose wheel collapsed and she was unable 
to maintain control, resulting in the airplane veering off to the right of the runway.  She could 
not recall how hard the airplane had touched down on the runway surface, but noted that it did 
not seem abnormal.
During a telephone interview with the IIC, the operator of the airplane stated that the airplane 
landed hard and veered off the right side of the runway, resulting in the nose landing gear 
collapsing.  The airplane incurred damage to the firewall.
In a written statement, a witness, who was a certified flight instructor, reported that he was 
flying with a student in the traffic pattern behind the accident airplane.  He stated that as he 
turned onto final approach, he observed the accident airplane on short final.  The airplane did 
not appear to be on a stable approach and seemed to be fast.  He did not see the airplane make 
the initial touchdown, but witnessed it porpoise down the runway, with the nose wheel making 
contact first on each bounce.  The porpoising appeared to get successively worse, and the 
airplane continued off the runway.
An airframe and powerplant mechanic (A&P) assessed the damage to the airplane.  He stated 
that there was no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane.  
He said the airplane appeared to have sustained a hard landing.
