During a cross-country flight, the 194-hour private pilot decided to land in a field at his ranch.  
Upon landing in the field, the left main landing gear tire sunk into the soft ground and the pilot 
lost control of the aircraft.  The aircraft turned to the left and the pilot employed right rudder 
in an unsuccessful attempt to counter the left turn.  The pilot reported that the field was "soft."
The pilot's attempt to land on terrain not suitable for landing.  A contributing factor was the 
soft terrain.
On February 2, 2004, approximately 1630 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-235 single-
engine airplane, N8936W, owned and operated by a private individual, was substantially 
damaged following a loss of control while landing in a pasture near Knox City, Texas.  The 
private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
personal flight.  The flight originated from Terrell Municipal Airport (TRL) near Terrell, Texas, 
at approximately 1430, with Knox City as its intended destination.
According to the 194-hour pilot, who was attempting to land in an open field at his ranch, at 
approximately 1430, after receiving weather information from Fort Worth Center, he departed 
Terrell Municipal Airport with the intent to land at his ranch located 8 miles west of Knox City.  
When the pilot arrived at the area where he planned to land, he peformed a fly-by to look for 
any obstructions in the field.  The field appeared to be flat and open and the pilot executed a 
normal descent and landing.  
The pilot added that he properly flared the airplane and touched down on the main gear, with 
the nose gear touching down approximately 30 feet later.  The pilot added that after firmly on 
the ground, he pulled all power and the aircraft rolled approximately 300 feet.
According to the pilot, the aircraft then veered to the left and he applied right rudder, but the 
pilot was not able to stop the left turn.  The pilot stated that approximately 30 feet later, the 
right wing impacted the ground and the nose gear collapsed.  The aircraft spun around and 
then the left wing and propeller impacted the ground.  The pilot stated that the ground was 
"soft," and the left main tire appeared to have sunk into the soft ground.
Examination by an FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, revealed that the left 
wing forward spar was fractured and the aft spar was bent.  Further examination revealed that 
the forward section of the left wing root separated from the fuselage.  The nose gear was found 
folded inside the wheel well.
