The airplane experienced a forced landing after a loss of power due to fuel exhaustion.  The 
pilot stated that they had departed Burbank, California, en route to Gila Bend, Arizona, where 
they were going to refuel.  The pilot reported to FAA inspectors that he had fueled the airplane 
to it's 90-gallon capacity the day before the accident and had flown the airplane for 1 hour after 
that.  During the accident flight, the pilot had used a richer mixture to aid in cooling one 
cylinder.  He told the inspector that this may have led to a miscalculation of the fuel 
consumption during the flight.  As the flight neared the vacinity of Gila Bend, the pilot 
contacted Albuquerque Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and reported a low fuel 
situation and that he was going to land at Gila Bend for fuel.  The controller contacted the Gila 
Bend airport and determined that there was no fuel available there and suggested that the pilot 
should divert to another airport.  They then headed towards Buckeye Municipal Airport, but 
were later notified by ARTCC that Buckeye also did not have fuel.  At this time they diverted to 
the Phoenix Goodyear Airport and advised the tower that they were low on fuel and coming in 
to land.  As they approached the airport, the pilot switched fuel tanks but the airplane exhibited 
signs of fuel exhaustion.  The engine lost power, and the pilot landed in a plowed field about 1 
mile from the airport.  Post accident inspection by FAA inspectors found no fuel onboard the 
airplane.  All fuel lines and tanks were intact.  The inspectors found no evidence of a fuel leak.  
According to the Pilot's Operating Handbook, the Cessna T210L has a fuel capacity of 90 
gallons; .5 gallons are unusable on each side.  According to the engine's manufacturer, the 
average fuel burn is about 18 gallons per hour at 75 percent horsepower.
The pilot's inadequate fuel consumption calculations and in-flight planning/decision, which 
resulted in fuel exhaustion.
On February 1, 2004, about 1100 mountain standard time, a Cessna T210L, N2234S, landed off 
airport near the Phoenix Goodyear Airport, Goodyear, Arizona, following a loss of engine 
power.  The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  
The private pilot and one passenger sustained serious injuries, one passenger sustained minor 
injuries, and one passenger was uninjured.  The airplane sustained substantial damage.  The 
personal cross-country flight departed Bob Hope Airport, Burbank, California, at an 
undetermined time en route to Gila Bend Municipal Airport, Gila Bend, Arizona.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
 
A sheriff's deputy interviewed the pilot and the front seat passenger after the accident.  The 
pilot stated that they departed Burbank in the morning for a sightseeing flight in Arizona.  They 
had decided to stop at Gila Bend for fuel.  The passenger reported that they had enough fuel to 
fly from Burbank to Gila Bend.
In a statement to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot reported that he 
had fueled the airplane to its 90-gallon capacity the day before the accident and had flown the 
airplane for 1 hour after that.  During the accident flight, the pilot had used a richer mixture to 
aid in cooling one cylinder.  He told the inspector that this may have led to a miscalculation of 
the fuel consumption during the flight.
As the flight neared the vacinity of Gila Bend, the pilot contacted Albuquerque Air Route 
Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and reported a low fuel situation and that he was going to land 
at Gila Bend for fuel.  The controller contacted the Gila Bend airport and determined that there 
was no fuel available there and suggested that the pilot should divert to another airport.  They 
then headed towards Buckeye Municipal Airport, but were later notified by center that Buckeye 
also did not have fuel.  At this time they diverted to the Phoenix Goodyear Airport and advised 
the tower that they were low on fuel and coming in to land.
As they approached the airport, they switched to the other fuel tank.  It went from 1/8 tank to 
empty in 15 minutes.  They decreased their speed in an effort to conserve fuel.  Near the 
airport, the airplane exhibited signs of fuel exhaustion.  The pilot did not believe he was going 
to make the runway.  The airplane lost power, and the pilot landed in a plowed field about 1 
mile from the Phoenix Goodyear airport.  The airplane sustained damage to the main landing 
gear and to the fuselage.
Post accident inspection by FAA inspectors found no fuel onboard the airplane.  All fuel lines 
and tanks were intact.  The inspectors found no evidence of a fuel leak.
According to the Pilot's Operating Handbook, the Cessna T210L has a fuel capacity of 90 
gallons; .5 gallons are unusable on each side.  According to the engine's manufacturer, the 
average fuel burn is about 18 gallons per hour at 75 percent horsepower.
