The pilot set the parking brake and attempted to start the airplane by rotating the propeller by 
hand. The airplane started and moved forward, and the pilot climbed up on the right wing to 
enter the cockpit but slipped and fell to the ground. The pilot grabbed onto the cabin step and 
was dragged as he attempted to gain access to the cockpit. When the pilot realized a collision 
with a parked airplane was imminent, he released his hold on the cabin step. The airplane 
taxied unmanned and collided with a parked airplane. The pilot reported no mechanical 
malfunction with the airplane.
The pilot's inadequate start procedure, which resulted in a run-away airplane.
On February 7, 2004, at 1245 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N21266, registered to 
and operated by a private owner, taxied unmanned into a parked airplane at Summerville 
Airport, Summerville, South Carolina. The personal flight was operated under the provisions of 
Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The 
private pilot received minor injuries, and the airplane and a parked airplane sustained 
substantial damage. The flight was originating from Summerville, South Carolina, at the time 
of the accident.
The pilot was preparing for a flight to Columbia, South Carolina, to deliver the airplane for 
avionics maintenance. The pilot stated that when he engaged the starter, it made a spinning 
noise, and the airplane would not start. The pilot set the parking brake and attempted to start 
the airplane by rotating the propeller by hand. The airplane started and moved forward, and 
the pilot climbed up on the right wing to enter the cockpit but slipped and fell to the ground. 
The pilot grabbed onto the cabin step and was dragged as he attempted to gain access to the 
cockpit. When the pilot realized a collision with a parked airplane was imminent, he released 
his hold on the cabin step. The airplane taxied unmanned and collided with a parked airplane.
Examination of the airplane revealed damage to the right wing spar and propeller, and the 
parked airplane sustained damage to the fuselage and left wing. The pilot reported no 
mechanical malfunction with the airplane.  
