The pilot stated that  the airplane was in cruise flight, at an altitude of 4,500 feet, when he 
detected a slight engine vibration. He noted that the fuel consumption had increased from the 
usual 12.5 gals/hr to 15.7 gals/hr, at 2,300 rpm and a manifold pressure of 30.00. Shortly 
thereafter he said the engine ceased operating. and he made a forced landing to the field. 
During the landing rollout the airplane incurred damage. An FAA airframe and powerplant 
mechanic with an inspection authorization rating, who responded to the scene of the accident 
stated that he found the B-nut on the inlet side of the fuel flow divider loose, about one full 
turn. In addition he said he saw signatures consistent with a leak which originated at the B-nut 
and ran down the right front of the engine case. Follow-on examination of the accident airplane 
revealed that at the connection of the B-nut on the fuel inlet line to the manifold, there was 
torque putty on the threaded connection on the manifold side, and no putty was observed on 
the B-nut. In addition, when conditions were recreated and the engine given a test run, when 
the electric fuel boost pump turned on, fuel leaked from around the B-nut. According to the 
airplane's engine log book, the engine had been rebuilt by Teledyne Continental Motors, and 
shipped to Mod Works Inc., Punta Gorda, Florida, who installed it in the accident airplane on 
March 03, 2003. At the time of the accident the engine had accumulated a total time of 80 
hours since installation, and had received two previous oil changes, all of which had been 
performed by Mod Works Inc.
A loss of engine power due to the airplane mechanic's improper maintenance/installation and 
failure to ensure that the B-nut on the inlet side of the fuel manifold was properly tightened, 
which resulted in a fuel leak, and fuel starvation.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 3, 2004, about 1015, eastern standard time, a Mooney M-20K, N252WF, 
registered to and operated by a private individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, 
made a forced landing in a potato field, about 7 miles east of Immokalee Airport, Immokalee, 
Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The private-
rated pilot and one passenger received minor injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial 
damage. The flight originated at Kendall-Tamiami Airport, Miami, Florida, the same day, 
about 0945.
The pilot stated that he was en route to Punta Gorda, Florida, to the Mooney maintenance 
facility where he has his airplane serviced, to have a 25-hr oil change performed. He further 
stated that the airplane was in cruise flight, at an altitude of 4,500 feet, when he detected a 
slight engine vibration. He noted that the fuel consumption had increased from the usual 12.5 
gals/hr to 15.7 gals/hr, at 2,300 rpm and a manifold pressure of 30.00. He said that the 
characteristics he noted at that time were similar to those of a partially  plugged fuel  injector 
he had encountered in the past, and since he was half the distance to Punta Gorda, he elected 
to continue. Shortly thereafter he said the engine ceased operating. He said there were no 
sputtering or other noises, the engine just abruptly ceased operating, while the propeller 
continued to windmill. He said he established the proper glide attitude, while looking for a 
place to land. He said he switched fuel tanks, turned  on the boost pump, and attempted to 
restart the engine, but it did not restart. At an altitude of about 3,000 feet, he said he noticed a 
field with long furrows, and after declaring an emergency and performing prelanding tasks, 
made a forced landing to the field. During the landing rollout the airplane incurred damage.
An FAA airframe and powerplant mechanic with an inspection authorization rating, who 
responded to the scene of the accident stated that he found the B-nut on the inlet side of the 
fuel flow divider loose, about one full turn. In addition he said he saw signatures consistent 
with a leak which originated at the B-nut and ran down the right front of the engine case.
On February 10, 2004, the NTSB conducted a follow-on examination of the accident airplane. 
Assisting the NTSB was a representative from Teledyne Continental Motors, as well as the 
airplane mechanic who had responded to the scene of the accident, and had witnessed the 
loose B-nut on the inlet side of the fuel flow divider. The examination revealed that the fuel 
manifold was properly positioned, and there were no anomalies noted with the unit. In 
addition, when the fuel manifold was opened, the screen was found to be clean and fuel was 
present.  At the connection of the B-nut on the fuel inlet line to the manifold, torque putty was 
noted on the threaded connection on the manifold side, and no putty was observed on the B-
nut. In addition, the engine was given an initial test run and no anomalies were noted. The B-
nut was then placed in the position it was found at the accident scene, and the engine tested a 
second time, and during the test run, when the electric fuel boost pump turned on, fuel poured 
from around the B-nut.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The accident airplane was equipped with a Teledyne Continental Motors TSIO-360-MB2B, 210 
horsepower engine, serial number 279325-R.  According to the airplane's engine log book, the 
engine had been rebuilt by Teledyne Continental Motors, and shipped to Mod Works Inc., 
Punta Gorda, Florida, who installed it in the accident airplane on March 03, 2003. According 
to the engine logbook, at the time of the accident the engine had accumulated a total time of 80 
hours since installation, and had received two previous oil changes, all of which had been 
performed by Mod Works Inc.
