National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Prosser, WA
Accident Number: SEA03LA035
Date & Time: 02/01/2003, 1430 PST
Registration: N75392
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-140
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot reported that his descent to the airport and approach to runway 25 was normal with the exception of a minor crosswind correction for winds blowing from the north.
The pilot reported that when the airplane touched down it momentarily ballooned and drifted to the left (south).
He stated that he held the airplane "steady" and when the airplane touched down a second time, it touched down on the runway edge with the left wheel off the runway.
The airplane turned sharply to the south and exited the runway.
After exiting the runway the airplane traveled across rough uneven terrain and an adjacent taxiway, eventually coming to rest south of the intended runway.
No mechanical difficulties or malfunctions were reported.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Improper flare while landing.
Factors include rough uneven terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 2.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On February 1, 2003, about 1430 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-28-140, N75392, sustained substantial damage when the airplane departed the runway edge and encountered rough terrain during landing at the Prosser Municipal Airport, Prosser, Washington.
The student pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
The airplane is owned by Noland Decoto Flying Service of Yakima, Washington, and was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) instructional flight under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan had been filed.
The round-robin cross-country flight originated from Yakima, with intermediate stops in Walla Walla, Washington, and Prosser.
The pilot reported that when the airplane touched down it momentarily ballooned and drifted to the left (south).
He stated that he held the airplane "steady" and when the airplane touched down a second time, it touched down on the runway edge with the left wheel off the runway.
The airplane turned sharply to the south and exited the runway.
After exiting the runway the airplane traveled across rough uneven terrain and an adjacent taxiway, eventually coming to rest south of the intended runway.
No mechanical difficulties or malfunctions were reported.
Student Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 27, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
