National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Quartzsite, AZ
Accident Number: LAX03LA080
Date & Time: 02/01/2003, 1110 TL
Registration: N6106V
Aircraft: Beech S-35
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane collided with a car crossing the runway.
After the airplane touched down on the dirt strip, a car pulled out to cross the runway.
The pilot attempted to go around but the left main gear hit the car and sheared off.
The airplane skidded down the runway and veered off to the left, which resulted in substantial damage to the wing and fuselage.
The airstrip was marked with "stop" and "landing area" signs; however, the car did not stop before crossing the airstrip.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The driver of the vehicle did not stop prior to crossing the airstrip as directed by airstrip signage.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 1.
OBJECT - VEHICLE 2.
(C) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT COMPLIED WITH - DRIVER OF VEHICLE 3.
EVASIVE MANEUVER - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On February 1, 2003, at 1110 mountain standard time, a Beech S-35, N6106V, collided with a car crossing the runway at Desert Gardens Airstrip, Quartzsite, Arizona.
The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
The private pilot and one passenger were not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The personal flight departed Palomar Airport, Carlsbad, California, about 1000 Pacific standard time.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed during the flight and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot stated that he flew from Montgomery Field, San Diego, California, to Carlsbad, and then filed IFR to Blythe, California.
He arrived at Blythe, canceled his IFR flight plan, and continued on to Desert Gardens Airstrip (a dirt strip).
A road crosses the runway, and a car pulled out to cross the runway.
The pilot touched down and saw the car.
He tried to go around, but the left main gear hit the car and sheared off.
The airplane skidded down the runway and veered off to the left, which resulted in substantial damage to the wing and fuselage.
In a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator, the airstrip owner stated that the airstrip was marked with "stop" and "landing area" signs; however, the car did not stop before crossing the airstrip.
As the car crossed the airstrip, it stopped.
The owner further reported that the road crossing the airstrip was closed as a result of the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 69, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
