National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Grandfield, OK
Accident Number: FTW03LA091
Date & Time: 02/01/2003, 1300 CST
Registration: N474BG
Aircraft: Gilbertson Zodiac CH601HDS
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
 Analysis During a test flight on the morning of the accident, the engine was running rough; however, the pilot landed the airplane without further incident.
The pilot removed the carburetor screen, cleaned the debris from the screen, and reinstalled the screen.
During the accident flight, the oil and water temperature indicated 205-210 degrees, and the flight was returning to the airport.
At an airspeed of 70 knots and an altitude of 500 feet agl, there was a total loss of engine power.
The pilot performed the emergency landing procedures; however, he was not able to turn the airplane into the wind due to an unsafe landing area east of the airport traffic pattern for the runway.
The pilot landed the airplane with a right quartering tailwind (25 knots, gusts 30 knots) in a field.
During the landing roll, the nose landing gear struck a berm, the nose landing gear collapsed, and the airplane structure twisted as the airplane came to rest.
The reason for the loss of engine power was not determined.
The pilot reported the winds were from the southwest at 25 knots with gust to 30 knots.
The airplane had accumulated 27.6 hours of the required 40 hours of flight time under the operating limitations for the homebuilt airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for an undetermined reason.
Contributing factors were the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing and the unfavorable wind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - UNFAVORABLE WIND Factual Information On February 1, 2003, approximately 1300 central standard time, a Gilbertson Zodiac CH601HDS experimental airplane, N474BG, struck a berm during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power near Grandfield, Oklahoma.
The airplane was built, owned, and operated by the pilot under 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
The airline transport pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.
The test flight originated from Chattanooga Sky Harbor Airport (92F) at Chattanooga, Oklahoma, approximately 1240.
The 5,043 hour pilot reported to the FAA inspector that during a flight that morning, the 73 horsepower Subaru automotive engine was running rough; however, he landed the airplane without further incident.
The carburetor screen was removed, cleaned of debris, and reinstalled by the pilot.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot reported that during the accident flight, the oil and water temperature indicated 205-210 degrees, and the pilot elected to return to the airport at an initial altitude of 700 feet agl.
At an airspeed of 70 knots and an altitude of 500 feet agl, there was a total loss of engine power.
The pilot performed the emergency landing procedures.
The pilot was not able to turn the airplane into the wind due to an unsafe landing area east of the airport traffic pattern for runway 17.
The pilot attempted a 270 degree turn to a landing area; however, due to the decreasing altitude and airspeed (55 knots) of the airplane, he was not able to compete the turn.
The pilot landed the airplane in a field with a right quartering tailwind.
During the landing roll, the nose landing gear struck a berm, the nose landing gear collapsed, and the airplane came to rest 110 feet from the initial impact point in the field.
The pilot reported the winds were from the southwest at 25 knots, with gust to 30 knots.
The FAA inspector reported that during the impact sequence, the airplane structure twisted, and the firewall and all components forward of the firewall separated from the airplane.
The integrity of the fuel tank was compromised.
The airplane had accumulated 27.6 hours of the required 40 hours of flight time under the operating limitations for the homebuilt airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane; Helicopter Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
