National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KENAI, AK
Accident Number: ANC03LA025
Date & Time: 02/01/2003, 1400 AST
Registration: N704JB
Aircraft: Cessna 150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private certificated pilot reported that he made a precautionary landing at a private airport on a 4,500 foot, gravel surfaced runway that was oriented north/south.
He said he overflew the airport and saw another airplane parked on the north end of the runway.
He said he decided to land toward the south, beyond the parked airplane.
The pilot said a tailwind was blowing from the north about 6 knots.
The pilot was familiar with the airport and knew the runway ran slightly uphill toward the south.
He said that he did not think the downwind landing would be a problem, and touched down just beyond the half-way point on the runway and allowed the airplane to coast.
As the airplane neared the end of the runway, he applied the airplane's brakes.
The pilot said he then realized the runway surface was glazed with ice, and the airplane began to slide sideways.
The left main landing gear collided with a snow berm at the south end of the runway, and the left wing struck the snow.
The pilot indicated the accident could have been prevented by "attempt to use brakes immediately after touchdown (landing) to get a good idea of surface conditions."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's delayed application of the airplane brakes resulting in an overrun during the landing roll, and subsequent collision with a snowbank.
A contributing factor in the accident was icy runway conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ICY 3.
(C) BRAKES(NORMAL) - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the pilot.
The private certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The flight originated at Johnson's Airstrip, Kenai, about 1130.
No flight plan was filed, nor was one required.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on February 1, the pilot reported that he was planning to land at the Trading Bay Airport.
He said he overflew the airport and saw another airplane parked on the north end of the runway.
The runway is oriented north/south, and is about 4,500 feet long.
The pilot said he observed what he thought was a coating of gravel on the runway.
The pilot reported that he decided to land toward the south, beyond the parked airplane.
The pilot said a tailwind was blowing from the north about 6 knots.
He touched down just beyond the half-way point on the runway and allowed the airplane to coast.
As the airplane neared the end of the runway, he applied the airplane's brakes.
The pilot said he then realized the runway surface was glazed with ice, and the airplane began to slide sideways.
The left main landing gear collided with a snow berm at the south end of the runway, and the left wing struck the snow.
After the collision, the pilot said his inspection indicated the left main landing gear strut was loose at its fuselage attach point.
On February 5, the pilot confirmed the airplane's left main landing gear attach point received structural damage, and the upper surface of the left wingtip was slightly wrinkled.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, he indicated that his reason for landing at the Trading Bay Airport was a precaution to inspect the airplane following a 200 rpm loss of engine power.
He indicated that he was familiar with the airport and knew the runway ran slightly uphill toward the south.
He said that he did not think the downwind landing would be a problem.
In the optional, "Operator/Owner Safety Recommendation", portion of the NTSB Form 6120.1, the pilot indicated the accident could have been prevented by "attempt to use brakes immediately after touchdown (landing) to get a good idea of surface conditions."
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
