National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fort Lauderdale, FL
Accident Number: ATL03LA039
Date & Time: 02/01/2003, 0945 EST
Registration: N528EE
Aircraft: Robinson R22
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The private pilot was demonstrating a run on landing to the check pilot.
The helicopter touched down in the sod area adjacent to runway 08 in a level attitude at or above effective translational lift.
During the deceleration the left front skid contacted an unknown object which slowed the helicopter rapidly.
The private pilot lunged forward in his seat and inadvertently moved the cyclic forward and to the left and increased collective pitch.
The helicopter pivoted around the toe of the left skid and rolled over on its left side before he or the check pilot could take any corrective action.
The private pilot stated the helicopter did not experience any mechanical failure or malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The private pilots improper use of flight controls during a run on landing resulting in a roll over.
Findings Occurrence #1: ROLL OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The helicopter rolled over on its left side and sustained substantial structural damage to the cabin and tailboom assembly.
The private pilot and airline transport rated check pilot reported no injuries.
The flight originated from Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, at 0830.
The private pilot stated he was demonstrating a run on landing to the check pilot.
The helicopter touched down in the sod area adjacent to runway 08 in a level attitude at or above effective translational lift.
During the deceleration the left front skid contacted "something" which slowed the helicopter rapidly.
The pilot stated he lunged forward in his seat and inadvertently moved the cyclic forward and to the left and increased collective pitch.
The helicopter pivoted around the toe of the left skid and rolled over on its left side before he or the check pilot could take any corrective action.
He further stated the helicopter did not experience any mechanical failure or malfunction.
Examination of the crash site did not identify the unknown object that the helicopter collided with.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 27, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Helicopter Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
