National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Klamath Falls, OR
Accident Number: SEA03LA032
Date & Time: 02/01/2003, 1815 PST
Registration: N59180
Aircraft: Cessna 180 B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot reported that he completed a go-around to runway 32 due to wind conditions.
After the go-around, the pilot made a second approach and landed on runway 32.
He reported that during the landing rollout, while retracting the flaps, the airplane's left wing "came up."
The pilot reported that he tried to compensate with full control inputs, however, the airplane nosed-over resulting in substantial damage.
At 1753, the official weather observation station located at the Klamath Falls Airport, reported winds from 290 degrees at 9 knots.
No mechanical difficulties or malfunctions were reported.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Failure to adequately compensate for wind conditions while landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING Factual Information On February 1, 2003, about 1815 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 180B, N59180, sustained substantial damage while landing at the Klamath Falls International Airport, Klamath Falls, Oregon.
The airplane is owned by the pilot, and was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal/pleasure cross-country flight under the provisions of Title 14 CFR, Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The private pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had been activated for the cross-country flight that originated from Red Bluff, California.
The pilot reported that he completed a go-around to runway 32 due to wind conditions.
After the go-around, the pilot made a second approach and landed on runway 32.
He reported that during the landing rollout, while retracting the flaps, the airplane's left wing "came up."
The pilot reported that he tried to compensate with full control inputs, however, the airplane nosed-over resulting in substantial damage.
At 1753, the official weather observation station located at the Klamath Falls Airport, reported winds from 290 degrees at 9 knots.
No mechanical difficulties or malfunctions were reported.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 35, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
