National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Long Beach, CA
Accident Number: LAX03LA081
Date & Time: 02/01/2003, 1050 PST
Registration: N300PS
Aircraft: Pitts S-2B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane experienced a loss of control, which resulted in a stall/mush while practicing touch-and-go takeoffs and landings.
The pilot stated he "lost control" of the airplane during a landing and added power to execute a go-around and pulled up.
An airline pilot, who reported having approximately 11,500 hours total time with about 250 hours in the Pitts S-2B, witnessed the accident.
He said that when he first saw the airplane it was on a divergent course to the left side of runway 25R at an altitude of 5 feet.
As the airplane came to the left edge of the runway it made a pull up, resulting in the nose coming up about 60 degrees.
It continued on its upward path while rotating right.
At approximately 25 feet, the nose passed vertical; at the 180-degree point of rotation, the right wing struck the ground followed by the nose.
The witness pilot further reported that the airplane landed with a left, quartering tailwind of an estimated 8 knots.
A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector examined the airplane.
The brakes and tailwheel steering were found in working order.
Flight control continuity could not be established because of the post impact fire.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's excessive pull up, which resulted in a failure to obtain/maintain flying speed and a subsequent stall/mush.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 2.
DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) LIFT-OFF - PREMATURE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) PULL-UP - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT OBTAINED/MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 6.
Hart Air, Ltd., was operating the rental airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
The private pilot sustained serious injuries; the airplane sustained substantial damage.
Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local, personal flight, and no flight plan had been filed.
The flight originated about 1020 from Long Beach.
The pilot told a certified flight instructor that he "touched down at an angle to the centerline and bounced."
He further stated that he "lost control" of the airplane.
He added power to initiate a go-around and pulled up.
An airline pilot, who reported having approximately 11,500 hours total time with about 250 hours in the Pitts S-2B, witnessed the accident.
In a written statement, he said that he was unsure if the airplane touched down but when it came into view it was on a divergent course to the left side of runway 25R at an altitude of 5 feet.
He felt the airplane had a higher than normal approach speed.
As the airplane came to the left edge of the runway it made a pull up, resulting in the nose coming up about 60 degrees.
It continued on its upward path while rotating right.
At approximately 25 feet, the nose passed vertical; at the 180-degree point of rotation, the right wing struck the ground followed by the nose.
The airplane remained on its nose for approximately  2 seconds and then "burst into flame" from the nose back.
The flames moved rearward engulfing the left side of the airplane.
The airline pilot further reported that the airplane landed with a left, quartering tailwind of an estimated 8 knots.
A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector examined the airplane.
The brakes and tailwheel steering were found in working order.
Flight control continuity could not be established because of the post impact fire.
The airplane came to rest facing east, 180 degrees from its original flight path.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
