Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
TAMARAC, FL
Accident Number:
MIA00FA019
Date & Time:
11/02/1999, 1137 EST 
Registration:
N924JH
Aircraft:
Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness stated he was flying southbound en route to FXE at about 1,000 feet and he observed 
the accident airplane about 200 to 300 feet below the 2,000-foot ceiling, in an extreme nose-
high attitude.  He observed the accident airplane roll to the left, pitch nose down and descend 
in a spin to the left, colliding with the Everglades. Postcrash examination of the aircraft 
structure, flight controls, engine and propeller showed no evidence of precrash mechanical 
failure or malfunction. The Information Manual for the Cessna 152, Section 4, Normal 
Procedures, states that spin entries should be accomplished at a high enough altitude so that 
recoveries are completed 4,000 or more above ground level. The manual further states that at 
least 1,000 feet of altitude loss should be allowed for a 1-turn spin and recovery, and that in any 
case, entries should be planned so that recoveries are completed at least 1,500 feet above the 
ground. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's failure to maintain airspeed resulting in the airplane stalling and entering a spin to 
the left at an inadequate altitude and his failure to apply spin recovery emergency procedures 
prior to the airplane impacting the swamp. 
Page 2 of 7MIA00FA019
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) AIRSPEED(VS) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. ALTITUDE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - SWAMPY
Page 3 of 7MIA00FA019
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 2, 1999, about 1137 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N924JH, 
registered to a private owner, and operated by Ramz Enterprises, as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight, crashed in the Everglades while maneuvering in the vicinity of Tamarac, 
Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed in the area at the time, and no flight plan 
was filed.  The airplane was destroyed, and the private-rated pilot sustained fatal injuries. The 
flight originated from Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport (FXE), Florida, about 24 minutes 
before the accident.  
A witness stated he was flying southbound en route to FXE at about 1,000 feet. He 
observed the accident airplane about 200 to 300 feet below the 2,000-foot ceiling, in an 
extreme nose-high attitude.  The witness further stated that he observed the airplane roll to the 
left, pitch nose down and descend in a tight spin to the left, colliding with the Everglades.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Information on file at the Federal Aviation Administration Airman Certification Branch, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma revealed that the pilot-in-command was issued a private pilot 
certificate with a rating, airplane single-engine land on April 10, 1999. The pilot's logbook 
indicated he had total flight time of about 124 flight hours, with about 78 flight hours in the 
same make and model as the accident airplane, and the remaining  flight hours in helicopters. 
His logbook, and the flight school training records from the school where he learned to fly 
airplanes, and from whom he also rented the accident airplane, showed that he received 
training in stall and spin awareness and recovery. There is no record of the pilot having 
performed spins or spin recoveries in an airplane. The majority of his flying after receiving his 
private pilot's license, was receiving dual flight instruction in helicopters at another flight 
school. Since receiving his certificate, he flew airplanes once in April, three times in May, and 
one time in October 1999, with the October flight being a checkout flight required by the flight 
school.  The checkout flight was the airplane flight which preceded the accident flight. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Maintenance records revealed that N924JH, a Cessna 152, serial number 15284781, had 
accumulated 3,963 hours at the time of the accident.  The last inspection, the annual, was 
conducted on October 18, 1999. The airplane was at that time modified in accordance with 
Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) SE792NW, increasing the engine horsepower from 115 to 
125, and the rpm from 2,750 to 2,800, and a Sensenich propeller was installed. The airplane 
had incurred 39 hours since the annual inspection.
METEROLOGICAL  INFORMATION
The accident occurred in daylight visual meteorological conditions.  Fort Lauderdale 
Executive Airport weather, reported at 1153 and valid at the time of the accident, showed that 
the wind  270 degrees at 10 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; scattered cumulous clouds at 
1,400 feet; temperature 81 degrees Fahrenheit; dew point 73  degrees; altimeter 29.85.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The aircraft crashed in the Everglades, in conservation area 2A, west of the Sawgrass 
Page 4 of 7MIA00FA019
Expressway in about 5 feet of water. The crash site coordinates were latitude 26 degrees, 14.2 
minutes north, and longitude 080 degrees 19.2 minutes west. All components of the aircraft 
which were necessary to sustain flight were located in the immediate vicinity of the main 
wreckage of the aircraft.
Examination of the crash site showed that the accident airplane came to rest on a 
heading of about 240 degrees, and the airplane collided with the water in a nose-down left 
banked attitude. The left wing was broken downward, outward of the strut and the left fuel 
tank was ruptured. The inboard section if the left wing was partially separated at the fuselage 
and bent rearward. Both wings sustained compression damage extending from the wing root 
outboard to the wing tip. The right wing was compressed along the leading edge at about a 50 
degree angle downward. The empennage separated from the rest of the fuselage, immediately 
forward of the leading edge of the horizontal stabilizer, and lay behind the rest of the fuselage. 
The engine was attached to the main fuselage, submerged in the silt below, in about 5 feet of 
water, and the cabin interior had compressed to the seats. 
The flight control system revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction, and 
there were no separation points within the cables prior to cutting cables during recovery of the 
wreckage. Continuity of the flight control system was established for roll, pitch and yaw, and 
was confirmed by tracing the cables to the flight control surfaces. The flap actuator was found 
in the full flap retracted position. The rudder was in the full left position, beyond the limit, 
restrained by the vertical stabilizer rear spar trailing edge and the rudder horn was wedged 
against the rudder stop. The seat rails and seats were in tact, and the pilot's seat belt 
attachment mechanism was unfastened during removal of the pilot.
Examination of the propeller after recovery from the accident site, showed damage 
consistent with engine rotation at the time of impact. "S" type bending was evident on one 
blade, and the other blade was bent backwards. The propeller hub had partially separated from 
the crankshaft flange, and five of the six bolt bushings had pulled through. 
The engine assembly and accessories were examined after recovery from the accident 
site. The engine rotated by hand, and continuity of the crankshaft, camshaft, valve train and 
accessory drives were established. Each cylinder produced compression when the engine was 
rotated by hand. The front and bottom section of the engine sustained heavy impact damage in 
the accident, and the sump was broken with only residual oil remaining. The engine oil suction 
screen and the oil filter were examined, and were not contaminated.
All engine and airframe fuel lines were unobstructed. There were no obstructions in the 
engine induction system, but the induction  air box had incurred damage and had separated  
from the engine. The carburetor was broken at the mounting flange. The cockpit carburetor 
heat control was extended about 1/2 inch, but the air induction box was in the hot position, and 
the cable had pulled out from the control arm. The carburetor float and needle valve operated 
normally and all passages within the carburetor were clean and unobstructed. A mixture of fuel 
and water was found in the carburetor bowl. The muffler was not attached to the engine and it 
has not been recovered.
Both magnetos were immersed in water for several hours and did not pass the field test. 
The magnetos were removed, retained, and bench tested. They readily fired on all points.
Each spark plug exhibited a color consistent with normal engine operation, with normal 
gap settings and moderate wear. 
Page 5 of 7MIA00FA019
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL  INFORMATION
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. Lisa Flannigan,  a Forensic 
Pathologist with the Broward County Medical Examiner's Office, on November  3, 1999. The 
cause of death was multiple blunt force trauma. 
Forensic toxicology was also performed by the FAA Toxicology Laboratory, Oklahoma 
City, Oklahoma, on the pilot. The tests were negative for ethanol, carbon monoxide, cyanide 
and neutral drugs.
TEST AND RESEARCH
The Information Manual for the Cessna 152, Section 4, Normal Procedures, states that 
spin entries should be accomplished at a high enough altitude so that recoveries are completed 
4,000 or more above ground level. The manual further states that at least 1,000 feet of altitude 
loss should be allowed for a one-turn spin and recovery, and that in any case, entries should be 
planned so that recoveries are completed at least 1,500 feet above the ground.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was released to Mr. Steve Smalley of Air and Sea Recovery Inc., 
on November 11, 1999.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
124 hours (Total, all aircraft), 78 hours (Total, this make and model), 23 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7MIA00FA019
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N924JH
Model/Series:
152 152
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15284781
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/18/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1675 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
39 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3963 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
152
Registered Owner:
MICHAEL R. MARSHALL
Rated Power:
125 hp
Operator:
RAMZ ENTERPRISES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
AIRBORNE SYSTEMS INC.
Operator Designator Code:
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FXE, 14 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 1400 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 23°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
FT. LAUDERDALE, FL (FXE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1113 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 7 of 7
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JOHN       W LOVELL
Adopted Date:
12/04/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
RAUL   DIAZ; FT. LAUDERDALE, FL
ROBERT A WHITE; WICHITA, KS
EDWARD   ROGALSKI; BELLVIEW, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
