A witness reported that, after landing for an en-route fuel stop, the noninstrument-rated pilot 
checked the weather and then departed for a cross-country flight; instrument meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of departure. The burned wreckage was found 2 days later in a 
remote unpopulated area about 6 miles northwest of the departure airport. Examination of the 
accident site revealed ground scars and airplane damage consistent with a nearly vertical nose-
down collision with terrain. Examination of the wreckage revealed no evidence of any 
preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures, although the definitive operational status of 
the vacuum-driven instruments could not be determined. The weather information, which was 
corroborated by a witness, depicted deteriorating weather conditions with a lowering variable 
ceiling and the lack of a visible horizon in the area at the time of the accident. The low-visibility 
conditions were conducive to the noninstrument-rated pilot™s development of spatial 
disorientation, and the airplane's near-vertical descent is consistent with the pilot's loss of 
airplane control due to spatial disorientation.
The noninstrument-rated pilot's encounter with instrument meteorological conditions, which 
resulted in spatial disorientation and his subsequent loss of airplane control. Contributing to 
the accident was the pilot's decision to take off in deteriorating weather conditions.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2013, about 1210 central daylight time, N9330M, a Mooney Aviation Company, Inc. 
M20E, single engine airplane, was destroyed after impacting terrain near Guymon, Oklahoma. 
The pilot and passenger were fatally injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by a 
private individual. Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed at the time of 
departure and a flight plan had not been filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations part 91 
personal flight. The airplane departed Guymon Municipal Airport (KGUY), Guymon, 
Oklahoma, at 1204, and was en route to Meadow Lake Airport (KFLY), Peyton, Colorado.
The airplane had earlier that morning departed from El Reno Regional Airport (KRQO), El 
Reno, Oklahoma, with a final destination of KFLY. After landing for an en route fuel stop at 
KGUY the pilot checked the weather and departed during deteriorating weather conditions. 
The airplane failed to arrive at KFLY. The burned wreckage was discovered two days later on 
the afternoon of April 3, 2013, in a remote area about 6 miles northwest from KGUY.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 68, held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) private pilot certificate with a 
rating for only airplane single engine land. He did not hold an instrument rating. His first FAA 
pilot certificate was a student pilot certificate which was issued on December 1, 2004, and his 
FAA private pilot certificate was initially issued on December 14, 2005.
The pilot's logbooks were not available during the course of the investigation. Based on the 
pilot's most recent airman medical certification application, aircraft maintenance logbooks, 
aviation insurance company documents completed by the pilot, and other documents, the 
pilot's  flight experience as of March 9, 2013, was estimated as 933 hours of total flight 
experience with about 638 hours of pilot experience in Mooney M20 series airplanes.
No records were found which indicated that the pilot had flight experience in any aircraft other 
than single engine land airplanes, and there was no logbook record of the pilot's instrument 
flying experience.
A certified flight instructor (CFI) administered a satisfactory flight review to the pilot on 
October 19, 2011, and reported that the pilot knew his aircraft and was knowledgeable of the 
regulations and proper procedures. The CFI also reported that during the 1.4 hour long period 
of flight instruction the pilot flew the airplane well in visual conditions, but had some difficulty 
flying in simulated instrument conditions while wearing a hood. After more instruction the 
pilot's hood work improved and he completed three unusual attitude recoveries while under 
the hood.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The four-seat, low-wing, retractable landing gear, single engine airplane, serial number (s/n) 
1262, was manufactured in 1973. It was equipped with a 200-horsepower Lycoming model IO-
360-A1A engine, s/n L-2718-51A, which drove a Hartzell, model HC-C2YR-1BF, 2-blade metal 
alloy propeller, s/n CH42095B.
The accident airplane was equipped with a Garmin GNS430W GPS; and an Aspen EFD 1000 
system with an Aspen EWR50 XM weather receiver capable of displaying satellite weather 
overlays on the moving map display. The Aspen equipment had been installed in April, 2012. 
The airplane was also equipped with a J.P. Instruments EDM-700 engine monitoring system; 
an S-TEC System 30 two axis autopilot; and a model EBC-102A emergency locator transmitter 
(ELT).
Fuel receipts at KGUY showed the airplane had been topped-off to its 52 gallon capacity with 
21.6 gallons of 100LL aviation gasoline. A postaccident fuel quality inspection of the refueling 
facility at KGUY was satisfactory.
A witness at KGUY reported that the pilot and passenger were seated in the two front seats, 
and the rear cabin was loaded with baggage and personal cargo "all the way up to the roof". The 
witness also reported that the pilot told him that he had "airborne XM weather radar installed 
on the airplane, but that it wasn't working".
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
KGUY was the closest official weather station to the accident site and had an Automated 
Surface Observing System (ASOS5) whose reports were not supplemented by a human 
observer. At 1053 KGUY reported the wind was from 020 degrees at 17 knots, visibility 10 
miles, ceiling overcast at 1,400 feet above ground level (agl), temperature 4 degrees Celsius (C), 
dew point 0 degrees C, with an altimeter setting of 30.17 inches of mercury.
At 1203 the data from KGUY revealed that the wind was from 360 degrees at 13 gusting to 23 
knots, visibility 10 miles, ceiling broken at 800 feet agl, overcast clouds at 1,200 feet agl, 
temperature 3 degrees C, dew point 0 degrees C, with an altimeter setting of 30.20 inches of 
mercury. Remarks indicated that the pressure was rising rapidly.
At 1253 the data from KGUY revealed that the wind was from 020 degrees at 15 gusting to 21 
knots, visibility 10 miles, overcast clouds at 800 feet agl, temperature 2 degrees C, dew point -1 
degrees C, with an altimeter setting of 30.18 inches of mercury. Remarks indicated that 
unknown precipitation began at 15 minutes after the hour and ended at 30 minutes after the 
hour, and rain began at 18 minutes after the hour and ended at 28 minutes after the hour. The 
ceiling was variable from 600 to 1,000 feet agl. Remarks also indicated that the freezing rain 
sensor not operating.
A witness at KGUY reported that the cloud condition was a low ceiling when the airplane 
landed and the ceiling was even lower with sprinkling rain and sleet when the airplane 
departed.
Another witness recalled hearing hail or sleet on the hangar roof before the airplane departed.
Records showed that the pilot used a desktop computer in the FBO pilot's flight planning room 
to check weather using "WSI" and "Aviation Sentry Weather" before he departed from KGUY. 
However, neither of those resources logs access, so there was no record of what specific 
weather information was obtained by the pilot.
COMMUNICATIONS AND POSTACCIDENT SEARCH ACTIVITY
On April 1, 2013, about 0733, the pilot of the accident airplane telephoned the Flight Service 
Station (FSS) and received a pilot weather briefing to fly from KRQO to KFLY. The pilot 
received only a weather briefing for the expected 3-hour flight and did not file a flight plan.
There was no record of any subsequent communications from the pilot.
On April 2, 2013, family members had become concerned and notified the FAA that the 
airplane had failed to arrive. Within minutes several different agencies became involved in the 
search efforts. Local emergency responders near KFLY conducted a physical search and 
confirmed the accident airplane had not arrived at the airport and the pilot's vehicle was still 
there. The FSS issued an alert notice (ALNOT) which directed an extensive communication 
search for the overdue, unreported, or missing aircraft.
FAA air traffic control (ATC) coordinated with the U. S. Air Force Rescue Coordination Center 
(AFRCC) and with volunteers from the Civil Air Patrol (CAP). AFRCC reported there had not 
been any reports of ELT signals along the route of flight from KRQO to KFLY. FAA ATC and 
CAP forensic radar specialists identified several radar targets in the area around KRQO, but 
were unable to positively identify the accident airplane. A volunteer CAP cell phone forensics 
specialist began tracking data from the pilot's cell phone and determined the pilot's cell phone 
had last been in the vicinity of KGUY.
Direct coordination with the airport fixed base operator (FBO) at KGUY showed that the 
accident airplane had landed at KGUY at 1050 on April 1, 2015, refueled, and took off 
northbound from runway 36 at 1204.
The FAA ATC radar forensics specialist reported that radar coverage west and northwest of 
KGUY is "sparse" below 5,000 to 6,000 feet mean sea level (msl), and that no radar tracks 
were visible for the accident airplane. The KGUY airport is at an elevation of 3,125 feet msl, and 
the elevation of the accident location was estimated about 3,209 feet msl.
The FAA, FSS, and AFRCC, coordinated with volunteer CAP search teams from Texas, 
Oklahoma, and Colorado to immediately begin efforts for an airborne search, but the CAP units 
were prevented from launching because of adverse weather.
About 1600 on April 3, 2015, a local pilot at KGUY, who was aware of the missing airplane, was 
airborne on a local flight when he visually spotted the burned wreckage in a remote area about 
6 miles northwest from KGUY. A local law enforcement officer drove to the accident scene and 
confirmed the location of the wreckage and the airplane's registration number. Other 
emergency personnel responded, the ALNOT was cancelled, the AFRCC search and rescue 
mission was terminated, and the multi-state CAP search mission was terminated.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was found impacted on dirt and rock in high desert terrain in a remote 
unpopulated area. The intact wreckage was upright and remained in or immediately adjacent 
to the impact ground scars. The fuel tanks were breached and much of the airplane was mostly 
consumed by a postimpact fire.
Impact scars, accordion compression buckling of the leading edges of the wings, and other 
evidence at the scene, was consistent with a wings level, terrain impact of about 70 degrees 
nose down. Witness marks showed the tail surfaces had bent straight forward during the 
impact, struck the empennage, and then rebounded.
All of the airplane components and flight control surfaces were accounted for and remained 
connected. Flight control continuity was confirmed from the control surfaces to impact 
separations or to the melted metal mass in the cockpit area. Areas of some flight control push-
pull tubes were missing or significantly damaged by fire but there was no evidence of 
preimpact separation.
Fire consumed the inboard portion of the right wing, most of the left wing, and much of the 
instrument panel, avionics, cockpit area, and the entire cabin area. The forward cockpit 
instrument panel and cabin area were unrecognizable. Impact damage and fire damage 
prevented a useful examination of the cockpit instruments.
Landing gear and gear doors were observed up and closed. The flaps were retracted. The 
elevator screw travel was observed on the wreckage as about 3 1/4 inches extension. The 
manufacturer reported that elevator screw travel for full nose-up trim is about 4 1/2 inches, 
and full nose down trim is about 2 inches.
The engine was then separated from the airframe and hung from a hoist for the examination. 
The propeller remained attached to the crankshaft. One propeller blade was bent aft under the 
engine and exhibited cord-wise polishing and scratches. The other blade was relatively straight 
and covered with soot. The propeller governor was partially deformed by fire.
The engine case was observed cracked open near the front of the case. The exhaust system had 
been crushed aft and upwards. Both magnetos were partially consumed by fire and were not 
further examined. The spark plugs were removed and appeared normal as compared to the 
Champion Aviation Check-a-Plug Chart AV-27. The spark plug electrodes were unbroken. The 
engine crankshaft flange was bent and the crankshaft could not be rotated. Engine drive train 
continuity was established visually. The engine driven fuel pump was observed to be mostly 
consumed by fire. The fuel servo was deformed by fire. All of the fuel injectors and the fuel flow 
divider were examined and appeared clear. The flow divider diaphragm was consumed by fire. 
The engine driven vacuum pump was disassembled and examined. The drive adaptor was 
melted and the rotor was observed impact cracked and broken. The rotor, pump vanes, and 
internal surfaces were examined.
The postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Autopsies were performed on the pilot and the passenger by the Office of the Chief Medical 
Examiner in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA), Aeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, in Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma. The toxicology report stated: tests for Carbon Monoxide were NOT PERFORMED; 
tests for Cyanide were NOT PERFORMED; NO ETHANOL was detected in Muscle. NO 
ETHANOL was detected in Liver: and NO DRUGS were detected in Liver.
FAA records showed the pilot's most recent Third-Class Limited Medical Certificate was issued 
on March 19, 2013, with a restriction: must wear corrective lenses for distant vision, and must 
possess glasses for near vision. At the time of the medical examination the pilot reported that 
he was taking no medications and he reported no new concerns.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
A fragmented, impact damaged, and thermally damaged Garmin GNS430W panel mount GPS 
device was removed from the wreckage and was examined at the NTSB vehicle recorder 
division in Washington, DC. An internal examination of the components revealed that heat 
from the postimpact fire destroyed most of the unit's electronic components. No recorded data 
was able to be extracted from the Garmin GNS430W.
A fragmented, impact damaged, and thermally damaged JPI EDM-700 engine data monitor 
was removed from the wreckage and was examined at the NTSB vehicle recorder division in 
Washington, DC. An internal examination of the components revealed that many of the unit's 
electronic components, including the memory, were found to be melted by exposure to flames. 
No recorded data was able to be extracted from the JPI EDM-700.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to FAA Advisory Circular 60-4A "Pilot's Spatial Disorientation," "Surface references 
and the natural horizon may at times become obscured, although visibility may be above visual 
flight rule minimums. Lack of natural horizon or surface reference is common – in extremely 
sparsely populated areas or in low visibility conditions. A sloping cloud formation (or) an 
obscured horizon – can provide inaccurate visual information for aligning the aircraft correctly 
with the actual horizon. The disoriented pilot may place the aircraft in a dangerous attitude."
"– tests conducted with qualified instrument pilots indicated that it can take as long as 35 
seconds to establish full control by instruments after a loss of visual reference of the earth's 
surface. AC 60-4A further states that surface references and the natural horizon may become 
obscured even though visibility may be above VFR minimums and that an inability to perceive 
the natural horizon or surface references is common during flights – in sparsely populated 
areas, and in low-visibility conditions".
According to the FAA "Instrument Flying Handbook", FAA-H-8083-5B, "An obscured horizon 
– can provide inaccurate visual information, or false horizon, for aligning the aircraft correctly 
with the actual horizon. The disoriented pilot may place the aircraft in a dangerous attitude".
"In moderate unusual attitudes, the pilot can normally reorient by establishing a level flight 
indication on the attitude indicator. However, the pilot should not depend on this instrument if 
– its upset limits may have been exceeded or it may have become inoperative due to 
mechanical malfunction ... As soon as the unusual attitude is detected, the recommended 
recovery procedures – should be initiated by reference to the ASI, altimeter, VSI, and turn 
coordinator".
According to the FAA "Airplane Flying Handbook", FAA-H-8083-3A, "The pilot should 
remember, that unless (instrument flying) tasks are practiced on a continuing and regular 
basis, skill erosion begins almost immediately. In a very short time, the pilot's assumed level of 
confidence will be much higher than the performance he or she will actually be able to 
demonstrate should the need arise".
"A VFR pilot is in IMC conditions anytime he or she is unable to maintain airplane attitude 
control by reference to the natural horizon, regardless of the circumstances or the prevailing 
weather conditions. (This situation) must be accepted by the pilot involved as a genuine 
emergency, requiring appropriate action".
