Before the accident flight, maintenance had been conducted on the foreign-registered airplane 
at a Federal Aviation Administration-authorized repair station. After takeoff, the pilot selected 
the landing gear to the ﬁupﬂ position. The pilot noticed that the main landing gear retracted but 
that the nose landing gear did not. He then ﬁcompleted the emergency check,ﬂ selected the gear 
ﬁdownﬂ position, and subsequently observed three ﬁgear down and lockedﬂ lights illuminate. 
After discussing the situation with an air traffic controller, the pilot decided to return to the 
airport to land. The touchdown was normal; however, during the landing roll, as the airplane 
decelerated, the nose landing gear collapsed, and the airplane™s nose and propellers contacted 
the runway, which resulted in substantial damage to the airplane. 
Examination of the nose landing gear assembly revealed that the nose landing gear actuator 
was intact, extended, and undamaged but that the rod end, which had its castellated nut still 
threaded onto it, was not connected to the nose landing gear drag brace. Review of 
maintenance records and discrepancy sheets revealed no evidence that maintenance had been 
performed on the nose landing gear assembly. However, review of worksheets that the operator 
had given to the repair station indicated that the operator had requested that nondestructive 
testing (NDT) be performed on the nose landing gear drag brace. Although the worksheets 
were supposed to be used to document the inspections, repair station personnel did not fill 
them out. However, a work order sent to the operator by the NDT technician, who was a 
contractor, did indicate that NDT had been performed on the nose landing gear drag brace. 
The repair station™s chief inspector stated that, for previous NDT of the nose landing gear 
brace, repair station personnel had always removed the part from the airplane. However, after 
the chief inspector met with the operator™s mechanic and the pilot to discuss the maintenance 
to be performed, they decided that the repair station did not have to be involved in the NDT 
that day because the nose landing gear brace actually did not need to be removed for the NDT. 
Thus, the chief inspector did not enter the NDT on the discrepancy sheets.
 
Page 2 of 9ERA13LA188
The chief inspector reported that, initially, no one involved in the airplane™s maintenance could 
remember if anyone had worked on or near the nose landing gear; however, a mechanic 
subsequently reported that he had disconnected and removed the bolt from the nose landing 
gear actuator at the request of the NDT technician to facilitate the NDT of the nose landing 
gear. The chief inspector further reported that neither the mechanic nor the NDT technician 
communicated to anyone that the bolt had been removed or took any actions that might have 
alerted anyone that the bolt was not in place; evidence indicates that the bolt was not 
reinstalled, which could have been detected during a postmaintenance inspection. However, 
the chief inspector reported that, because the nose landing gear drag brace inspection was not 
on the discrepancy sheet and it had not been removed for maintenance, it did not occur to him 
to inspect it before releasing the airplane to service. The inspector™s failure to inspect the drag 
brace led to its being returned to service without the bolt attached and its subsequent failure. 
The evidence indicates that confusion existed regarding what each person™s and organization™s 
responsibilities were and that a breakdown in communication occurred between the repair 
station personnel, the NDT technician, and the operator. These factors, coupled with the lack 
of oversight by the chief inspector, led to a breakdown in the controls put in place to detect and 
correct errors before an accident occurs. 
The disconnection of the nose landing gear actuator, which resulted in the subsequent collapse 
of the nose landing gear. Contributing to the accident was the repair station™s inadequate 
maintenance, postmaintenance inspection process, and oversight of the maintenance 
performed and the lack of communication between the repair station personnel, the operator, 
and the testing technician. 
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2013, at 1635 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 402C, Turks and Caicos Islands 
registration VQ-TIN, operated by Caicos Express Airways (CEA), was substantially damaged 
when the nose landing gear collapsed during landing rollout at Fort Lauderdale Executive 
Airport (FXE), Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The airline transport pilot was not injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and an IFR flight plan was filed for the positioning flight, 
destined for Providenciales International Airport (MBPV), Providenciales, Turks and Caicos 
Islands. The flight was conducted under the provisions of Article 14 of the United Kingdom Air 
Navigation (Overseas Territories) Order 2007.
According to the pilot, the airplane had just had maintenance completed and the purpose of 
the flight was to return the airplane to MBPV to place it back in service. After departing from 
runway 26 at FXE, the pilot selected the landing gear to the "UP" position. The pilot noticed 
however, that the main landing gear retracted but, the nose landing gear did not. He then 
"completed the emergency check" and immediately selected "gear down". He then observed 
three "gear down and locked lights". After discussing the situation with air traffic control the 
pilot decided to return for landing on runway 13. The touchdown was normal, however during 
the rollout, as the airplane decelerated through 60 knots, the nose landing gear collapsed and 
the airplane's nose and propellers made contact with the pavement. The pilot also advised that 
prior to the nose landing gear collapse, he never heard a gear warning horn.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and pilot records, the pilot held an airline 
transport pilot certificate with a rating for airplane multi-engine land. His most recent FAA 
first-class medical certificate was issued on October 23, 2012. He reported that he had accrued 
10,566 total hours of flight experience, 3,507 of which were in the accident airplane make and 
model.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
According to Turks and Caicos Islands Civil Aviation Authority (TCI-CAA) and CEA records, 
the airplane was manufactured in 1980. Its most recent annual inspection was completed on 
March 16, 2013. At the time of the inspection, the airplane had accrued 8,524 total hours of 
operation.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The recorded weather at FXE at 1653, included: wind 180 degrees at 5 knots, visibility 10 miles, 
sky clear, temperature 26 degrees C, dew point 17 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.97 
inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the airplane revealed that the fuselage nose structure behind the radome had 
been substantially damaged.
Examination of the nose landing gear assembly revealed that the nose landing gear actuator 
was intact, extended, and undamaged, but the rod end with its castellated nut still threaded 
onto it was not connected to the nose landing gear drag brace. Further examination of the nose 
landing gear assembly also revealed that it would have been difficult for the pilot to discover 
that the nose landing gear actuator was disconnected from the nose landing gear drag brace, as 
the disconnected actuator was in an area that would be difficult for him to see or access. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Review of Maintenance Records
According to FAA and TCI-CAA records, the repair station which performed the maintenance 
on the airplane; EA Management Services Inc. (EAMS), was authorized to perform both 
airframe and powerplant repair on CEA aircraft. 
Review of the airplane's maintenance records revealed however, no evidence of any 
maintenance being performed on the nose landing gear assembly. Review of the EAMS defect 
work cards for the maintenance performed on the airplane also did not reveal any evidence of 
maintenance being performed on the nose landing gear assembly.
Review of the additional worksheets (Form CEA-124) which had been given to EAMS to be 
used to document additional inspections as part of the maintenance requested by CEA, 
indicated that the nose landing gear drag brace (Supplemental Inspection Number: 32-20-00) 
was requested to be performed. The documents however were discovered to have not been 
filled out by EAMS.
Review of a work order (Work Order: 2013-0051) that was sent to CEA by Ultimate NDT Inc. 
indicated however that non-destructive testing (NDT) had been performed on the nose landing 
gear drag brace in the form of a fluorescent penetrant inspection and that no cracks were noted 
at the time of the inspection. 
CHIEF INSPECTOR'S STATEMENTS
According to EAMS's chief inspector, on March 24, 2013, the accident airplane was flown into 
FXE by the pilot and one of CEA's mechanics to have maintenance performed, which included 
an engine change and numerous Supplemental Inspections in accordance with Chapter 4 of the 
airplane maintenance manual. One of the mechanics that normally worked for the repair 
station was also contracted by CEA to assist in performing the maintenance for the duration. 
According to the chief inspector, upon the airplane's arrival, they immediately began to prepare 
the airplane for the inspection and engine change as they had tentatively scheduled March 27, 
2013 as the date that non-destructive testing (NDT) inspections were to be performed by a 
contractor. Using the work order instructions as a guide, the chief inspector prepared a list of 
the NDT inspections to be carried out by the NDT contractor. This list was compiled based on 
the chief inspector's knowledge of the airplane and his familiarity with its maintenance history. 
The chief inspector's list included some additional inspections that were not originally included 
on the work order instruction supplied by CEA. This list was presented and after discussions 
with the mechanic from CEA and the pilot, it was decided that the repair station did not need 
to be involved in the inspection of the nose landing gear drag brace, because it did not 
necessitate the dismantling or separation of any parts. According to the chief inspector, this 
discussion happened on March 24, 2013 but, he was unable to recall the specific details, though 
according to him, "it was unequivocal that we had agreed that our help will not be needed in 
the performance of this inspection at this time." On previous inspections of the nose landing 
gear drag brace, the repair facility had always completely removed the drag brace from the 
airplane and the inspection was carried out with the part removed from the airplane. The chief 
inspector also advised that they discussed the unavailability of paint stripper and the need to 
purchase some to carry out the inspection. After he was informed that this was not required he 
did not transfer that inspection to the out shop defect work cards (discrepancy sheets).
According to the chief inspector, they proceeded to complete the inspections, installations and 
other additional maintenance as required by CEA and on their work order. He advised that he 
was responsible for the supervision of all tasks and upon their completion; he did a final 
inspection, ground runs for the engine installation, and the control adjustments and release to 
service. 
After the accident, when the examination found that the bolt that connected the nose gear drag 
link to the nose gear actuator was disconnected, initial questioning of all parties that were 
involved in the maintenance of the aircraft, as to whether anyone may have worked on and 
therefore disconnected the nose actuator bolt, was conducted. Everyone involved answered in 
the negative. No one at the time could remember anyone working on the nose landing gear or 
working in the vicinity of the nose landing gear. 
Further questioning revealed that a mechanic had indeed disconnected and removed the bolt at 
the request of the NDT technician to facilitate an inspection on the nose landing gear. The 
mechanic and NDT technician at no time communicated this to anyone and did not take any 
further actions that may have alerted anyone to the bolt not being in place.
According to the chief inspector, they had performed this inspection numerous times at their 
facility and the contracted NDT technician had always had the nose landing gear drag brace 
removed, the inspection areas paint stripped, and then placed on a table, to conduct the 
inspection. According to the chief inspector they were unaware that this inspection could have 
been carried out in-situ on the aircraft. He advised that, since it was not on their discrepancy 
sheet, and since they did not remove it for maintenance, and being unaware that this 
inspection could have been carried out without the drag brace being removed from the aircraft, 
at no time did it occur to him to inspect the drag brace before the release to service.
