Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
North Pole, AK
Accident Number:
ANC15LA069
Date & Time:
09/02/2015, 1500 AKD 
Registration:
N7494R
Aircraft:
PIPER PA 28-140
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The student pilot was conducting a local flight with a passenger on board. The passenger stated 
that they had overflown a moose hunting area and were returning to the departure airport for 
landing. After touchdown and during the landing roll, the airplane veered left, then right, then 
left again before departing the runway and impacting a stand of birch trees. He stated that the 
airplane seemed to fly great and that he was not aware of, nor did the pilot discuss, any 
mechanical anomalies or malfunctions during the flight. Due to injuries sustained in the 
accident, the student pilot was unable to remember the accident sequence. 
A pilot-rated witness reported that he observed the airplane on final approach with about an 8- 
to 10-knot tailwind and noted that the airplane appeared to be a "little fast." He stated that, 
after touchdown, the airplane veered left, then right, then sharply left again before exiting the 
runway, corroborating the passenger's statement. The examination of the airframe and engine 
revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal 
operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The student pilot's loss of directional control during landing with a tailwind, which resulted in 
a runway excursion and collision with trees. 
Page 2 of 6ANC15LA069
Findings
Aircraft
Directional control - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Student pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Tailwind - Effect on operation (Cause)
Page 3 of 6ANC15LA069
Factual Information
On September 2, 2015, about 1500 Alaska daylight time, a Piper PA-28 airplane, N7494R, 
sustained substantial damage following a loss of control while landing at Lakloey Air Park, 
North Pole, Alaska. The airplane was being operated by the student pilot as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) flight under the provisions of Title 14, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, when 
the accident occurred. The student pilot sustained minor injuries and the sole passenger was 
not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed. 
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on September 2, the passenger stated that they had overflown a 
moose hunting area and were returning for landing. After touchdown, during the landing roll, 
the airplane veered to the left, then to the right, then back to the left before departing the 
runway and impacting a stand of birch trees. He stated that the airplane seemed to fly great, 
and he was not aware of, nor did the pilot discuss, any mechanical anomalies or malfunctions 
during the course of the flight. 
During an interview with the NTSB, IIC on September 3 the pilot stated that the only thing he 
remembered from the accident flight was being on short final for runway 24 at Lakloey Air 
Park. 
At the time of the accident, a pilot rated witness on the northeast corner of Lakloey Air Park 
reported light wind conditions out of the east at 8 to 10 knots. He observed the accident 
airplane on final approach for runway 24; a downwind landing. He noted that the airplane 
appeared to be a "little fast", and estimated the groundspeed to be about 60 miles per hour. He 
said that after touchdown, the airplane veered to the left, then to the right, then back sharply to 
the left before exiting the runway. 
The NTSB IIC reached the accident site on the morning of September 3. The airplane came to 
rest upright in a densely populated stand of birch trees about midfield and adjacent to runway 
24, on a heading of about 250 degrees. All the primary flight controls were identified at the 
accident site. Stabilator control continuity was established from the control column to the 
stabilator balance arm. Rudder control continuity was established from the rudder torque tube 
to the rudder horn. Aileron control continuity was established in the direct cables, from the 
control column to the point where the right cable fractured with features consistent with 
tension overload, to the left and right aileron bellcranks, and in the balance cable to the point 
where the cable fractured with features consistent with tension overload, to the left and right 
aileron bellcranks.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings and fuselage. The examination of the 
airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would 
have precluded normal operation.
The closest weather reporting facility is Ladd Army Airfield, Fort Wainwright, AK 
approximately 3 miles west of the accident site. At 1458, an aviation routine weather report 
Page 4 of 6ANC15LA069
(METAR) at Fort Wainwright, Alaska, reported in part: wind 090 degrees at 7 knots, visibility, 
10 statute miles, clear skies; 67 degrees F; dew point 37 degrees F; altimeter, 29.87 inHG.
Title 14, Code of Federal Regulation (CFR) Part 61 prescribes in part: The requirements for 
issuing pilot certificates and ratings, and the privileges and limitations of these certificates and 
ratings. The student pilot was subject to the part's applicable rules. Section 61.89, states, in 
part: A student pilot may not act as pilot in command of an aircraft: That is carrying a 
passenger. 
History of Flight
Landing-landing roll
Loss of control on ground (Defining event)
Runway excursion
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
30
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/07/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
66 hours (Total, all aircraft), 60 hours (Total, this make and model), 25 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ANC15LA069
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N7494R
Model/Series:
PA 28-140 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1966
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-22048
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/05/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3405 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91  installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320 SERIES
Registered Owner:
LUIS M. JARA
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
LUIS M. JARA
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PAFB, 460 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
3 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2258 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
290째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
70째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.04 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14째C / 1째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
North Pole, AK (AK22)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
North Pole, AK (AK22)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1151 AKD
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Lakleoy Air Park (AK22)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf; Gravel
Airport Elevation:
475 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
24
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4000 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Page 6 of 6ANC15LA069
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
64.821667, -147.521667 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
David B Banning
Adopted Date:
05/16/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Eric Jones; Federal Aviation Administration; Fairbanks, AK
Publish Date:
06/14/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91925
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
