Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
ROANOKE, TX
Accident Number:
FTW96FA004
Date & Time:
10/02/1995, 1225 CDT 
Registration:
N85636
Aircraft:
AERONCA 7AC
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot obtained two weather briefings for the cross country flight. The second briefing was 
obtained approximately 4 hours prior to departure. The briefings included a convective sigmet 
and a severe thunderstorm watch. Lines of thunderstorms (tops to 45,000) associated with a 
cold front were moving into the area. At the time of the second briefing the winds in the area 
were from the south at 8 to 12 knots. The airplane departed runway 17. The pilot stated that 
'during the takeoff ground roll, at approximately the same time that the tailwheel lifted from 
the runway' the windsock extended from 'limp to standing straight out due to a very strong 
gust.' The main wheels had not lifted off the runway, when the wind 'hit,' and 'picked the 
airplane up like a helicopter or a kite.' The airplane crashed after lift-off. Peak surface wind 
shifts from southwest through northeast near the time of departure reached 70 degrees with 
gusts to 33 knots. Witnesses reported winds at the departure airport shifted from the south to 
the north with gusts to 35 knots. Pilot reports included moderate to severe turbulence below 
8,000 MSL. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's inadequate weather evaluation and encounter with a sudden windshift and tailwind. 
The wind gusts and turbulence were factors. 
Page 2 of 7FTW96FA004
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN
Findings
1. (C) WEATHER EVALUATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) WEATHER CONDITION - SUDDEN WINDSHIFT
3. (C) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND
4. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS
5. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - TURBULENCE
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7FTW96FA004
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT:
On October 2, 1995, about 1225 central daylight time, an Aeronca 7AC, N85636, registered to a 
private owner impacted terrain following a loss of control during takeoff from runway 17 at 
Northwest Regional Airport, Roanoke, Texas.  The commercial pilot and the pilot rated 
passenger received serious injuries and the airplane sustained substantial damage.  The 
airplane was being operated as a personal flight under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed; however, the weather in the area was influenced by an 
approaching line of thunderstorms associated with a cold front.  
On a written statement, one witness reported observing the airplane at approximately 100 feet 
above the ground start a left turn with about 10 degrees of bank.  As the turn continued, the 
angle of bank increased to about 30 degrees, the airplane then "pitched down maybe 20 or 30 
degrees" as the airplane headed in a northerly direction.  The witness further stated that "it 
appeared that the pilot was trying to roll out of the turn."  This witness reported a cold front 
passage, approximately 30 seconds prior to observing the airplane turning.  This witness 
further reported "a strong wind shift" estimated at "30 to 35 knots from the north."  Another 
witness reported "dark clouds associated with the cold front," "lighting," and winds at "least 20 
knots."
During a telephone interview, conducted by the investigator-in- charge, one witness reported 
observing the airplane about 150 feet above the ground during a takeoff climbing turn to the 
east. This witness described the airplane attitude as "high angle of attack" and "slow speed."   
Engine power was heard by this witness prior to observing the airplane in "3/4 left turn to spin 
entry."  Steady winds at 20 knots from the west were reported by the witness.
During a personal interview, conducted by the investigator-in- charge, and on the enclosed 
statement, a flight instructor reported departing the airport for an instructional flight, with 
winds from the south; however, at about 1205 approaching weather with "severe wind gusts" 
prompted the flight instructor to return to the airport.  Winds at the time of the landing had 
changed to the southwest and the flight experienced "light chop" at about "200 feet above the 
ground."  Total flight time was .5 hour.  By the time the airplane was placed in the hangar at the 
south end of runway 17, winds were estimated from the north at 30 knots.  
During a telephone interview, conducted by the investigator-in- charge, and on the 
Pilot/Operator Report, the pilot-in-command reported the following information.  Weather 
briefings were obtained for the cross country flight to Branson, Missouri, via Sherman, Texas, 
McAlester, Oklahoma, Tulsa, Oklahoma, and Rogers, Arkansas.  Prior to the departure, a visual 
assessment of the weather was conducted by the pilot-in-command.  He estimated the weather 
associated with the approaching cold front was 20 to 30 miles northwest of the airport.  During 
the takeoff ground roll, as the tailwheel lifted from the runway, the pilot observed a "cloud of 
dust right to left" and the windsock extend from "limp to standing straight out due to a very 
strong gust."  Prior to the main wheels lifting off the runway, the wind "hit," "picked the 
aircraft up like a helicopter or a kite and took us up about 100 to 150 feet."  Subsequently, the 
left wing dropped when the airplane was "hit by a strong downdraft/windshear."  
During a telephone interview, conducted by the investigator-in- charge, the passenger's 
father/witness reported the following information.  As the airplane taxied from the ramp area, 
Page 4 of 7FTW96FA004
the wind was from the south.  During the takeoff ground roll, the airplane was approximately 
1/2 way down the 3,500 foot runway when the wind shifted to a quartering headwind and then 
a quartering tailwind.  The "wall of wind gusting to 30 knots lifted the airplane off the ground."  
This witness observed the flight controls moving as the airplane traveled and rolled eastward.  
The airplane struck the "ground right wing and nose low."  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION:
National Weather Service surface observations from 0745 through 0844 in the departure 
airport area indicated winds from the south at 8 to 12 knots.  From 0845 through 1044, winds 
from Wichita Falls to Abilene were from the west northwest with gusts from 24 to 34 knots.  
Thunderstorms with lightning were moving to the east.  At 1147, Alliance Airport (7 miles 
southwest of Northwest Regional) reported winds from 040 degrees at 14 knots with gust to 20 
knots.  At 1155, Dallas/Fort Worth Airport (12 miles southeast of Northwest Regional) reported 
a wind shift from 230 degrees at 13 knots to 300 degrees at 24 knots with gust to 33 knots.  At 
1202, Fort Worth Airport (15 miles south of Northwest Regional) reported winds from 340 
degrees at 16 knots with gusts to 22 knots.  At 1202, Denton Airport (10 miles north of 
Northwest regional) reported winds from 320 degrees at 16 knots with gusts to 21 knots.
Terminal Forecast weather and the Area Forecast synopsis included a line of thunderstorms 
with tops to 45,000 feet and rain showers in the area of the departure airport.
Convective Sigmets issued for Texas advised of the cold front, lines of severe thunderstorms, 
hail to 2 inches, and wind gusts to 50 knots.  Thunderstorms were associated with regions of 
upslope flow and convergence associated with a surface trough.  
A severe thunderstorm watch effective from 1123 through 1800 for north central and east 
Texas was issued for the "possibility of extremely dangerous winds, large hail, and dangerous 
lighting."  
From 1045 through 1230, pilot's reported moderate to severe turbulence below 8,000 feet 
MSL.   
COMMUNICATIONS:
The pilot-in-command obtained an outlook briefing from Fort Worth Flight Service Station the 
night before the flight.  The pilot was briefed that thunderstorm activity associated with a cold 
front was expected in the Dallas/Fort Worth area the following morning. 
At approximately 0820 the following morning, the pilot obtained a standard weather briefing 
for a 1130 departure to Branson, Missouri.  The pilot was advised of thunderstorms and rain 
showers associated with an unstable airmass.  He was further advised of a convective sigmet, a 
severe thunderstorm watch over the flight route and that "VFR is questionable due to the 
possibility and severity of thunderstorms."
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION:
The airplane came to rest on a measured magnetic heading of 300 degrees less than 1/4 mile 
east of the departure end of runway 17.  The airplane remained intact; however, structural 
damage was sustained by the engine and airframe.  See the enclosed wreckage diagram.
The right wing tip was crushed aft, the fuselage and wing fabric was twisted to the right, and 
the cockpit was destroyed.  Flight control continuity was confirmed.  The integrity of the fuel 
tank was compromised; however, fuel screens were clean and fuel was found in the line from 
Page 5 of 7FTW96FA004
the gascolator to the carburetor.  Engine continuity was confirmed.  The oil screen was clean 
and oil was found in the engine.  Both magnetos sparked at all of the terminals.  Propeller 
blades exhibited chordwise scratches and the propeller flange was bent downward.  
TEST AND RESEARCH:
Examination of the engine and accessories did not reveal any pre- impact anomalies that would 
have contributed to the accident. 
ADDITIONAL DATA:
The airplane was released to the owner's representative.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
24, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/01/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
747 hours (Total, all aircraft), 36 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AERONCA
Registration:
N85636
Model/Series:
7AC 7AC
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
7AC4380
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/08/1995, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
83 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6975 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONTINENTAL
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
C-85-12F
Registered Owner:
GRANT D. SMITH
Rated Power:
85 hp
Operator:
GRANT D. SMITH
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7FTW96FA004
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
AFW, 722 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1232 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
210°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
25 knots / 35 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
310°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (52F)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
SHERMAN, TX (SWI)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1225 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
NORTHWEST REGIONAL (52F)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
643 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
17
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
3500 ft / 40 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JOYCE      M SMITH
Adopted Date:
04/29/1996
Additional Participating Persons:
CURT F MAHAFFEY; FORT WORTH, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7FTW96FA004
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
