Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
WAUCHULA, FL
Accident Number:
MIA97LA091
Date & Time:
03/02/1997, 1646 EST 
Registration:
N1201G
Aircraft:
Hackett WINDEX 1200C
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
Analysis 
The home built, powered glider was being flown on a flight to conduct a stall test at 3,000 feet. 
A witness observed the powered sailplane flying westbound at low altitude. According to the 
witness, the powered sailplane entered an abrupt turn to the east, then it started rotating to the 
left in a descent until it disappeared from view below a tree line. Examination of the crash site 
revealed evidence that the powered sailplane collided with the ground in a near vertical 
descent, 10-degree nose-up attitude, with no evidence of forward motion, rotating around its 
vertical axis to the left. Examination of the airframe, flight control assembly, engine assembly, 
and accessories revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. The 
powered sailplane had accumulated about 4 hours of flight time, since it was built. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
failure of the pilot to maintain adequate airspeed, while maneuvering, which resulted in an 
inadvertent stall/spin and subsequent collision with terrain. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. MANEUVER - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 2 of 5MIA97LA091
Factual Information
 On March 2, 1997, about 1646 eastern standard time, a Windex 1200C, N1201G, 
registered to a private owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed while 
maneuvering in the vicinity of Wauchula, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan was filed. The airplane was destroyed and the private pilot was fatally 
injured. The flight originated from Wauchula about 48 minutes before the accident.
Friends of the deceased pilot stated the pilot departed Wauchula at about 1558 for the 
local flight. The pilot was going to conduct a stall test at 3,000 feet. They talked to him 
periodically throughout the flight. The last communication was at about 1545. The pilot stated 
he had completed the stalls and everything was okay.  About 30 minutes later, a Hardee County 
Sheriff's Deputy arrived at the airport and informed them that there had been an airplane 
accident. They departed the airfield for the crash site, and upon arrival identified the deceased 
pilot.
A witness stated she was driving south when she observed the airplane on the east side 
of the road flying westbound at a very low altitude. She thought the airplane was a remote 
control airplane due to its size and altitude. She looked down towards the ground to see if she 
could find the operator and didn't see anyone. She looked back up and observed the airplane 
make an abrupt turn to the east. The airplane then started rotating to the left in a vertical 
descent until it disappeared from view below the tree line. She continued driving and observed 
the airplane in a pasture with the pilot laying motionless beside the airplane. She stopped her 
car, went to the fence and called the pilot. There was no response. She engaged the assistance 
of a passing motorist to call for help and notify the authorities.
The wreckage of N1201G was located in a pasture due east of Danby Road and Ander 
Marsh Road in the vicinity of Wauchula, Florida.
Examination of the crash site revealed the airplane collided with the ground in a near 
vertical descent, 10-degree nose-up attitude, with no evidence of forward motion rotating 
around its vertical axis to the left. The engine and propeller assembly were displaced 
downward. One composite propeller blade had separated and was located by the left wing. No 
evidence of chordwise scarring was present. The remaining propeller blade was found in the 
feather position with no evidence of chordwise scarring. Buckling damage was present on the 
upper surface of the left wing near the fuselage. The left wing flap was folded under the left 
wing and attached at the most inboard hinge. The right flap had separated and was laying 
below the trailing edge of the right wing oriented in a chordwise direction. The fuel tank was 
not ruptured and about 2 1/2 gallons of fuel was present in the fuel tank. The canopy had 
broken in four pieces. Examination of the canopy emergency jettison handle revealed the red 
release wire was functional and had not been activated. The right hand canopy attachment 
frame assembly was torn away from the fuselage. The left-hand canopy release mechanism was 
functional and revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
Examination of  the airframe, flight control assembly, engine assembly and accessories 
revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. All components 
necessary for flight were present at the crash site. Continuity of the flight control system was 
confirmed for pitch, roll, and yaw.  Postmortem examination of the pilot 
was conducted by Dr. Stephen J. Nelson, Medical Examiner, District Ten, Bartow, Florida, on 
March 3, 1997. The cause of death was multiple blunt force traumatic injuries. Postmortem 
Page 3 of 5MIA97LA091
toxicology of specimens from the pilot were forwarded to Wuesthoff Memorial Hospital, 
Rockledge, Florida, for analysis. The studies were negative for alcohol, neutral, acidic, and 
basic drugs.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
62
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/29/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 60 hours (Total, this make and model), 1460 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Hackett
Registration:
N1201G
Model/Series:
WINDEX 1200C WINDEX 12
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
001
Landing Gear Type: 
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/12/1997, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
694 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
4 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Konig
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
SC430
Registered Owner:
RUSSEL F. HACKETT
Rated Power:
24 hp
Operator:
LARS R. BERGSTROM
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5MIA97LA091
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TPA, 27 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
43 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1756 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
330°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (FDO6)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (FD06)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1558 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
CARROL     A SMITH
Adopted Date:
08/29/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
LADD R LEWIS; ORLANDO, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5MIA97LA091
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
