The aircraft owner reported that the student pilot was conducting traffic pattern training when 
he experienced a total loss of engine power while on final approach. The student pilot reported 
that he completed the before landing check that included the application of carburetor heat. 
After he turned on to the final approach leg the student pilot noticed that the engine had quit. 
During the forced landing roll the airplane collided with two parked vehicles. The examination 
of the aircraft at the accident site failed to disclose a mechanical problem. A subsequent 
functional check of the engine disclosed that it operated normally throughout all power ranges. 
Weather conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor ice. 
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. 
 On November 1, 1996, at 1745 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N81435, collided with 
two travel trailers in a secure lot east of the Hernando County Airport in  Brooksville, Florida. 
The instructional flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight 
plan filed. Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane 
sustained substantial damage, and the student pilot was not injured. The flight departed 
Brooksville, at 1730.
The aircraft owner reported that the student pilot was conducting traffic pattern training when 
he experienced a total loss of engine power while on final approach to runway 27. The student 
pilot reported that he completed the before landing check, that included the application of 
carburetor heat. After the student pilot turned on to the final approach leg, he noticed that the 
engine had quit. The student pilot selected an area near the airport and attempted a forced 
landing. During the forced landing roll out, the airplane collided with two parked vehicles.
The examination of the aircraft at the accident site failed to disclose a mechanical problem. A 
subsequent functional check of the engine disclosed that it operated normally throughout all 
power ranges. This check was repeated with the same results. A review of the weather data 
disclosed that conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor icing.
