The helicopter was was being used in an external lift operation, moving supplies of salt to a 
storage location. The pilot reported that he was lifting to a hover over a loaded cargo net, 
unaware that the external load cable was draped over one of the skids. As the cable took the 
strain of the load, the helicopter rolled, and the lateral control limit was exceeded. The pilot 
released the load with an electrical switch; however, before control was regained, the helicopter 
contacted the ground, nose low, and the main rotor blades struck the ground. The pilot 
reported that from initial down-force on the skid until impact, the time frame was less than 4 
seconds. He also reported no mechanical malfunction with the helicopter. 
improper routing of the external cargo hoist cable (over helicopter skid), which resulted in 
lateral imbalance and roll-over of the helicopter, as weight on the cable became effective. 
 On November 1, 1996, at 1230 hours mountain standard time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N90144, 
dynamically rolled over and crashed while lifting an external sling load from an uncharted 
mountainous helipad located near Supai, Arizona.  The helicopter was owned and operated by 
Action Helo of Arizona, under 14 CFR Part 133 for the local flight.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and a company VFR flight plan had been filed 
for the operation.  The helicopter was destroyed and property on the ground was damaged in 
the ensuing crash.  The certificated commercial pilot, the sole occupant, sustained minor 
injuries.
In his written accident report, the pilot said that "while lifting to a hover over a cargo net 
external load, the 40 foot cable became fouled over the skid (left-right unknown).  Control 
limits were exceeded with an increasing roll rate.  The load was released by the electrical switch 
but the helicopter contacted the ground nose low striking main rotors to the ground.  From 
initial down-force on [the] skid to impact[, it] was less than perhaps four seconds."  The pilot 
also reported that there were no mechanical malfunctions with the helicopter.
