A witness stated that the airplane 'flared smoothly and touched down with what appeared to be 
no side load.' As the aircraft settled onto the runway surface, the right main gear collapsed, and 
the aircraft subsequently skidded off the right side of the runway. During examination of the 
right main landing gear, it was discovered that the gear pivot assembly was fractured adjacent 
to the spline. It has not been determined as to whether the fracture occurred during gear 
retraction, extension, or upon contact with the runway. According to maintenance records, 
Cessna Service Bulletin, SE390.1, April 20, 1990, was applicable to this aircraft and was 
complied with. The Service Bulletin's purpose was to inspect main landing gear pivot 
assemblies for cracks in the spline area. The pivot assembly that failed, P/N 2441100-9, had a 
total time of 1,611.8 hours. Visual inspection of the fractured surface showed evidence of 
overload, however a small area on the outer portion of the surface had several small cracks 
bordering the edge. 
The failure of the main landing gear pivot gear assembly. 
 On November 1, 1996, approximately 1100 central standard time, a Cessna 172RG, N9520B, 
was substantially damaged following a collapse of the right main landing gear during landing 
roll out, at Riverside Airport, Tulsa, Oklahoma.  The private pilot was not injured.  No flight 
plan was filed, and visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 141 solo 
instructional flight.
In an interview with the investigator-in-charge the pilot reported that he was practicing stall 
maneuvers in a designated practice area adjacent to the airport.  Upon completion of the 
maneuvers, he returned to the airport and set up for landing on runway 1L.  After executing the 
pre-landing checklist, he noticed that the green landing gear down light was not illuminated.  
After an unsuccessful attempt to change light bulbs, he tried to pump the manual gear 
extension handle, but "it would not move."  He was able to visually check the left main gear but 
could not see the right gear.  After contemplating a go around, the pilot decided to land.
One witness, who was observing the airplane as it was on final, reported that he thought that 
the nose gear and left main was down and locked, but the right main did not appear to be in the 
locked position.  Another witness, who was observing, reported that he thought that all three 
landing gears were down and locked.  He further reported that the airplane "flared smoothly 
and touched down with what appeared to be no side load."  As the aircraft settled onto the 
runway surface, the right main gear collapsed.  Subsequently, the aircraft skidded off the right 
side of the runway.  The right wing was structurally damaged.
Inspection of the aircraft after the accident revealed that the landing gear down light bulb was 
burned out and was not related to the gear collapse.  During examination of the right main 
landing gear, it was discovered that the gear pivot assembly was fractured adjacent to the 
spline (illustration is attached to this report).  It has not been determined as to whether the 
fracture occurred during gear retraction, extension, or upon contact with the runway.
According to maintenance records, Cessna Service Bulletin, SE390.1, April 20, 1990, was 
applicable to this aircraft and was complied with.  The Service Bulletin's purpose was to inspect 
main landing gear pivot assemblies for cracks in the spline area.  The pivot assembly that 
failed, P/N 2441100-9, had a total time of 1,611.8 hours.  Visual inspection of the fractured 
surface showed evidence of overload, however a small area on the outer portion of the surface 
had several small cracks bordering the edge.  The part was sent to the NTSB metallurgy 
laboratory in Washington, D.C, for further analysis
The metallurgist who examined the pivot assembly reported that a large portion of the fracture 
face showed torsional mechanical damage.  A roughly circular area of undamaged features 
surrounded the drilled hole near the center of the shaft.  The undamaged area had features 
typical of an overstress separation.  The damaged area had features typical of rotational 
smearing and mechanical deformation.  Mechanically damaged ratchet mark features covered 
an arc of approximately 100 degrees around the outside edge of the shaft.  Small longituidinally 
oriented cracks emanated from most of the ratchets.  Hardness and electrical conductivity 
measurements were consistent with the engineering drawing specified material (7171-T74 
aluminum alloy) for the part.
