The aircraft was a new production airplane, which was manufactured in Romania, then was 
disassembled and shipped in a crate to the United States. This was the first flight following 
reassembly of the aircraft. The aircraft had been run on the ground for 50 minutes, and a high 
speed taxi test had been completed. Shortly after takeoff, a loss of engine power occurred. The 
pilot landed on the runway, but insufficient runway was remaining to stop before colliding with 
a building and a fence at the departure end of the runway. The powerplant was a Russian 
manufactured 9-cylinder radial engine with a pressure carburetor. The pilot said he believed 
that the carburetor malfunctioned. The aircraft was examined by an FAA airworthiness 
inspector with the assistance of a Russian factory trained technician. The carburetor was 
removed from the engine and a used/serviceable one was installed in its place. The engine was 
then started and exercised through the normal power range with no problem noted. The 
technician stated that disassembly of the carburetor required special tools available only at the 
factory. The inspector reported that the directions for disassembling the aircraft were used as a 
checklist/reference for reassembling the aircraft, and that the directions were written only in 
Russian. The Russian technician said that '. . . the factory did not do one or two steps on the 
checklist.' 
loss of engine power due to an undetermined internal carburetor malfunction.  A factor 
relating to the accident was: the directions that were use for reassembly of the aircraft were 
written only in Russian. 
 On November 1, 1996, at 1200 hours Pacific standard time, an Aerostar SA Yak 52, N207YK, 
collided with an airport building and a perimeter fence during a rejected takeoff attempt at the 
Fullerton Municipal Airport, Fullerton, California.  The rejected takeoff was precipitated by a 
loss of engine power just after liftoff.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time 
and no flight plan was filed.  The aircraft sustained substantial damage.  The certificated 
commercial pilot was not injured.  The flight originated at the time of the accident as a local 
area test flight.
The aircraft is a new production airplane which was manufactured in Romania, then shipped in 
a crate to the United States.  This was the first flight following reassembly of the aircraft.  
According to the pilot, the aircraft had been run on the ground for 50 minutes and had 
completed a high speed taxi test.  Following liftoff from runway 24, the engine quit as the 
aircraft reached 50 feet in altitude.  The pilot landed on the runway, but had insufficient 
pavement to stop prior to colliding with a building and a fence at the departure end of the 
runway.
In a telephone interview, the pilot reported that the airplane has a 9-cylinder radial engine with 
a pressure carburetor.  He believed that the carburetor malfunctioned.
The aircraft was examined by an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness 
inspector from the Long Beach, California, Flight Standards District Office.  The inspector 
reported that a Russian factory trained technician came from another importer of the aircraft 
and provided technical assistance.
During examination of the airplane, the carburetor was removed from the engine and another 
serviceable one installed in it's place.  The engine was then started and exercised through the 
normal power range with no problems noted.  The technician stated that disassembly of  the 
carburetor requires special tools available only at the factory.  The inspector reported that the 
directions for disassembling the aircraft are used as a checklist/reference for reassembling the 
aircraft, and that the directions are written only in Russian.  The Russian tech from San Diego 
said that ". . . the factory did not do one or two steps on the checklist."
