National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: OLD BRIDGE, NJ
Accident Number: NYC97LA133
Date & Time: 07/01/1997, 1940 EDT
Registration: N5156M
Aircraft: Beech C24R
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The purpose of the flight was to practice simulated engine failures.
The first simulated engine failure was conducted to a landing, and the second was terminated with a go-around.
During the third simulated engine failure, the instructor observed that the airplane was low, and verbally instructed the student to add power.
The student added full power; however, the engine did not respond.
The airplane then touched down on the grass, to the right of the runway, and encountered a drainage ditch.
Examination of the engine revealed no evidence of a pre impact malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On July 1, 1997, about 1940 eastern daylight time, a Beech C24R, N5156M, was substantially damaged when it landed off the runway's right side and collided with a drainage ditch, at the Old Bridge Airport (3N6), Old Bridge, New Jersey.
The certificated flight instructor (CFI) and private pilot were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that departed the Allaire Airport, Belmar, New Jersey.
No flight plan was filed for the instructional flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The CFI reported that the flight arrived at 3N6, with the intent to practice simulated engine failures to Runway 6.
The first simulated engine failure was conducted to a landing, and the second was terminated with a go-around.
During the third simulated engine failure, and while on final approach, the instructor observed that the airplane was low, and verbally instructed the student to add power.
The student added full power; however, the engine did not respond.
The airplane then touched down on the grass, to the right of the runway, and encountered a drainage ditch.
Examination of the engine by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector did not reveal evidence of pre impact malfunctions.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
