National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KEYSTONE, FL
Accident Number: MIA97LA202
Date & Time: 07/01/1997, 0000 EDT
Registration: N772T
Aircraft: DFL Holdings Inc. TANGO
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot departed on a local flight and did not return.
The wreckage was located the following day.
Examination of the wreckage revealed the airplane collided with trees and terrain spinning to the left.
Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assembly and accessories revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
All components necessary for flight were present at the crash site.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: an in-flight loss of control for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: UNKNOWN Findings 1.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane was destroyed and the airline transport rated pilot was fatally injured.
The flight originated from Keystone Airpark at about 1330 eastern daylight time.
The airplane was reported as missing on July 1, 1997, and was located on July 2, 1997, in the northeast corner of restricted area 2903A.
Examination of the crash site revealed the airplane collided with trees in a nose down attitude with little horizontal movement spinning to the left.
The left wing was bent slightly up, was attached at the forward portion of the wing, and separated 10 to 12 inches on the trailing part of the wing.
The right wing tip bottom was found two feet forward of the right wing.
The fuel tanks were ruptured and browning of the  vegetation was present.
Torsional twisting, "s" bending and chordwise scarring was present on the propeller blades.
Tree branches found in the vicinity of the crash site exhibited 45-degree "v" cuts Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assembly and accessories revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
All components necessary for flight were present at the crash site.
He was informed about the characteristics of the tango airplane, was instructed not to perform aerobatics, power on stalls, or spins, and to consider it as a low g aircraft.
After initially flying the airplane the pilot informed them that the airplane did a great "pull close" maneuver.
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted on July 3, 1997, by Dr. Margarita Arruza, Associate Medical Examiner, Jacksonville, Florida.
The cause of death was multiple injuries.
Postmortem toxicology studies of specimens from the pilot were performed by the Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Federal Aviation Administration, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
These studies were negative for basic, acidic, and neutral drugs.
Ethanol 21.000 mg/dl was detected in the blood, 30.00 mg/dl ethanol was detected in the muscle fluid, 1.00 mg/dl acetaldehyde was detected in the muscle fluid, 16.000 acetaldehyde was detected in the blood, and 5.000 mg/dl n-propanol was detected in the blood.
The wreckage was released to MSG Ronald Watson, Provost Marshals Office, Camp Blanding, Florida, on July 11, 1997.
The pilot log books were released to the deceased pilot's father, Dr. Richard K. Ames, on August 19, 1997.
Registration: N772T Model/Series: TANGO TANGO Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: Yes Airworthiness Certificate: Experimental Serial Number: 001 Landing Gear Type: Tricycle Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
: 1750 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: O-360-A1A Registered Owner: DFL HOLDING INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
