National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SATANTA, KS
Accident Number: CHI97LA193
Date & Time: 07/01/1997, 2030 CDT
Registration: N10397
Aircraft: Grumman G-164
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis Approximately two miles after takeoff, the pilot reported losing partial power due to backfiring of the engine.
The pilot then made a forced landing and ground looped the airplane.
The engine was test run on the airplane.
Rated power was achieved during the test run with no mechanical deficiencies were noted.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot did not maintain aircraft control and the reason for the loss of engine power was undetermined.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The commercial pilot reported no injuries.
The 14 CFR Part 137 aerial application flight was not operating on a flight plan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The flight departed Satanta, Kansas, at 2025 cdt.
Post accident examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration principal Maintenance Inspector (PMI), stated that the pilot reported that about two miles from the departure airport the engine backfired and lost power causing an emergency landing.
The airplane's fuel system was inspected and the fuel tanks were empty due to rupture in the fuel line caused when the airplane ground looped and settled on the top of the upper wing.
The fuel strainer was inspected and held clean aviation 100LL fuel (blue in color).
The fuel line was repaired and fuel was added to the wing tanks for the engine test run.
The forward spark plugs were removed and cleaned and oil which had run into the cylinders when the airplane was inverted was allowed to drain.
The existing propeller was removed and a serviceable propeller installed for the test run on the airplane.
The propeller was pulled through to clear all the cylinders of oil.
The engine was then motored over with the starter and after several attempts the engine started.
The engine ran rough until it burned the remainder of the oil out of the cylinders and warmed up.
The engine was then ran at 2100 rpm's and produced 32 inches of manifold pressure.
There were no mechanical or backfiring problems discovered during the test run.
The pilot did not submit the required National Transportation Safety Board's form 6120.1/2 under Title 49, Part 830.15.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 40, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
