National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NENANA, AK
Accident Number: ANC97TA096
Date & Time: 07/02/1997, 0815 AKD
Registration: N5582C
Aircraft: Piper PA-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot was landing a tundra tire and tailwheel equipped airplane on an asphalt surfaced runway for the purpose of practicing touch-and-go landings.
During the landing roll, the airplane ground looped to the right.
The left main gear collapsed, and the left wing struck the ground.
The pilot indicated he had accrued 172.4 hours of total pilot experience with about 18 hours in tailwheel airplanes.
The airplane received damage to the left wing, left landing gear, left elevator, and the fuselage, forward of the tail wheel.
Also, the pilot reported calm wind conditions.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to maintain directional control of the airplane, which resulted in an inadvertent ground loop and a collapsed main landing gear.
His lack of experience in tailwheel airplanes was a related factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN KIND OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - OVERLOAD Factual Information On July 2, 1997, about 0815 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Piper PA-18, N5582C, crashed during landing at the Nenana Municipal Airport, Nenana, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country government flight under Title 14 CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.
The airplane, operated by the Alaska State Troopers, Fairbanks, Alaska, sustained substantial damage.
The certificated private pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
A VFR flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Fairbanks International Airport, Fairbanks, about 0730.
On July 2, 1997, the pilot reported in a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), he was planning to practice touch and go landings.
During the initial landing roll on runway 03, an asphalt covered runway, the airplane ground looped to the right.
The left main gear collapsed, and the left wing struck the ground.
The pilot indicated he had accrued 172.4 hours of total pilot experience with about 18 hours in tailwheel airplanes.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors, Fairbanks Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), reported the airplane received damage to the left wing, left landing gear, left elevator, and the fuselage, forward of the tail wheel.
The passenger reported the weather conditions as clear; visibility, 10 miles in haze; temperature, 75 degrees F; and calm wind conditions.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1750 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 14 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 6847 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-320 Registered Owner: ALASKA DEPT.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
