National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: Denver, CO
Incident Number: DEN05IA046
Date & Time: 01/03/2005, 1934 MST
Registration: N202UX
Aircraft: Beech 1900D
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 15 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis According to witnesses, the tug was parked behind the left wing of the airplane, facing in the opposite direction, with its engine running.
The airplane's engines were not running.
When the tug operator "jumped" onto the tug, he lost his footing and slipped.
As he grabbed for something to catch his balance, his right arm hit the tug's gearshift lever.
As the tug started moving forward in a right turn, the tug operator's left foot became caught between the tug's frame and left rear tire.
The tug circled around the left wing tip of the airplane and it struck the left engine nacelle.
The tug operator's foot became wedged between the tug and the airplane's stairs, resulting in a sprained left ankle and a few minor lacerations.
The airplane sustained minor damage to the left engine nacelle and one propeller blade.
According to the FAA, the tug operator's training records did not reflect the tug operator's qualifications to operate ground equipment, including the gas powered Kubota tug involved in this incident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be: the tug driver's failure to maintain operational control of the tug, resulting in impact with an airplane.
Contributing factors include the tug driver's improper procedure, the tug driver's inadequate initial ground equipment training, and the company/operator's inadequate certification/approval of the tug driver.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: STANDING - ENGINE(S) NOT OPERATING Findings 1.
(C) MISCELLANEOUS - DRIVER OF VEHICLE 2.
(F) IMPROPER USE OF PROCEDURE - DRIVER OF VEHICLE 3.
(F) INADEQUATE INITIAL TRAINING - DRIVER OF VEHICLE 4.
(F) INADEQUATE CERTIFICATION/APPROVAL - COMPANY/OPERATOR MGMT 5.
Night visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time of the incident.
The airline transport certificated captain, and first officer and 13 passengers on board were not injured.
The tug operator received minor injuries.
The scheduled domestic passenger flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 121 on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan.
The flight to McCook, Nebraska, was preparing for departure.
According to witnesses, the tug was parked behind the left wing of the airplane, facing in the opposite direction, with its engine running.
The airplane's engines were not running.
When the tug operator "jumped" onto the tug, he lost his footing and slipped.
As he grabbed for something to catch his balance, his right arm hit the tug's gearshift lever.
As the tug started moving forward in a right turn, the tug operator's left foot became caught between the tug's frame and left rear tire.
The tug circled around the left wing tip of the airplane and it struck the left engine nacelle.
The tug operator's foot became wedged between the tug and the airplane's stairs, resulting in a sprained left ankle and a few minor lacerations.
The airplane sustained minor damage to the left engine nacelle and one propeller blade.
According to the FAA, the tug operator's training records did not reflect the tug operator's qualifications to operate ground equipment, including the gas powered Kubota tug involved in this incident.
: 17120 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Pratt & Whitney Canada ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: PT6a-67D Registered Owner: Great Lakes Aviation LTD.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
