National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Thermal, CA
Accident Number: LAX05CA059
Date & Time: 01/03/2005, 0910 PST
Registration: N441CX
Aircraft: Cessna 441
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 5 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane encountered muddy terrain and collapsed the nose landing gear during a landing overrun.
The pilot reported that as he approached his destination he prepared for an instrument approach to the airport.
The pilot descended via the approach to an altitude of about 800 feet, at which point he was able to identify the runway environment and transition to a visual approach.
Throughout the approach, the pilot reported encountering moderate rain and restricted visibility.
The airplane's speed during the approach was about 120 knots, varying slightly with configuration changes required during descents and transitions to level flight.
During landing, the airplane touched down hard, about halfway down the 4,995-foot- long runway, and bounced twice.
The pilot reported that once established in the landing rollout, he applied full brakes and configured the propellers in full reverse thrust, attempting to stop before the end of the runway.
The pilot said that although the runway was absent of noticeable standing water, the moderate rain and wet conditions hindered braking effectiveness.
The airplane continued off the runway and impacted terrain resulting in the collapse of the nose gear.
The pilot was unable to remember the speed at which the airplane touched, but opined that it was about 100 knots, the normal touchdown speed for the airplane.
The Airplane Flying Handbook states that "hydroplaning can have serious adverse effects on ground controllability and braking efficiency" and recommends that "touchdown speed should be as slow as possible consistent with safety."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's misjudged speed and distance, which resulted in a failure to attain the proper touchdown point and a subsequent overrun of the runway.
A factor in the accident was limited braking effectiveness resulting from the wet runway condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - WET 2.
(C) DISTANCE/SPEED - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
: Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Garrett ELT: Engine Model/Series: TPE331 Registered Owner: Western Slope Auto Co. Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
