This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Virginia Beach, VA
Accident Number: ERA18LA003
Date & Time: 10/03/2017, 0830 EDT
Registration: N685SE
Aircraft: FREEMAN HERITAGE COLLECTION
SE5A
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Air Race/Show
On October 3, 2017, about 0830 eastern daylight time Freeman Heritage Collection SE5A; 
N685SE, owned and operated by Training Services Incorporated, was substantially damaged 
during a forced landing after a partial loss of power during initial climb at Virginia Beach 
Airport (42VA), Virginia Beach, Virginia. The airline transport pilot sustained minor injuries. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed, for the local test flight, 
which was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The accident airplane had been assembled by the Fighter Factory, which was a division of the 
Warplane Heritage Museum, from parts obtained from the Freeman Heritage Collection, and 
was operated in the experimental exhibition category.
According to the museum's chief pilot, on the previous day, he had started, taxied, and fast 
taxied (with the tail up), to ensure the airplane was operating properly for its first flight after 
being assembled. The intent was to fly it that day, but the wind speed and direction became 
unfavorable and he decided to fly it early the next morning while there was little or no wind. All 
the checks that were done on the ground that day were completed satisfactorily, and he was 
comfortable that the airplane was ready for flight.
On the morning of the accident, the winds were calm. They started the airplane, and the pilot 
taxied out to runway 29. He chose this runway, so the sun would not be in his eyes on take-off 
and landing. The airplane started and ran well during taxi and run-up. He advanced the power 
slowly and the engine ran "perfectly" as the aircraft quickly accelerated and became airborne.
Once in the air, he would normally check all gauges and assess how an airplane was running 
and would pull power back and land back on the runway if there were any questions 
whatsoever about its airworthiness. The airplane "was running like a top" and had immediately 
accelerated easily to 80 mph. Watching the flight's progression for the next few seconds, the 
pilot committed to continue the flight, as it was running perfectly. When he was about 200-300 
feet agl, and more than 3/4 of the way down the runway, he sensed that the engine was losing 
power, even though he could hear no change in sound of the engine. By the end of the 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
departure end of the runway, it had become apparent that it was losing power, even though it 
sounded unchanged.
He then started a gradual left turn, looked at the airspeed and noticed it was at 60 mph, and it 
had stopped increasing. He made a few minor changes in the throttle setting and it made no 
difference at the higher end. The pilot then made a very small adjustment in the mixture to see 
if it would do anything different. It appeared to make a change for a second but, the engine 
continued to lose power. Simultaneously, he continued the left turn, hoping to get turned back 
around and land on the airport property in the opposite direction. The power continued to 
degrade, and the pilot had to continue to steepen his decent to maintain the airspeed of 60 
mph.
He quickly realized that he was not going to make it back to the airport and turned toward a 
clear residential area that was between him and the airport, and headed for a recently 
harvested corn field. He continued to try and get the engine to increase power, without result. 
There was a swampy, wooded area just beyond the cornfield and nowhere to land. He then 
committed to land in the corn field, and pulled the throttle back to idle and the engine rpm 
decreased which indicated to him that it was still running, but just not producing enough 
power to sustain flight.
Approach to, and initial touchdown in, the cornfield was coordinated and smooth. During the 
touchdown, he was in the landing flare with the main wheels rolling on the ground, and the 
airplane was decelerating with the tail a couple of inches in the air. He could hear the cut corn 
stalks, which were 10-12 inches height, being struck by the wheels and landing gear. Suddenly 
there was a loud "crack", and then a sudden drop, and a very hard vertical stop. The airplane's 
forward motion then suddenly stopped, and the airplane then nosed over and came to rest.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, revealed 
that it had sustained substantial damage. The main landing gear was broken in several places, 
and shifted to the left of the longitudinal axis of the airplane. The upper wings were twisted, 
and impact damaged, the right front interplane strut was broken, the leading edge of the center 
section, vertical stabilizer, and rudder were damaged, and one of the propeller blades had 
broken off from the hub.
According to FAA airman records and pilot records, the pilot held an airline transport pilot 
certificate with a rating for airplane multi-engine land, and commercial privileges for airplane 
single-engine land, and airplane single engine sea. He also held type ratings for the BE-400, 
CE-500, G-S2, HS-125, L-18, LR-JET, MU-300, N-B25, and G-TBM, as well as letters of 
authorization for the CHV-F4U, CU-P40, DC-AD1, FW-190, ME-262, MOSQUITO, SPITFIRE, 
YAK-3, YAK-9, and YAK-11. Additionally, he possessed a flight instructor certificate with 
ratings for airplane single-engine, and airplane multi-engine, and a mechanic certificate with 
ratings for airframe and powerplant. His most recent FAA second-class medical certificate was 
issued on August 19, 2017. He reported that he had accrued 14,475 total hours of flight 
experience.
According to FAA airworthiness and airplane maintenance records, the airplane's special 
airworthiness certificate was issued on June 9, 2017. Its most recent condition inspection was 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
completed on June 4, 2017. The engine, had accrued about 6 total hours of operation since 
major overhaul.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: FREEMAN HERITAGE
COLLECTION
Registration: N685SE
Model/Series: SE5A NO SERIES
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: TRAINING SERVICES INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: NFE, 16 ft msl
Observation Time: 0856 EDT
Distance from Accident Site: 5 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 20°C / 14°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 4 knots / , 10°
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.52 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Virginia Beach, VA (42VA)
Destination: Virginia Beach, VA
(42VA)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Minor
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude: 36.678889, -76.032778 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Todd G Gunther
Additional Participating Persons: Kenny Bain; FAA / FSDO; Richmond, VA
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
