National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MERCER ISLAND, WA
Accident Number: SEA01LA022
Date & Time: 12/01/2000, 1100 PST
Registration: N8551Z
Aircraft: Aerofab Inc. LAKE 250
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot began a takeoff run to the west, planning a left step turn and liftoff to the south.
He reported that he was heading about west to southwest when this occurred.
The plane came to an instantaneous stop at this point.
Investigators did not find any evidence of aircraft malfunctions occurring prior to the sudden stoppage in the water.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during a left turning step taxi to takeoff, resulting in a wing contacting the water during the step turn.
Findings Occurrence #1: DRAGGED WING,ROTOR,POD,FLOAT OR TAIL/SKID Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
The private pilot-in-command received minor injuries in the accident.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR 91 personal flight.
The pilot did not report the accident flight's destination.
The pilot indicated that at the time of the takeoff attempt, the wind was 3 to 5 knots from the south, and there was about 6 to 10 inches of chop on the water.
He reported there was no nearby boat traffic and no noticeable wakes or swells.
The pilot stated he began his takeoff run to the west, planning a left step turn and liftoff to the south.
He reported that he was heading about west to southwest when this occurred.
He stated the plane came to an instantaneous stop at this point.
The pilot subsequently radioed for assistance.
Several boats came to the aid of the stricken aircraft and rescued the pilot.
The aircraft then began to sink, but the aid boats were successful in placing flotation gear underneath the aircraft.
This prevented the aircraft from sinking and enabled it to be towed to shore.
According to the pilot, the accident aircraft had 830 hours airframe total time since new, and the aircraft had received its last annual inspection on November 24, 2000, 1.5 flight hours before the accident.
The pilot reported that after the accident, he noted that the aircraft's engine, which is mounted on a dorsal pylon above the fuselage, had toppled onto the right wing.
The pilot stated that this was possibly due to a "pylon flying wire root block Uchannel [sic] failure", although he further stated that this was "most likely a result, not a cause of the accident."
A representative of Talon Aviation, Puyallup, Washington, brought a fractured component he reported to be this suspect component to the NTSB Northwest Regional Office in Seattle, Washington, for examination.
The NTSB IIC visually examined the component and observed that the fracture surfaces on the component displayed 45-degree shear lips.
The IIC did not observe any areas of scalloping or "beach marks" on the component's fracture surfaces.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 50, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Registration: N8551Z Model/Series: LAKE 250 LAKE 250 Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Normal Serial Number: 130 Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Amphibian; Hull; Tricycle Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 11/24/2000, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
