National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CLEVELAND, TN
Accident Number: ATL01LA017
Date & Time: 12/03/2000, 1030 EST
Registration: N5288P
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilots had been conducting short-field takeoffs and, full-stop landing followed by a taxi back to runway 21.
During the third takeoff, they experienced a total loss of engine power as they climbed through 100 feet.
The CFI initiated a forced landing.
The airplane struck trees, nosed over, and collided with a storage shed as he maneuvered the airplane for the forced landing.
Terrain and other obstructions were unsuitable for a forced landing.
Examination of the airplane and the engine assembly failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction of component failure.
A review of weather data showed that conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor ice.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power during takeoff due to carburetor ice.
A factor was unsuitable terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On December 3, 2000, at 1030 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N5288P, collided with the ground during a short field takeoff from Hardwick Field Airport in Cleveland, Tennessee.
The certified flight instructor (CFI) received serious injuries and the dual student received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local instructional flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight was originating from Cleveland, Tennessee, at the time of the accident.
The CFI reported that he and the student pilot had been conducting short-field takeoffs and, full-stop landing followed by a taxi back to runway 21.
The CFI stated that during the third takeoff, they experienced a total loss of engine power as they climbed through 100 feet.
At this point the CFI took control of the airplane from the dual student and initiated a forced landing.
The airplane struck trees, nosed over, and collided with a storage shed as the CFI maneuvered the airplane for the forced landing.
The CFI stated that he elected the left maneuvering turn to avoid terrain and other obstructions that were not suitable for a forced landing.
Examination of the accident site revealed that the airplane rested about 250 feet left of the runway edge.
Examination of the airplane and the engine assembly failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction of component failure.
A review of weather data showed that conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor ice.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 24, Female Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
BEACH     SCOTT Adopted Date: 04/19/2001 Additional Participating Persons: BRIAN   SWORD Publish Date: Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
