National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Sonoma, CA
Accident Number: SEA08LA057B
Date & Time: 01/01/2008, 1430 PST
Registration: N15EX
Aircraft: Barnard/Stancil Glastar
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilots were attending a fly-in at the airport.
One pilot in a low-wing airplane was landing, and the other pilot in a high-wing airplane was departing.
The runup area for the landing runway is situated at the beginning of the runway so following a runup, a pilot can depart straight from the runup area onto the runway.
A witness said that the landing pilot had made radio transmissions around the traffic pattern and then indicated that he was on final approach for landing.
When the landing pilot was on short final, the departing pilot indicated that he was departing.
The witness was flying above the airport and advised the departing pilot that an airplane was landing.
The airplanes collided shortly thereafter.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The departing pilot's inadequate visual lookout.
Findings Occurrence #1: MIDAIR COLLISION Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On January 1, 2008, about 1430 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA 28-180 low-wing airplane, N8037W, and a Barnard/Stancil Glastar high-wing airplane, N15EX, collided in flight at the Sonoma County Airport (OQ3), Schellville/Sonoma, California.
Both pilots were operating the airplanes under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
The private pilot of the Piper, the sole occupant, and the commercial pilot and one passenger of the Glastar, were not injured.
The Piper sustained minor damage, and the Glastar sustained substantial damage.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for either flight.
The pilots of both airplanes were attending a fly-in at the airport.
The Piper pilot reported that he entered the right downwind leg of the traffic pattern for runway 07 and announced his position.
Then, he announced that he was turning right base for runway 07.
As he turned onto the final approach leg, he announced his position and that he was landing on runway 07.
He noticed an airplane about 100 feet from the runway, facing east (away from the pilot).
As the pilot continued his descent, he heard the sound of an airplane engine.
Within 1 to 2 seconds, he felt contact between his airplane and another airplane.
He looked out of the right window and saw an airplane next to his, turning away and climbing.
He noticed that the top portion of the other airplane's rudder sustained impact damage.
According to the Glastar pilot, he was waiting for an airplane to land on runway 25 so he was holding at the end of runway 07.
When the airplane cleared the runway, the pilot announced his intentions to depart and began his takeoff roll.
As the airplane became airborne, he heard someone transmit over the frequency that he had someone above him.
The pilot looked up and saw the right main gear of an airplane about six feet above him.
The pilot attempted to side slip to the right; however, the airplanes collided.
The Glastar pilot continued to fly the airplane and did not have any rudder authority.
He diverted to Napa County Airport because they had a larger runway available.
The landing was made without further incident.
The Safety Board investigator interviewed a witness who was attending the fly in.
The witness was the pilot of an airplane that was the second airplane in a flight of two.
The lead airplane was just entering the right downwind for runway 07 and the witness was directly over the airport at midfield.
He saw the Piper on downwind, base, and then on the final approach leg.
As the Piper was on final, the Piper pilot made a broadcast that he was landing on runway 07.
When the Piper was on short final, the witness heard another pilot say, "...rolling 07."
The witness looked down and saw a Glastar rolling down the runway and the Piper nearly over the top of him.
The witness transmitted to the Glastar pilot that there was an airplane landing on the runway.
The airplanes then collided and the Glastar went to the right while climbing and the Piper landed uneventfully.
After attempting to land at Schellville but not being able to due to a lack of rudder authority, the Glastar landed uneventfully at a nearby airport.
The witness stated that the runup area for runway 07 is situated at the beginning of runway 07.
Following a runup, a pilot can depart straight from the run up area onto the runway.
The witness further indicated that it is widely known that airplanes operating at the Antique Fly-In may not have radios and/or electrical systems so pilots must remain vigilant of other traffic in the area, especially during fly-in activities.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
