Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MT. PLEASANT, IA
Accident Number:
CHI93DCD03
Date & Time:
08/01/1993, 1955 CDT 
Registration:
N92T
Aircraft:
HOWARD W. DUTTON GLAS AIR II 
RG
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Witnesses observed the homebuilt airplane  maneuvering.  They observed the nose to pitch  up 
and the airplane to enter a steep nosedown  attitude with counter-clockwise rotation.   
Coincident with the pitch-up maneuver there  was a popping sound from the airplane and  
engine sounds ceased. Just prior to impact  high level engine sounds returned. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot-in-command's not maintaining  aircraft control. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. REMEDIAL ACTION - NOT OBTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 5CHI93DCD03
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 1993, at 1955 local time, a home-built Howard W. Dutton Glasair II RG operated 
by Howard W. Dutton of Mount Pleasant, Iowa, was on a flight that crashed on a farm field 
approximately 2.5 miles east of Mount Pleasant.  Visual Flight Rules (VFR) prevailed at the 
time of the accident, and no flight plan was filed.  The aircraft was destroyed and the pilot was 
fatally injured.  The pilot held a private pilot certificate with an instrument rating and a current 
third class medical.
Witnesses to the accident stated that prior to impact the airplane was observed to pitch nose 
up, enter a near nosedown attitude and rotated counter-clockwise.  One witness stated that 
coincident with the pitch-up maneuver, there was a popping sound from the airplane and 
engine sounds ceased; however, this witness stated that just prior to impact high level engines 
sounds resumed.
CREW INFORMATION
The pilot was a certificated private pilot holding an instrument rating and a third class medical.  
He had logged approximately 700 hours total time with approximately 100 hours in this make 
and model.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N92T, Dutton Glasair II RG, an amateur built aircraft manufactured and owned by Howard W. 
Dutton of Mount Pleasant, Iowa, was registered on 4/15/91, and received an Experimental 
Amateur-built Certificate of Airworthiness on 04/07/92.  The airframe had a total time of 
approximately 100 hours.  The aircraft empty weight was recorded as 1327 pounds.  The 
aircraft had a current condition inspection.
IMPACT AND WRECKAGE
The aircraft initial impact with the ground was with the right wing.  Crop damage indicates 
aircraft was basically on a heading of approximately 100 degrees.  Approximately 24 feet 
further along the path, the main fuselage contacted the ground.  The aircraft began breaking up 
at this point continuing in a path approximately on a 120 degree heading coming to rest 
approximately 87 feet from initial impact of fuselage.  Approximate width of path from that 
point to final resting point was 21 feet.  Propeller, propeller hub, engine starter drive gear, and 
crankshaft were sheared off at impact of fuselage.  They were found approximately 40 feet from 
initial impact and about 10 feet to the right of the wreckage path.  Right wing and right 
horizontal stabilizer with elevator were damaged from impact.  Rudder, left horizontal 
stabilizer and elevator along with left wing were intact except for minor damage of skidding 
along the ground.  The left wing was separated from fuselage at attachment to fuselage.  All 
flight controls, wing structures, landing gear and major portions of fuselage structure were 
with the main wreckage.  The canopy was examined and appeared to still be secured at impact.  
It was then separated by tearing of the fiberglass structure and was with the rest of the 
wreckage.  Engine was canted to the right and the fuselage bottom structure showed more 
crushing from impact on the right side then the left.
The aircraft made contact with the ground in a right wing low, nosedown attitude, but not 
inverted.  The landing gear was retracted at impact.  The engine had fuel to the distributer 
Page 3 of 5CHI93DCD03
valve and the fuel filter was full of fuel.  All accessory drives were functional and still had 
mechanical integrity with the drive train.  Magnetos were sparked and functioned.  Magneto 
timing could not be verified.  Engine oil filter showed no metal or visible contaminants.  All fuel 
tanks were ruptured and fuel quantity could not be verified.  The personal restraint system 
consisted of a lap and shoulder belt.  The belts were still fastened but were torn loose from 
their attachment points.  
The aircraft instruments were destroyed in the crash.
MEDICAL/PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A toxicology mailing kit was given to De Francis Garrity, Des Moines, Iowa.  There was no 
evidence of significant natural disease.
ADDITIONAL DATA
The wreckage was released to Mrs. Shirley Dutton after the on scene investigation on August 2, 
1993.    
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/05/1993
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
700 hours (Total, all aircraft), 110 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 4 of 5CHI93DCD03
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
HOWARD W. DUTTON
Registration:
N92T
Model/Series:
GLAS AIR II RG GLAS AIR I
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
1
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/1993, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
12 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
110 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360
Registered Owner:
DUTTON, HOWARD W.
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
DUTTON, HOWARD W.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
0 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0000 
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     J HILLOCK
Adopted Date:
07/25/1994
Additional Participating Persons:
NICK K SPASIC; DES MOINES, IA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
