The commercial pilot, who owned the airplane, was making a local personal flight from his 
home airport. During taxi for takeoff, the airplane experienced a total loss of engine power. The 
pilot/owner reported to a controller in the airport's air traffic control tower that he did not 
know why the engine stopped but that he got it restarted. The airplane subsequently departed. 
Minutes after departure, the pilot reported "engine problems" to the controller, asked to 
return, and was cleared to land on any runway. The airplane reversed course and witnesses 
near the accident site reported hearing the engine sputter and then stop. The airplane struck 
trees about 1 mile from the extended runway centerline as the pilot was attempting to reach the 
airport.
Examination of the wreckage revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical anomalies that 
would have prevented normal engine operation. The fuel drained from the airplane presented 
the color and odor of automobile gasoline, and the pilot was seen refueling his airplane from 
cans transported in his car. Further, the pilot had not serviced his airplane with aviation 
gasoline at his home airport.
Atmospheric conditions were conducive to serious icing at descent power and moderate icing 
at cruise power. The airplane's loss of power when the power setting was low while taxiing and 
its loss of power when the power was reduced to cruise power after takeoff were both likely due 
to carburetor icing. A search of the airplane's maintenance records revealed no supplemental 
type certificate that authorized the use of automobile gasoline in the airplane, and the 
likelihood of carburetor icing is increased when automobile gasoline is used. While the airplane 
was equipped with carburetor heat, impact-related damage to the engine controls precluded an 
assessment of the control's preimpact position.
The loss of engine power due to carburetor icing. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's 
use of automobile gasoline, which increased the likelihood of carburetor icing.
