The private pilot stated that, during the initial climb after takeoff, he checked the airspeed and 
lowered the airplane's nose. He reported that the airplane rolled to the right, which he 
corrected, then the airplane "abruptly" rolled to the left. He was unable to correct the roll, and 
the airplane descended and impacted terrain. The pilot reported that there were no mechanical 
failures or malfunctions of the airplane. A witness reported that the airplane was airborne in a 
wings level, "very high" nose-up attitude when he first saw it. He stated that, after a few 
seconds, the left wing and the nose dropped. Shortly after that, the right wing dropped, the 
nose-down attitude increased, and the airplane impacted terrain. A video of the accident 
corroborated the witness account. The witness's recollection of the accident, along with the 
video of the accident airplane just before the accident, suggest that the pilot exceeded the 
airplane's critical angle of attack during the initial climb, which resulted in an aerodynamic 
stall. 
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed during takeoff, which resulted in an 
exceedance of the airplane's critical angle of attack and subsequent aerodynamic stall.
On October 1, 2016, at 1300 central daylight time, an experimental light sport, amateur-built 
Drake Kitfox Speedster, N157D, collided with the terrain following a loss of control after takeoff 
from the Jennings Airport (3R7), Jennings, Louisiana. The pilot received serious injuries. The 
airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to and operated by the private 
pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not operated on a flight plan. The 
intended destination was Slaughter Airpark (SL77), Slaughter, Louisiana.
The pilot reported that he was the last airplane in a flight of four to takeoff. He stated he 
verified his altitude and airspeed, and retracted the flaps during the takeoff. He stated he 
checked the airspeed, lowered the nose of the airplane, and resumed the climb. The pilot 
reported the airplane rolled to the right, which he corrected, then the airplane "abruptly" rolled 
to the left. He was unable to correct the roll and the airplane descended to impact with the 
terrain. The pilot reported that there were no mechanical failures/malfunctions of the airplane.
A witness reported the airplane was airborne in a wings level, "very high" nose up attitude 
when he first saw it. He stated that after a few seconds the left wing dropped and the nose 
lowered. Shortly after that, the right wing dropped and the airplane nosed down even more 
until it impacted the terrain.
A video posted on YouTube by furley85 showed the airplane climbing out in a steep, nose-high 
attitude after takeoff. The airplane was a couple hundred feet above the grass airstrip when the 
left wing dropped and the nose lowered. The airplane rolled back through wings level then the 
right wing dropped and the airplane impacted the terrain. The airplane received substantial 
damage to the wings and fuselage.
