Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Minneapolis, MN
Accident Number:
CHI05LA064
Date & Time:
02/03/2005, 1500 CST 
Registration:
N1767R
Aircraft:
Cessna A185F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane collided with the terrain following a loss of directional control after touchdown.  
The pilot reported that after touching down, as the airplane slowed, it began turning to the 
right.  The pilot stated he already had left aileron and rudder applied because there was a slight 
crosswind.  However, he applied more aileron and rudder but the turn became more severe.  
He stated he tried the left brake to no avail.  He stated the airplane was veering about 30 
degrees off the runway centerline and he applied right brake to try and slow the airplane.  The 
pilot stated the airplane began to skid as it traveled to the side of the runway at a speed of 35 to 
40 knots.  The pilot stated the airplane tipped to the left when it contacted the slushy grass.  
The left wing and left horizontal stabilizer contacted the ground prior to the airplane settling 
back on the main gear.  The pilot stated the airplane continued to turn until it came to rest 
facing the runway.  Post accident inspection of the airplane revealed the tail wheel steering 
pawl was worn to the point that it would not sufficiently lock the locking collar allowing the tail 
wheel to castor on landing.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A failure of the tail wheel locking mechanism which resulted in the pilot's inability to maintain 
directional control of the airplane during the landing roll.
Page 2 of 6CHI05LA064
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (C) LANDING GEAR,TAILWHEEL LOCK - WORN
2. (C) LANDING GEAR,TAILWHEEL LOCK - FAILURE
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
3. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6CHI05LA064
Factual Information
On February 3, 2005, at 1500 central standard time, a Cessna A185F, N1767R, collided with the 
terrain following a loss of directional control, while landing on runway 36 (4,855 feet by 100 
feet, dry asphalt) at the Anoka County-Blaine Airport (ANE), Minneapolis, Minnesota.  The 
private pilot was not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  The 
flight originated from the Konshok Airport (PKD), Park Rapids, Minnesota, at 1350.  
The pilot reported that after touching down he raised the flaps to put more weight on the 
aircraft wheels.  He stated that as the airplane slowed, it began turning to the right.  The pilot 
stated he already had left aileron and rudder applied because there was a slight crosswind.  
However, he applied more aileron and rudder but the turn became more severe.  He stated he 
tried the left brake to no avail.  He stated the airplane was veering about 30 degrees off the 
runway centerline and he applied right brake to try and slow the airplane.  The pilot stated the 
airplane began to skid as it traveled to the side of the runway at a speed of 35 to 40 knots.  The 
pilot stated the airplane tipped to the left when it contacted the slushy grass.  The left wing and 
left horizontal stabilizer contacted the ground prior to the airplane settling back on the main 
gear.  The pilot stated the airplane continued to turn until it came to rest facing the runway.  
The pilot stated he purchased the airplane in December 2004, and flew it for the first time 
during the week prior to the accident.  His first flight consisted of five full stop landings with an 
instructor.  He stated that both he and the instructor noted that the airplane was not taxiing 
right and that the left brake felt "soft."  He stated he flew the airplane to ANE and on February 
1, 2005, he made six full stop landings in the airplane at ANE.  The pilot stated that the 
airplane was not handling "perfect" during this flight, but that it was "OK."  The pilot stated 
that on the following day he flew the airplane back to PKD with a list of discrepancies that 
needed to be fixed.  He stated the brakes were on the list.  He stated that when he landed PKD 
the left brake was not working and the airplane veered on the runway coming to rest facing the 
runway edge.  
The pilot stated that following the maintenance he taxied and test flew the airplane, and the 
brakes functioned properly.  It was on his return flight back to ANE following the maintenance 
that the accident occurred.
Post accident inspection of the airplane was conducted by an inspector from the Federal 
Aviation Administration Flight Standards District Office in Minneapolis, Minnesota.  The 
inspector reported the tail wheel steering pawl was worn to the point that it would not 
sufficiently lock the locking collar allowing the tail wheel to castor on landing.
Page 4 of 6CHI05LA064
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/06/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/06/2003
Flight Time:
907 hours (Total, all aircraft), 6 hours (Total, this make and model), 798 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N1767R
Model/Series:
A185F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18502487
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/06/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3525 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
6 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2787 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-D
Registered Owner:
Seaplane Rental LLC
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
Seaplane Rental LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI05LA064
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ANE, 910 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1455 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.21 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Park Rapids, MN (PKD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Anoka, MN (ANE)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1350 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Anoka County (ANE)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
910 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4855 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
45.145000, -93.211389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Pamela S Sullivan
Adopted Date:
02/28/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Scott Meyers; FAA, FLight Standards District Office; Minneapolis, MN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI05LA064
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
