Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Midland, TX
Incident Number:
FTW02IA027
Date & Time:
11/02/2001, 0734 CST 
Registration:
N814AW
Aircraft:
Airbus Industrie A319-132
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Injuries:
89 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
The transport airplane was in cruise flight at flight level 390 for 12 minutes when they received 
an "engine oil filter bypass" fault message on the engine centralized aircraft monitoring 
(ECAM) system; however, all of the engine parameters remained within limits.  Subsequently, 
the oil pressure indication for the #1 (left) engine rose into the red band and a "high vibration 
and a thumping sound" was felt and heard.  The flight crew then declared an emergency and 
diverted to another airport.  The captain reported that during the landing roll, he moved both 
throttle levers into reverse, and simultaneously the cockpit and cabin began to fill with smoke.  
Air traffic controllers reported they observed white smoke emanating from the #1 engine 
during the landing roll.  The captain stopped the airplane on the high-speed taxiway, turned off 
both engines, and an emergency evacuation ensued.  The 1L and 2L doors were operated 
normally; however, the 1R door jammed when the flight attendant attempted to open it.  
Examination of the 1R door actuator and slide did not reveal the reason it failed to operate.  
Examination of the engine revealed that debris contamination of the #3 bearing initiated 
spallation of the bearing's outer ring raceway.  Cyclic loading from the bearing balls passing 
over the growing raceway spall resulted in extensive fretting of the outer diameter surface of 
the outer ring, from which a fatigue crack was initiated.  High-cycle fatigue progression radially 
through the outer ring was followed by rapid fracture and subsequent liberation of the outer 
ring fragments.  The debris contamination more than likely came from the high-pressure 
compressor (HPC) stubshaft coating, which was liberated and entered the #3 bearing area 
causing it to fracture, and the engine to lose power.  Research revealed this was one of five 
similar occurrences, which was traced down to a change in the manufacture process for the 
HPC stubshaft coating.  The manufacturer has taken actions to alert operators of the existing 
problem.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
the #1 engine's fatigue failure of the #3 bearing due to the manufacturer's inadequate design of 
the high-pressure compressor stubshaft coating, which resulted in a loss of engine power and 
an emergency landing.
Page 2 of 10FTW02IA027
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. 1 ENGINE
2. (C) TURBINE ASSEMBLY,SHAFT BEARING - FATIGUE
3. (C) MATERIAL DEFECT(INADEQUATE QUALITY OF MATERIAL) - MANUFACTURER
4. (C) TURBINE ASSEMBLY,SHAFT BEARING - FAILURE,TOTAL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
Findings
5. PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - PERFORMED - FLIGHTCREW
Page 3 of 10FTW02IA027
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 2, 2001, at 0734 central standard time, an Airbus Industrie A319-132 transport 
airplane, N814AW, operating as America West Airlines flight 786, experienced an engine 
anomaly while in cruise flight and diverted to the Midland International Airport (MAF), 
Midland, Texas.  The captain, who held an airline transport pilot certificate, the first officer, 
who also held an airline transport pilot certificate, three cabin attendants, and 84 passengers 
were not injured.  The airplane was registered to International Lease Finance Corporation of 
Los Angeles, California, and operated by America West Airlines of Phoenix, Arizona.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed 
for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121 scheduled passenger flight.  The flight 
originated from the George Bush Intercontinental Airport (IAH), Houston, Texas, at 0610, and 
was destined for the Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport (PHX), Phoenix.
According to the captain and first officer, the flight departed IAH and climbed to flight level 
390.  The flight had been in cruise at flight level 390 for 12 minutes when the flight crew 
received an "engine oil filter bypass" fault message on the electronic centralized aircraft 
monitoring (ECAM) system; however, all of the engine parameters remained within limits.  
The flight crew informed maintenance control of the indication, and decided that if the engine 
should develop further problems the flight would land at the nearest airport, which was MAF.  
As a precaution, the flight descended to flight level 350 and obtained the current ATIS 
(automated terminal information system) information at MAF.  Subsequently, the oil pressure 
indication for the #1 (left) engine rose into the red band and a "high vibration and a thumping 
sound" was felt and heard.  They stated that they did not detect any smoke or odor in the 
cockpit.  The first officer referenced the quick reference handbook (QRH) and completed the 
"high engine vibration checklist."  In accordance with the checklist, the captain moved the 
thrust lever for the #1 engine to the idle position.  
The flight crew then declared an emergency and diverted to MAF.  When the flight crew 
notified the cabin crew of their action to divert, the cabin crew reported that there was a "thin 
film" of visible, odorless smoke in the area of the forward galley between the first class cabin 
and the cockpit.  The flight crew then donned their oxygen masks.  The captain reported that 
during the landing roll, on runway 16R, he moved both throttle levers into reverse and, 
simultaneously, the cockpit and cabin began to fill with smoke.  The cabin attendants reported 
that during the landing roll the cabin began to fill with a "heavier" white smoke.  The MAF air 
traffic control tower personnel added that, during the landing roll they observed white smoke 
emanating from the #1 engine.  The captain stopped the airplane on the high speed taxiway, 
shut-down both engines, and an emergency evacuation ensued.
According to the flight attendants (FA), the #1 and #2 FAs were seated on the forward jump 
seat (forward of the first class cabin).  The captain signaled to evacuate, both FAs got up, and 
the #1 FA proceeded to the 1L door and the #2 FA proceeded to the 1R door.  The 1L door 
opened and the slide deployed and inflated.  The #2 FA reported that she pulled the 1R door 
handle up and felt the power assist begin to open the door.  The slide cover opened and she 
could see the slide.  The door opened approximately 12 inches and then stopped moving.  The 
#2 FA then directed the passengers to exit through the 1L door.  The #3 FA was seated on the 
aft jump seat.  When the captain signaled the evacuation, she proceeded to the 2L door, pulled 
Page 4 of 10FTW02IA027
the door handle up, and the door began to open.  The power assist was not as powerful as she 
expected, and she had to manually push the door open to engage the gust lock.  The slide 
deployed and inflated, and passengers exited.  The 2R door was not opened and the #3 FA 
reported that due to a low number of passengers, flow through the 2L door was good.  There 
were no injuries during the evacuation.
Prior to vacating the airplane, the captain observed the 1R door 3/4 open and the slide 
"partially out of the bustle."  He stated that he then pushed the door "pretty hard," and the 
door then moved to the fully open position.  The evacuation slide deployed and inflated.  
Maintenance personnel removed the slides and the airplane was towed to a hangar at the 
airport.  
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The captain held an airline transport pilot certificate and was type rated in the Airbus 319/320, 
Boeing 737, and the Swearingen 227.  According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident 
Report Form, which was completed by America West Airlines, the captain had accumulated a 
total of 15,000 hours, of which 800 hours were in the A319.  He held an FAA first-class medical 
certificate, with no limitations or waivers, which was issued on May 21, 2001.
The first officer held an airline transport pilot certificate and was type rated in the BA-3100.  
According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report Form, the first officer had 
accumulated a total of 4,800 hours, of which 1,000 were in the A319.
The three cabin attendants were based in Phoenix. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was delivered to America West Airlines new, and was registered on July 27, 2000.  
It is equipped with two International Aero Engine Corporation (IAE) 2524-A5 engines, which 
are rated at 24,000lbs of thrust each.  America West configured the airplane with 124 
passenger seats and six crew seats.  A review of maintenance records revealed no pertinent 
entries relating to the #1 engine's loss of power.  On October 18th, 2001, the last "A" check was 
performed, during which all of the magnetic chip detectors (MCD) were reported to be clean.
The airframe and engines had accumulated a total of 4,798 hours.  The #1 engine (serial 
number V10778) had accumulated a total of 1,916 cycles.
The IAE series of engines was developed through a consortium of four major engine 
manufacturers consisting of Pratt & Whitney, Rolls-Royce, Japanese Aero Engines 
Corporation, and MTU Aero Engines.  The IAE 2524-A5 engine is an axial flow, two-shaft 
engine that incorporates a 4-stage low-pressure compressor (LPC), a 10-stage high-pressure 
compressor (HPC), a 2-stage high-pressure turbine (HPT), and a 5-stage low-pressure turbine 
(LPT).
AERODROME INFORMATION
MAF is located at 31 degrees 56.552 minutes north latitude and 102 degrees 12.115 minutes 
west longitude, at an elevation of 2,871 feet msl.  The airport has two parallel runways oriented 
north-south, one runway oriented east-west, and one runway oriented northeast-southwest.  
Runway 16R (asphalt) is 9,501 feet long and 150 feet wide.    
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Page 5 of 10FTW02IA027
At 0753, the weather observation facility at MAF reported the following weather conditions: 
clear skies, visibility 10 statute miles, wind from 230 degrees at 8 knots, temperature 17 
degrees Celsius, dew point 12 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.06 inches of 
mercury.  
FLIGHT RECORDER INFORMATION
The airplane was equipped with an Allied Signal Solid State Digital Flight Data Recorder 
(SSDFDR), serial number 5846.  The recorder was sent to the NTSB's Vehicle Recorder 
Laboratory in Washington, DC, where it was found to be in good condition.  The recorded data 
were extracted normally from the recorder and plotted for the entire engine event.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Initial examination of the airplane and the #1 engine did not reveal evidence of an uncontained 
engine failure or fire; however, an oil film was observed on the exterior of the #1 engine 
cowling and along the fuselage.  The scavenge oil filter and #1 engine's MCDs contained large 
quantities of metal particles.  The oil pressure filter had been imploded and was covered with 
metal particles.  The engine was then shipped to IAE's Pratt & Whitney facility located in 
Cheshire, Connecticut, for further examination.
The engine was disassembled by IAE/Pratt & Whitney personnel, under the supervision of the 
NTSB Investigator-In-Charge (IIC).  The engine's nose cone fairing and fan blades were 
covered with a film of oil; however, displayed no damage.  A boroscope was used to examine 
the front bearing compartment (FBC), and it was discovered that the #3 bearing was fractured.  
A section of the #3 bearing race was observed lying on the bottom of the FBC.  The LPT shaft 
could not be removed, so the #1 bearing support housing was disassembled and the HPT 
stubshaft was removed to facilitate further examination.  
Following disassembly, sections of the #3 bearing were observed in the #2 bearing support 
housing.  The #2 bearing support housing was then disassembled and it was noted that the 
hydraulic seal runner had fused to the LPT shaft, therefore preventing its removal from the 
FBC.  The HPC section's shrouds and inner seals displayed damage, consistent with secondary 
damage from a rearward shift of the HPC rotor.  The rotor paths displayed evidence of contact 
with their respective HPC blades.  The HPC contained metal particles, consistent with that 
from the FBC.  The HPC vanes and rotor exhibited damage, typical of debris originating from 
the FBC.  The nozzle guide vane (NGV) and diffuser did not exhibit any damage.  
The HPT blade tips were melted and curled.  The LPT section contained metal particles.  The 
main oil pressure pump, scavenge pump and air cooled oil cooler were intact; however, 
displayed damage consistent with metal particles from the #3 bearing.  The FBC parts, 
including the #3 bearing and HPC stubshaft were further examined by personnel at IAE's Pratt 
& Whitney Materials Laboratory.
The #3 bearing's outer race fractured into 14 pieces.  The outer diameter surface contained a 
thumbnail appearance and major arrest lines, consistent with fatigue.  According to the 
metallurgists examining the failed components, the #3 bearing outer ring failed as a result of 
"high cycle fatigue that progressed through the ring thickness from a primary origin on the 
outer diameter surface associated with severe fretting between the [bearing's] outer ring and 
the [bearing] housing."  An area of spalling up to 1.5 inches in length was noted on the outer 
ring's inside diameter raceway.  The exact location of the spalling area's origin could not be 
determined due to secondary damage; however, it was noted that the spall progression was in 
Page 6 of 10FTW02IA027
the rolling direction.  The area of outside diameter fretting coincided with the same position of 
the inside diameter's spalling.
The #3 bearing's cage displayed several side fractures and deformation of the side rails and ball 
pockets.  The 20 bearing balls displayed varying degrees of flat areas, consistent with a sliding 
motion.  The inner ring exhibited damage to its raceways and lands, with evidence of ball and 
cage sliding.  The damage to the cage, balls, and inner ring is consistent with secondary 
damage.  Metallographic examination of the bearing balls and the bearing outer ring revealed a 
"microstructure that was typical of properly processed PWA 793 bearing steel.  The general 
microstructure, porosity, and carbide segregation were within the acceptable limits" specified 
by the manufacturer's requirements.  Hardness tests were conducted on the bearing balls and 
the bearing's outer ring.  The hardness test results revealed the components met the 
manufacturer's specifications.   
Visual examination of the HPC tungsten carbide coated stubshaft exhibited regions of fretting 
and coating recession at the aft and fore edges of the bevel gear contact area between the axial 
oil-slot witness marks.  Scanning electron microscope examination of the HPC stubshaft 
hardface coating that coincided with the #3 bearing-feeding oil slots, revealed "several regions 
containing clusters of 'pits' 0.001 inch (nominal) and larger in diameter.  The majority of the 
pits appeared to be relatively shallow, irregularly shaped 'pock marks' with more severely 
distressed areas showing edge crumbling, micro-cracking, and pullout features.  Regions 
surrounding the 'pits' generally appeared friable and loosely bonded to the surface."  Based on 
the quantity, size, and shape of the HPC stubshaft's coating surface discontinuities, the 
manufacturer's metallurgical report opined that "released carbide particulate from the 
hardface coating may have been a route of bearing contamination and subsequent outer ring 
raceway spall initiation from debris damage."  It should be noted that traces of the HPC 
stubshaft coating was found in the oil jets adjacent to the HPC stubshaft.   
The 1R door actuator was examined at the Barfield, Inc, Miami, Florida, under supervision of 
an NTSB investigator.  No anomalies or malfunctions were found.  The 1R evacuation slide was 
examined and overhauled at Goodrich Corporation, Ontario, California.  No anomalies were 
noted.  On December 8, 2001, approximately one month after the incident, maintenance 
records revealed that the 1R door was checked for proper movement, with no hard points.  The 
associated maintenance entry read, "Ops normal." 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Research conducted by IAE revealed four other engines had experienced a fracture of the #3 
bearing, and similar secondary damage.  On all of the researched engines, it was noted that the 
HPC stubshaft coating displayed fretting and coating recession on the fore and aft edges of the 
bevel gear oil feed slot witness marks similar to that noted on engine serial number V10778 
(this incident's engine).  All of these engines were within the engine serial number range 
V10600-V10990.  
Originally, there were two approved hardface coatings for the HPC stubshaft; 1. Low-energy 
plasma spray, and 2. High-energy plasma spray.  HPC stubshafts were manufactured with 
high-energy plasma coatings up until engine serial number V10599.  At engine serial number 
10600, the low-energy plasma spray was utilized during the HPC stubshaft manufacturing 
process, which was the same process used during the manufacture of this incident's stubshaft.  
At engine serial number V109901 a material improvement was introduced to the low-energy 
Page 7 of 10FTW02IA027
plasma coating (fine powder was added to the low-energy plasma spray), which raised it to the 
same standard as the high-energy plasma spray.  At engine serial number V11304, HPC 
stubshafts were again manufactured using the original high-energy plasma spray coatings.    
Subsequently, IAE discontinued the use of low-energy plasma spray. 
On November 30, 2001, IAE sent an official message to all of their field service representatives, 
which alerted them of events where the #3 bearing has failed.  The message stated: "Recent 
events have occurred that were the result of debris ingestion into the bearing outer raceway 
that have caused spalling resulting in outer bearing race fractures."  The message alerted the 
representatives that during future inspections, and any work that permits access to the FBC 
area, close observation of the front bearing case bevel gears, HPC stubshaft, and the #3 bearing 
compartment should be undertaken.  Furthermore, the message indicated that technical 
services should be advised of abnormalities in the front bearing case, chips on any of the 
magnetic chip detectors, or abnormalities discovered during an engine filter oil analysis.
On October 10, 2002, IAE issued an All Operator's Wire (AOW 1064) to all V2500 operators.  
The wire informed the operators of the #3 bearing failures and history of the HPC stubshaft 
hardface coating.  The message recommended that the HPC stubshaft coating be replaced at 
the next shop visit.  It should be noted that AOW 1064 revision 3, dated May 12, 2003, 
included the examination of all HPC stubshafts with low-energy plasma hardface coatings.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/21/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
15000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 800 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 8 of 10FTW02IA027
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
30, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/21/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
4800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1000 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Airbus Industrie
Registration:
N814AW
Model/Series:
A319-132 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
1281
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
130
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/18/2001, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
150000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
4798 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
International Aero Engines
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
IAE-2524-A5
Registered Owner:
International Lease Finance 
Corporation
Rated Power:
24000 lbs
Operator:
America West Airlines Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
America West
Operator Designator Code:
AWXA
Page 9 of 10FTW02IA027
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MAF, 2871 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0753 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.06 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Houston, TX (IAH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Phoenix, AZ (PHX)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0610 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
Midland International (MAF)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2871 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
16R
IFR Approach:
ILS
Runway Length/Width:
9501 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
5 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
84 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
89 None
Latitude, Longitude:
31.942500, -102.201944
Page 10 of 10
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jason A Ragogna
Adopted Date:
12/03/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven Miller; Federal Aviation Administration; Lubbock, TX
Sylvain Ladiesse; Bureau Enquetes - Accidents (BEA)
Thierry Thoreau; Airbus Industrie
Michael L Young; International Aero Engines; East Hartford, CT
Jack Drake; America West Airlines; Phoenix, AZ
Mark Solper; Airline Pilots Association
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
