Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
TULSA, OK
Accident Number:
FTW97LA041
Date & Time:
11/01/1996, 1100 CST 
Registration:
N9520B
Aircraft:
Cessna 172RG
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
A witness stated that the airplane 'flared smoothly and touched down with what appeared to be 
no side load.' As the aircraft settled onto the runway surface, the right main gear collapsed, and 
the aircraft subsequently skidded off the right side of the runway. During examination of the 
right main landing gear, it was discovered that the gear pivot assembly was fractured adjacent 
to the spline. It has not been determined as to whether the fracture occurred during gear 
retraction, extension, or upon contact with the runway. According to maintenance records, 
Cessna Service Bulletin, SE390.1, April 20, 1990, was applicable to this aircraft and was 
complied with. The Service Bulletin's purpose was to inspect main landing gear pivot 
assemblies for cracks in the spline area. The pivot assembly that failed, P/N 2441100-9, had a 
total time of 1,611.8 hours. Visual inspection of the fractured surface showed evidence of 
overload, however a small area on the outer portion of the surface had several small cracks 
bordering the edge. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the main landing gear pivot gear assembly. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
1. LANDING GEAR,GEAR INDICATING SYSTEM - INOPERATIVE
2. (C) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL RETRACTION/EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - FRACTURED
Page 2 of 5FTW97LA041
Factual Information
 On November 1, 1996, approximately 1100 central standard time, a Cessna 172RG, N9520B, 
was substantially damaged following a collapse of the right main landing gear during landing 
roll out, at Riverside Airport, Tulsa, Oklahoma.  The private pilot was not injured.  No flight 
plan was filed, and visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 141 solo 
instructional flight.
In an interview with the investigator-in-charge the pilot reported that he was practicing stall 
maneuvers in a designated practice area adjacent to the airport.  Upon completion of the 
maneuvers, he returned to the airport and set up for landing on runway 1L.  After executing the 
pre-landing checklist, he noticed that the green landing gear down light was not illuminated.  
After an unsuccessful attempt to change light bulbs, he tried to pump the manual gear 
extension handle, but "it would not move."  He was able to visually check the left main gear but 
could not see the right gear.  After contemplating a go around, the pilot decided to land.
One witness, who was observing the airplane as it was on final, reported that he thought that 
the nose gear and left main was down and locked, but the right main did not appear to be in the 
locked position.  Another witness, who was observing, reported that he thought that all three 
landing gears were down and locked.  He further reported that the airplane "flared smoothly 
and touched down with what appeared to be no side load."  As the aircraft settled onto the 
runway surface, the right main gear collapsed.  Subsequently, the aircraft skidded off the right 
side of the runway.  The right wing was structurally damaged.
Inspection of the aircraft after the accident revealed that the landing gear down light bulb was 
burned out and was not related to the gear collapse.  During examination of the right main 
landing gear, it was discovered that the gear pivot assembly was fractured adjacent to the 
spline (illustration is attached to this report).  It has not been determined as to whether the 
fracture occurred during gear retraction, extension, or upon contact with the runway.
According to maintenance records, Cessna Service Bulletin, SE390.1, April 20, 1990, was 
applicable to this aircraft and was complied with.  The Service Bulletin's purpose was to inspect 
main landing gear pivot assemblies for cracks in the spline area.  The pivot assembly that 
failed, P/N 2441100-9, had a total time of 1,611.8 hours.  Visual inspection of the fractured 
surface showed evidence of overload, however a small area on the outer portion of the surface 
had several small cracks bordering the edge.  The part was sent to the NTSB metallurgy 
laboratory in Washington, D.C, for further analysis
The metallurgist who examined the pivot assembly reported that a large portion of the fracture 
face showed torsional mechanical damage.  A roughly circular area of undamaged features 
surrounded the drilled hole near the center of the shaft.  The undamaged area had features 
typical of an overstress separation.  The damaged area had features typical of rotational 
smearing and mechanical deformation.  Mechanically damaged ratchet mark features covered 
an arc of approximately 100 degrees around the outside edge of the shaft.  Small longituidinally 
oriented cracks emanated from most of the ratchets.  Hardness and electrical conductivity 
measurements were consistent with the engineering drawing specified material (7171-T74 
aluminum alloy) for the part.
Page 3 of 5FTW97LA041
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
27, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/26/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
101 hours (Total, all aircraft), 9 hours (Total, this make and model), 25 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 23 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N9520B
Model/Series:
172RG 172RG
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
172RG0851
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/25/1996, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2658 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
89 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5673 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-F1A6
Registered Owner:
CHRISTIANSEN AVIATION INC.
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
SPARTAN SCHOOL OF 
AERONAUTICS
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
DF2S
Page 4 of 5FTW97LA041
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 4700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 16 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
5°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (RVS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0930 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
RIVERSIDE JONES (RVS)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
638 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
7
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5101 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ALEXANDER    LEMISHKO
Adopted Date:
08/25/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
JERRY   YATES; OKLAHOMA CITY, OK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5FTW97LA041
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
