Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Revere, MN
Accident Number:
CEN12LA128
Date & Time:
01/05/2012, 1030 CST 
Registration:
N330BL
Aircraft:
Sanderson Pitts Special SPS-1
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane had not been flown for over 6 months prior to the accident flight. Before 
departure, the pilot added about 3 gallons of fuel to the existing fuel on board the airplane. The 
pilot did not find contamination when he drained fuel from the main fuel tank sump drain. 
About 20 minutes after departure, during cruise flight, the airplane experienced a total loss of 
engine power that led the pilot to conduct a forced landing on a road. The airplane nosed over 
during the landing. An examination of the airplane revealed that the airplane was not 
equipped, nor was it required to be equipped, with a fuel sump drain(s) for the wing tank, 
which drained into the main fuel tank. Water contamination was present in the fuel line 
leading to the carburetor, but no water contamination was noted when the main fuel tank 
sumpŠthe only available sumpŠwas drained. Accordingly, water was likely in the wing tanks 
and fed into the main tank after it was sumped. The water then entered the fuel lines. The lack 
of sump drains in the wing tanks is an inadequate design because it does not allow a pilot to 
remove all water from the fuel system.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The total loss of engine power during cruise flight due to fuel contamination and the 
inadequate design of the fuel system.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid condition (Cause)
Fuel system - Design (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN12LA128
Factual Information
On January 5, 2012, about 1030 central standard time, an experimental amateur-built 
Sanderson Pitts Special SPS-1, N330BL, experienced a total loss of engine power during cruise 
flight. The pilot subsequently made a forced landing on a road near Revere, Minnesota. The 
commercial pilot was uninjured. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the right wings 
and vertical stabilizer when the airplane nosed over and impacted terrain during the landing. 
The airplane was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. A flight plan had 
not been filed for the flight that originated from Madison Municipal Airport (MDS), South 
Dakota, at 1000 and was destined for Faribault Municipal Airport (FBL), Faribault, Minnesota.
The pilot purchased the airplane, which had not flown for over six months, and was going to fly 
to MDS. Prior to departure, he drained the main fuel tank sump but was not able to check for 
fuel contamination present in the wing tank due to a lack of a fuel sump drain. The wing fuel 
tank drains into the main fuel tank. To top off the wing fuel tank, he added 3 gallons of fuel 
from the previous airplane owner's fuel tank. The main fuel tank was already full. 
After about 20 minutes of flight, the pilot moved the auxiliary fuel selector to the open position 
to allow fuel from the wing fuel tank to flow into the main fuel tank. About 5 minutes later, the 
airplane experienced a total loss of engine power. The pilot changed engine throttle control 
positions, and the engine surged and quit again. The pilot then performed a forced landing to a 
field.
Examination of the airplane by the Federal Aviation Administration revealed the presence of 
water in the fuel line leading to the carburetor. Fuel samples from the available fuel sumps did 
not show the presence of water.
The experimental amateur-built airplane was not certified nor was it required to be certified 
under 14 CFR Part 23, Airworthiness Standards for Normal, Utility, Acrobatic, and Commuter 
Category Airplanes. Part 23.971, Fuel Tank Sump, states in part:
(a) Each fuel tank must have a drainable sump with an effective capacity, in the normal ground 
and flight attitudes, of 0.25 percent of the tank capacity, or 1/16 gallon, whichever is greater.
(b) Each fuel tank must allow drainage of any hazardous quantity of water from any part of the 
tank to its sump with the airplane in the normal ground attitude.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Fuel contamination
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of engine power (total)
Landing
Collision during takeoff/land
Page 3 of 5CEN12LA128
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Flight Engineer
Age:
63, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/12/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/04/2012
Flight Time:
2652 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2 hours (Total, this make and model), 2418 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Sanderson
Registration:
N330BL
Model/Series:
Pitts Special SPS-1 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
1
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/10/2011, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1219 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1053 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-360
Registered Owner:
Individual
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Pilot
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN12LA128
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KMML, 1183 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1015 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
315°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.78 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / -4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Madison, SD (MDS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Faribault, MN (FBL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1000 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
43.230000, -95.300000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Mitchell F Gallo
Adopted Date:
01/15/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Diercks; Federal Aviation Admnistration; Minneapolis, MN
Publish Date:
01/15/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82660
Page 5 of 5CEN12LA128
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
