Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lohn, TX
Accident Number:
CEN12LA120
Date & Time:
01/01/2012, 1400 CST 
Registration:
N9021R
Aircraft:
CONTINENTAL COPTERS INC. 47G2
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Flight control sys malf/fail
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
The pilot performed a preflight inspection of the helicopter to include checking the tail rotor oil 
level through its sight glass. He had flown the helicopter for more than an hour when the tail 
yawed to the left, slowly at first then rapidly. The pilot ﬁcutﬂ the throttle, flew the helicopter ﬁto 
the ground as fast as possible,ﬂand impacted terrain. A postaccident examination of the 
wreckage revealed that the tail rotor gearbox did not operate when it was rotated. A teardown 
revealed that the interior surfaces of the gearbox were covered with a black oily substance 
consistent with residual lubricating oil contaminated with liberated metal particles. The oil 
level sight glass exhibited no discoloration or other hindrance to normal oil level detection in 
service. 
Examination of the ring and pinion gears revealed that the teeth on the pinion gear were 
deformed and worn almost down to the tooth root in some locations. Wear was observed on 
the top land and drive faces of the ring gear. Wear patterns were noted on the coast faces of the 
ring and pinion gear teeth. The observation of wear on the coast faces of the gear teeth is most 
probably an indication that the spacing between the gears was too tight as a result of improper 
alignment during installation, causing accelerated wear. A logbook entry showed that the 
helicopter™s last annual inspection was completed about 6 months before the accident during 
which the tail rotor gearbox was overhauled and installed.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The improper installation of the tail rotor gearbox by maintenance personnel, which led to 
accelerated wear of the ring and pinion gears, resulting in the loss of tail rotor effectiveness and 
subsequent forced landing.
Page 2 of 6CEN12LA120
Findings
Aircraft
Tail rotor gearbox - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Tail rotor gearbox - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Repair - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN12LA120
Factual Information
On January 1, 2012, about 1400 central standard time, a Continental Copters Inc. 47G2 
helicopter, N9021R, impacted terrain during a forced landing following a loss of tail rotor 
effectiveness near Lohn, Texas. The commercial pilot and passenger sustained serious injuries. 
The helicopter™s tailboom was substantially damaged during the forced landing. The helicopter 
was registered to and operated by Sky Horse Helicopters Inc. under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an aerial observation flight. Day visual flight rules (VFR) 
conditions prevailed for the flight, which did not operate on a VFR flight plan. The helicopter 
departed on the local flight about 1300.
The pilot stated in his accident report that he performed a preflight inspection of the helicopter 
to include checking the tail rotor oil level through its sight glass. He flew the helicopter for 
ﬁoverﬂ an hour when the tail yawed to the left. The yaw was slow at first and then the helicopter 
yawed rapidly. The pilot ﬁcutﬂ the throttle and flew the helicopter ﬁto the ground as fast as 
possible.ﬂ
A logbook endorsement showed that the helicopter™s last annual inspection was completed on 
July 13, 2011, and that the helicopter had accumulated 8,989 hours of total flight time. The 
pilot reported that the helicopter had accumulated 9,057 hours of total flight time at the time 
of the accident and that he did not have any records in reference to the tail rotor gearbox.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the wreckage on-scene. The tail 
rotor gearbox did not operate when it was rotated. The FAA inspector measured the gearboxes' 
shim and he reported its thickness measurement as 0.015 inches, plus or minus 0.001 inches.
The accident gearbox, marked with part no. 47-640-044-39 and serial no. A13-3661, was 
retained and was shipped to Scott™s Œ Bell 47 Inc. for detailed examination under FAA 
supervision. The examination, in part, revealed that the interior surfaces of the gearbox were 
covered with a black oily substance consistent with residual lubricating oil contaminated with 
liberated metal particles. The oil level sight glass exhibited no discoloration or other hindrance 
to normal oil level detection in service. Damage was noted on the upper aft portion of the main 
case assembly where the aft casting accommodated the tail rotor guard. This area of displaced 
or previously removed material was filled with a media consistent with an epoxy mix. The 
gearbox assembly was dismantled in accordance with procedures listed in its service 
instruction and no significant difficulties or abnormal conditions were encountered. Scott™s Œ 
Bell 47 Inc. report is appended to the docket material associated with this case.
Parts, to include the ring and pinion gear, were removed and shipped to the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Materials Laboratory. A NTSB Senior Materials Engineer 
examined the parts and produced Materials Laboratory Factual Report No. 13-028. The 
examination revealed that the teeth on the pinion gear were deformed and worn almost down 
to the tooth root in some locations. Wear was observed on the top land and drive faces of the 
ring gear. Wear patterns were noted on the coast faces of the ring and pinion gear teeth. 
Hardness testing revealed that both gears exhibited a trend of increasing hardness with 
decreasing distance from the bottom land surface. The NTSB Materials Laboratory report is 
appended to the docket material associated with this case.
Page 4 of 6CEN12LA120
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft maintenance event
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Flight control sys malf/fail (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of tail rotor effectiveness
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/04/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/03/2011
Flight Time:
14000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 14000 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 35 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CONTINENTAL COPTERS INC.
Registration:
N9021R
Model/Series:
47G2 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
CCI-165
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/13/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
68 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
9057 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
VO-435-A1D
Registered Owner:
SKY HORSE HELICOPTERS INC
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
SKY HORSE HELICOPTERS INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN12LA120
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BBD, 1827 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
12 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1535 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
162°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.52 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Lohn, TX 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Lohn, TX 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1300 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
31.325000, -99.408333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Edward F Malinowski
Adopted Date:
09/05/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael P Garvin; Federal Aviation Administration; San Antonio, TX
Don Maguire; Scott's - Bell 47, Inc.; Le Sueur, MN
Publish Date:
09/05/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82607
Page 6 of 6CEN12LA120
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
