Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
BINGHAMPTON, NY
Accident Number:
NYC00FA023
Date & Time:
11/01/1999, 0616 EST 
Registration:
N511AR
Aircraft:
Cessna T303
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
While in cruise flight, at 6,000 feet, the left engine lost power.  The pilot attempted a restart of 
the engine, but only about one-half rotation of the left engine propeller was observed, and the 
engine was secured.  The pilot stated that he was unable to maintain altitude and initiated a 
decent.  He requested and was cleared for an instrument approach at an airport where the 
weather conditions were, 1/4 statute mile of visibility, fog, and a vertical visibility of 100 feet.  
On the approach, at the minimum decent altitude, the pilot executed a missed approach.  As 
the airplane climbed, the pilot reported to the controller that the 'best altitude [he] could get 
was 2,200 feet.'  A second approach was initiated to the reciprocal runway.  While on the 
second approach, the pilot 'was going to fly the aircraft right to the runway, and told the 
controller so.' He put the gear down, reduced power, and decided there was 'no hope for a go-
around.'  He then 'flew down past the decision height,' and about 70-80 feet above the ground, 
'added a little power to smooth the landing.'  The pilot also stated, 'The last thing I remember 
was the aircraft nose contacting the runway.'  A passenger stated that once the pilot could not 
see the runway, [the pilot] 'applied power, pitched the nose up,' and attempted a 'go-around' 
similar to the one that was executed on the first approach. Disassembly of the left engine 
revealed that the crankshaft was fatigue fractured between connecting rod journal number 2 
and main journal number 2.  Review of the pilot's operating handbook revealed that the single 
engine service ceiling, at a weight of 4,800 pounds, was 11,700 feet.  The average single engine 
rate of climb, at a pressure altitude of 6,000 feet, was 295 feet per minute.  The average single 
engine rate of climb, at a pressure altitude of 1,625 feet, was 314 feet per minute.  Review of the 
ILS approach plate for Runway 34 revealed that the decision height was 200 feet above the 
ground. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper in-flight decision to descend below the decision height without the 
runway environment in sight, and his failure to execute a missed approach.  A factor in the 
accident was the failed crankshaft.
Page 2 of 8NYC00FA023
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. 1 ENGINE
2. (F) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - FRACTURED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: APPROACH
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - RUNWAY
4. (C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (C) MISSED APPROACH - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. DECISION HEIGHT - DISREGARDED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 8NYC00FA023
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 1, 1999, about 0616 Eastern Standard Time, a Cessna T303, N511AR, registered 
to Twin Cities Air Service Incorporated, was substantially damaged while landing at the 
Binghamton Regional/Edwin A. Link Airport, Binghamton (BGM), New York.  The certificated 
commercial pilot received serious injuries and two passengers received minor injuries.  
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight 
plan was filed for the on-demand air taxi service, conducted under 14 CFR Part 135.
According to the pilot, he conducted a preflight inspection of the airplane and added a quart of 
oil to each of the airplane's two engines prior to departing from the Auburn/Lewiston Airport, 
Auburn, Maine, at 0320.  The pilot then flew the airplane to the Portland International Airport 
(PWM), Portland, Maine.  The flight took about 12 minutes and was uneventful.  At PWM, two 
passengers boarded the airplane, and the flight departed, destined for the Youngstown-Warren 
Regional Airport, Youngstown, Ohio.  About 2 hours into the flight, at 6,000 feet, the left 
engine "suddenly stopped."  The left engine oil pressure gauge fluctuated and then went to 
zero.  The pilot observed the propeller to be "windmilling, but turning at a rate."
After the left engine failed, the pilot placed the throttles, mixture, and prop controls for both 
engines in the full forward position to attempt a restart of the left engine, but since "we were in 
cruise mode, I did not immediately try to feather the engine, but tried the obvious restart 
procedures."  During the attempted restart, the pilot observed only about one-half rotation of 
the left engine propeller.  He also changed the position of the fuel selector to the left engine, 
but could not remember what position he finally selected.  The boost pump switch was placed 
in the low position, and then into the high position.  Both magnetos were shut off for the left 
engine, and the pilot attempted to feather the propeller.  The attempt to feather the propeller 
failed.  The pilot believed "the prop was turning slower than normal, [and] the locks may have 
come out, making it impossible to feather."  The pilot did recall that the propelled eventually 
feathered later in the flight.
The pilot added that during the processes of attempting to restart the engine, and then 
securing it, he noticed that the airplane's speed was "slowly bleeding down, to a point when it 
got to blueline."  The pilot pitched the airplane down to maintain the blue line speed.  Unable 
to maintain the airplane's altitude, the pilot initiated a decent.  The airplane descended to 
3,200 feet, described by the pilot as a "slow, gradual, sink."
Once the left engine was secured, the pilot radioed to the Binghamton Approach controller that 
he "had an engine failure" and needed to land at the "closest VFR airport."  According to the 
pilot, the controller replied that the closest VFR airport was 60 miles away.  The pilot decided 
to land at BGM because it was nearby and he knew they had radar on the field.
An instrument landing system (ILS) approach was conducted to Runway 16 at BGM.  On final 
approach, the landing gear was not selected to the down position until the last minute so that 
the pilot would have the option of executing a go-around.  Once he descended to his minimum 
decent altitude, the only visual contact the pilot had with the runway environment were 3 
unidentified lights, and a missed approach was initiated.  As the airplane climbed, the pilot 
reported to the controller that the "best altitude [he] could get was 2,200 feet."  Since the 
approach called for a higher altitude, the controller "started" him in on an ILS approach to 
Page 4 of 8NYC00FA023
Runway 34 "inside the marker."  
The pilot added that, while on the second approach, "I was going to fly the aircraft right to the 
runway, and told the controller so."  The pilot put the gear down, reduced power, and decided 
there was "no hope for a go-around."  He then "flew down past the decision height," and about 
70-80 feet above the ground, he "added a little power to smooth the landing."  The pilot also 
stated, "The last thing I remember was the aircraft nose contacting the runway, I may have 
instinctively pushed the throttle forward..."
A passenger stated that once the pilot could not see the runway, "he [the pilot] applied power, 
pitched the nose up," and attempted a "go-around" similar to the one that was executed on the 
first approach.  The airplane's wing tip then hit the ground.
The accident occurred during the hours of dawn approximately 42 degrees, 12 minutes north 
latitude, and 75 degrees, 58 minutes west longitude.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine and multi-
engine land, instrument airplane.  He also held a flight instructor certificate for airplane single 
engine land, instrument airplane.
The pilot's most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) first class medical certificate 
was issued on January 18, 1999.
The pilot reported approximately 2,430 hours of flight experience, 200 hours of which were in 
multi-engine airplanes, and 60 hours of which were in make and model airplane.
The pilot reported 180 hours of flight experience in the 90 days prior to the accident. His most 
recent biennial flight review was August 27, 1999, which was conducted in the Cessna T303.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION  
On April 30, 1994, the left engine was removed from the airplane and overhauled.  During the 
overhaul, all steel parts were magnafluxed, and all aluminum parts were zygloed.  The engine 
was then re-installed on the airplane.  The engine's total time at overhaul was 3,596 hours and 
it had accumulated about 1,874 hours since.
The last maintenance performed on the engine was on October 20, 1999.  It included an oil 
change and oil filter replacement.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather reported by BGM at 0608 was; winds calm, 1/4 statute mile of visibility, fog, 
vertical visibility of 100 feet, temperature and dew point of 45 degrees Fahrenheit.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The wreckage was examined on November 1, 1999, at the accident site.  The airplane came to 
rest on Runway 34; about 1,900 feet from the approach end, on a heading of about 290 
degrees, and at an elevation of 1,636 feet mean sea level.  All major components of the airplane 
were accounted for at the accident site.
The nose landing gear was collapsed, and exhibited scaring along the left side of the wheel 
forks.  The forward nose cone section was crushed upward and to the right.  It displayed 
scraping along the underside.  The main landing gear were extended and locked.
Page 5 of 8NYC00FA023
The right outboard wing section, which was exposed to a post crash fire, exhibited rearward 
buckling, and damage along the wing tip.  All control cables and fuel lines remained connected 
between the wing firewall and the right engine.  Powerplant control cable continuity was 
confirmed from the cockpit to the engine.  The right engine throttle lever, propeller control, 
and mixture control, were all found in the full forward position.  Fuel was observed draining 
from the fuel lines as the engine was removed from the fuselage.  The right wing fuel tank was 
not damaged and contained an undetermined amount of fuel.
The outboard section of the left wing exhibited damage from the impact and post crash fire.  All 
control cables and fuel lines remained connected between the wing firewall and the left engine.  
Powerplant control cable continuity was confirmed from the cockpit to the engine.  The left 
engine throttle lever, and propeller control were found in the full aft position.  The mixture 
control was found in the mid-range position.  A small amount of fuel was observed draining 
from the fuel lines as the engine was removed from the fuselage. The left wing fuel tank was 
compromised and did not contain any fuel.
Flight control continuity was confirmed from the cockpit area to the ailerons, rudder, and 
elevator.  The flaps were found in the full extend position, which corresponded with the 
selector position located in the cockpit.
The left engine was inspected after being removed from the wreckage.  It exhibited damage due 
to the post-crash fire.  The engine was rotated by hand, using the propeller.  Some resistance 
was noted during the rotation.  The number 6 cylinder was damaged during the impact 
sequence and displayed exposed valves.  Thumb compression was only confirmed to the 
number 3 and 5 cylinders.  No compression could be determined for the remaining four 
cylinders.  The top and bottom spark plugs were removed; their electrodes were intact and light 
gray in color.  The left and right magnetos were removed from the engine and rotated by hand, 
producing spark on all towers.  While the engine was rotated, the accessory drive section gears 
and the number 1 and 2 cylinder valves did not show any signs of movement.  The propeller 
remained attached to the engine. Two of the three propeller blades were in the feather position.  
The remaining blade was in a high pitch position and bent 90 degrees about 9 inches from the 
hub.  The counterweight for the bent propeller blade was found detached from the hub and was 
located along the debris path.
The fuel manifold valve on the left engine was inspected.  The diaphragm was dry, but 
exhibited a smell of aviation fuel.  The fuel screen was free of debris.  The fuel selector control 
for the left tank was found in the crossfeed position, and the right tank selector was in-between 
the on and off positions.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The airplane's left engine was examined at Hagerstown, Maryland, on December 8, 1999, 
under the supervision of a Safety Board Investigator.
Removal of the engine oil sump revealed large pieces of metal and metal shavings in the sump 
and trapped in the oil sump suction screen.
Disassembly of the engine revealed that the crankshaft was fractured between connecting rod 
journal number 2 and main journal number 2.
The crankshaft was forwarded to the Safety Board's materials lab on December 9, 1999.  
Fracture surfaces on the crankshaft were examined by optical microscopy.  The fracture surface 
Page 6 of 8NYC00FA023
on the aft section of the crankshaft was destroyed by post-fracture damage.  The fracture 
surface on the forward section of the crankshaft displayed several areas of smooth features, 
curving boundaries, and ratchet marks, all typical of fatigue.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Review of the Cessna T303 pilot's operating handbook revealed that the single engine service 
ceiling, at a weight of 4,800 pounds, with the landing gear and flap in the retracted position, 
was 11,700 feet.
The average single engine rate of climb, at a pressure altitude of 6,000 feet, a temperature of -5 
degrees centigrade, and a weight of 4,800 pounds, was 295 feet per minute.
The average single engine rate of climb, at a pressure altitude of 1,625 feet, a temperature of 7.5 
degrees centigrade, and a weight of 4,800 pounds, was 314 feet per minute.
Review of the ILS approach plate for Runway 34 revealed that the decision height was 200 feet 
above the ground.
The airplane wreckage was released on November 1, 1999, to a representative of the owner's 
insurance company.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
27, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/22/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2430 hours (Total, all aircraft), 60 hours (Total, this make and model), 2280 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 180 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Page 7 of 8NYC00FA023
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N511AR
Model/Series:
T303 T303
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
T30300192
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/20/1999, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
9 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5480 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-AE
Registered Owner:
TWIN CITIES AIR SERVICE INC
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
TWIN CITIES AIR SERVICE INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
IWVA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dawn
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BGM, 1636 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0608 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
0.25 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 100 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
PORTLAND, ME (PWM)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
YOUNGSTOWN, OH (YNG)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0415 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
BINGHAMTON REGIONAL APRT 
(BGM)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1636 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
ILS
Runway Length/Width:
7501 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 8 of 8NYC00FA023
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
STEPHEN    M DEMKO
Adopted Date:
07/17/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
RICHARD P LANSILL; ROCHESTER, NY
EMILE J LOHMAN; WITCHITA, KS
GEORGE   HOLLINGSWORTH; MOBILE, AL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
