Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
PENDLETON, OR
Accident Number:
SEA00FA014
Date & Time:
11/02/1999, 1532 PST 
Registration:
N635H
Aircraft:
Enstrom F28C
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The helicopter was destroyed when it sustained a tail rotor blade strike during a solo 
instructional flight.  The airline transport pilot, who was preparing for a commercial rotorcraft-
helicopter rating checkride on the following day, was fatally injured.  The pilot was on his 
second left-hand circuit of the pattern and had been cleared for the option.  On his first circuit, 
he had made three touchdowns along the length of the runway, at the threshold, mid-length, 
and at the departure end, then had continued his circuit.  On the second circuit, the tower 
controller had again cleared the pilot for the option.  The tower controller observed similar 
touchdowns at the threshold, and at mid-field.  He stated that he was looking away at the time 
of the crash; however he heard a very garbled transmission, looked in the direction of the 
helicopter, saw dirt flying, and activated the siren and dispatched rescue vehicles. Ground 
strikes consistent with tail rotor blade strikes were found near the wreckage. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Failure to maintain clearance from the runway surface while maneuvering at low altitude, and 
inadequate remedial action after the tail rotor struck the surface. 
Page 2 of 7SEA00FA014
Findings
Occurrence #1: DRAGGED WING,ROTOR,POD,FLOAT OR TAIL/SKID
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
2. (C) REMEDIAL ACTION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7SEA00FA014
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 2, 1999, at 1532 Pacific standard time, an Enstrom F28C helicopter, N635H, was 
destroyed when it sustained a tail rotor blade strike during a solo instructional flight at 
Pendleton airport, Pendleton, Oregon.  The airline transport pilot, who was preparing for a 
commercial rotorcraft-helicopter rating, was fatally injured.  The helicopter was registered to 
Charlie Inc., an entity of which the pilot was a principal.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the flight.  No flight plan was filed.  There was a post-impact fire.  No 
ELT was installed in the aircraft.
According to the pilot's flight instructor, he had accumulated approximately 66.5 hours of 
helicopter instruction, and was scheduled for an add-on commercial rating on the day 
following the accident.  The instructor had flown once with the pilot for 1.7 hours the morning 
of the flight.  The pilot had then flown again for approximately an hour in an additional flight 
before the accident flight.  On the accident flight, the pilot was on his second left-hand circuit 
of the pattern for runway 34.  According to the tower controller, the pilot had been cleared for 
the option on runway 34 on his first circuit .  He had made three touchdowns along the length 
of runway 34, at the threshold, mid-length, and at the departure end of the runway, then had 
continued his circuit.  On the second circuit, the tower controller had again cleared the pilot for 
the option.  The tower controller observed similar touchdowns at the threshold, and at mid-
field.  He stated that he was looking away at the time of the crash; however he heard a very 
garbled transmission, looked in the direction of the helicopter, saw dirt flying, and activated 
the siren and dispatched rescue vehicles.  He then saw smoke and flames.  
Ground strikes consistent with tail rotor blade strikes were found near the wreckage.  Both tail 
rotor blades separated from the tail rotor hub, and the tail rotor gearbox also separated from 
the tailcone.  The pilot was at least partially ejected from the helicopter's cockpit and was 
partially beneath the fuselage when rescuers arrived.  Rescuers lifted the fuselage and pulled 
him from the burning wreckage.  
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was located along the east edge of runway 34, a few hundred feet from the 
departure end of the runway.   Two groups or sets of surface scars were found on the asphalt 
runway surface.  The first set included a gouge estimated to be about 1/4 inch deep and one 
inch in diameter, with a 4-5 inch scratch or metal and paint transfer.  A few inches away were 
three other scrapes or gouges.  This set of marks was to the right of the runway centerline.  The 
second surface scar location was about 20 yards closer to the departure end of the runway, and 
on the left side of the runway centerline, consisting of another similar crater, with an 
associated 4-5 inch scratch mark.  In both instances, flecks of paint and material similar to that 
used for tail-rotor bonding were found in the vicinity.   
One tail rotor blade, including the grip, was found a few yards from the first surface scars, 
closer to the approach end of the runway.  The tail rotor gearbox was found about twenty yards 
north of the second surface scar, also on the left side of the runway centerline.  The second tail 
rotor blade was found beyond the gearbox, again to the left of the runway centerline.  
The tail rotor blade nearest the approach end of the runway exhibited large radius bending, 
and two separate areas of compression folds on the trailing edge.  The other tail rotor blade 
Page 4 of 7SEA00FA014
exhibited trailing edge folding, large radius bending from about mid-span, and leading edge 
crushing and impact signatures.  
The tail rotor gearbox exhibited a broken casting, and the two associated control cables 
exhibited signatures similar to tensile overload.  One blade grip remained attached to the 
spindle; the other blade grip remained with the other rotor blade.
The fuselage was found laying on its left side, with the tailboom separated from the fuselage aft 
of the engine.  The upper fuselage and cockpit area exhibited fire damage, as did both the 
upper and lower area aft of the passenger compartment bulkhead.  The belly exhibited arcing 
scratches in the paint and crushing.  The left skid was folded beneath the fuselage.  The right 
skid was bent forward of the front attachment point; the forward portion of that skid exhibited 
abrasion and scratches at an angle to the skid tube's longitudinal axis. 
The tail rotor hoop had separated into two main pieces, which were located separately in the 
wreckage distribution.  No evidence of scratches, scoring, or paint transfer was observed on the 
outer surface of the hoop.  
Control continuity was established from the cyclic and collective controls to the swash plate.  
Pedal cables were, as earlier described separated. 
All three main rotor blades exhibited tip damage and delamination consistent with blade 
strikes.  No pre-impact mechanical anomalies were noted during the on-scene investigation.    
The helicopter was equipped with seat belts.  No evidence of installed shoulder harnesses was 
found.  The pilot's seat belt buckle remained buckled when observed at the accident scene.  The 
belt was found outside the aircraft.  Its right-side attachment point remained clasped on its 
attachment point; however the attachment point had separated from the airframe.  The other 
end of the belt exhibited melting and separation.     
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy of the pilot was performed November 3, 1999 by Dr. James B. Sawyer of Blue 
Mountain Pathology, Inc., in Pendleton, Oregon.  Toxicological testing was conducted by the 
FAA laboratory, with negative results for carbon monoxide, cyanide, and ethanol. 
FIRE
The tower controller activated the siren and dispatched fire/rescue personnel after observing 
the crash.  Vehicles were en route to the accident scene within 4 minutes of notification.  The 
fire was suppressed using foam.    
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to the insurance adjuster, as owner's representative, on November 
4, 1999, after inspection by investigators.  At the time of release the wreckage was located at 
the General Aircraft Services, Inc., facility in Pendleton, Oregon.
Page 5 of 7SEA00FA014
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Sea; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/10/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
15000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 66 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Enstrom
Registration:
N635H
Model/Series:
F28C F28C
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
386
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/21/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
20 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1557 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-E1BD
Registered Owner:
CHARLIE INC
Rated Power:
205 hp
Operator:
CHARLIE INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7SEA00FA014
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KPD, 1494 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1456 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
10°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (KPDT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1520 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
PENDLETON (KPWT)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1494 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4159 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Stop and Go
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
MICHAEL    L STOCKHILL
Adopted Date:
05/09/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
TERRY   WILMETH; HILLSBORO, OR
BILL   TAYLOR; MENOMINEE, MI
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7SEA00FA014
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
