Page 1 of 12
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Argyle, TX
Accident Number:
CEN15FA136
Date & Time:
02/04/2015, 2109 CST 
Registration:
N441TG
Aircraft:
CESSNA 441
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The instrument-rated commercial pilot was approaching the destination airport after a cross-
country flight in night instrument meteorological conditions. According to radar track data and 
air traffic control communications, while receiving radar vectors to the final approach course, 
the pilot did not always immediately comply with assigned headings and, on several occasions, 
allowed the airplane to descend below assigned altitudes. According to airplane performance 
calculations based on radar track and GPS data, the pilot made an engine power reduction 
about 2.5 minutes before the accident as he maneuvered toward the final approach fix. 
Following the engine power reduction, the airplane's airspeed decreased from 162 to 75 knots 
calibrated airspeed, and the angle of attack increased from 2.7° to 14°. About 4 miles from the 
final approach fix, the airplane descended below the specified minimum altitude for that 
segment of the instrument approach. The tower controller subsequently alerted the pilot of the 
airplane's low altitude, and the pilot replied that he would climb. At the time of the altitude 
alert, the airplane was 500 ft below the specified minimum altitude of 2,000 ft mean sea level. 
According to airplane performance calculations, 5 seconds after the tower controller told the 
pilot to check his altitude, the pilot made an abrupt elevator-up input that further decreased 
airspeed, and the airplane entered an aerodynamic stall. A witness saw the airplane abruptly 
transition from a straight-and-level flight attitude to a nose-down, steep left bank, vertical 
descent toward the ground, consistent with the stall. Additionally, a review of security camera 
footage established that the airplane had transitioned from a wings-level descent to a near-
vertical spiraling descent. A postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation during the accident flight.
Although the pilot had monocular vision following a childhood injury that resulted in very 
limited vision in his left eye, he had passed a medical flight test and received a Statement of 
Demonstrated Ability. The pilot had flown for several decades with monocular vision and, as 
such, his lack of binocular depth perception likely did not impede his ability to monitor the 
cockpit instrumentation during the accident flight.
Page 2 of 12CEN15FA136
The pilot had recently purchased the airplane, and records indicated that he had obtained 
make and model specific training about 1 month before the accident and had flown the airplane 
about 10 hours before the accident flight. The pilot's instrument proficiency and night currency 
could not be determined from the available records; therefore, it could not be determined 
whether a lack of recent instrument or night experience contributed to the pilot's difficulty in 
maintaining control of the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed during the instrument approach in night 
instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in the airplane exceeding its critical 
angle of attack and an aerodynamic stall/spin at a low altitude.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Angle of attack - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Monitoring equip/instruments - Pilot
Page 3 of 12CEN15FA136
Factual Information
History of Flight
Approach-IFR initial 
approach
not used
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On February 4, 2015, about 2109 central standard time, a Cessna 441 (Conquest II) twin turbo-
prop airplane, N441TG, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain following a 
loss of control during an instrument approach to Denton Municipal Airport (DTO), Denton, 
Texas. The commercial pilot was fatally injured. The airplane was registered to Del Air 
Enterprises II, LLC, and was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal 
Regulations
 Part 91 while on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan. Night instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country flight that departed Willmar 
Municipal Airport (BDH), Willmar, Minnesota, about 1828.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) air traffic control data, at 2050:46, the 
pilot established contact with Dallas-Fort Worth Terminal Radar Approach Control and 
reported being level at 4,000 ft mean sea level (msl). According to radar data, the flight was 
about 35 miles northwest of DTO and was established on a southbound course. The approach 
controller issued the current weather conditions at DTO and told the pilot to expect the GPS 
runway 36 approach. At 2052:54, the approach controller told the pilot to fly direct to WOBOS, 
an intermediate fix associated with the instrument approach. The plotted radar data showed 
that the flight turned to the south-southeast to a direct course toward WOBOS. At 2059:35, the 
flight was cleared to descend to and maintain 3,000 ft msl, and the pilot acknowledged the 
altitude clearance.
At 2101:24, the DTO tower controller advised the approach controller that a Cessna 172 had 
just landed at DTO and that the Cessna's pilot reported light-to-moderate turbulence during 
approach and an in-flight visibility of about 1.5 miles. The approach controller subsequently 
advised the accident pilot of the light-to-moderate turbulence. At 2103:08, the flight was 
cleared to descend to and maintain 2,500 ft msl, and the pilot acknowledged the altitude 
clearance.
At 2103:24, the approach controller told the pilot to turn to a south heading. The pilot 
acknowledged the heading change and subsequently turned southbound. According to radar 
data, at 2104:09, the airplane descended below 2,500 ft msl. At 2104:27, the approach 
controller told the pilot to turn to an east heading. The pilot acknowledged the heading change, 
but, according to radar data, did not initiate the turn as requested. The airplane continued to 
descend while on a southbound course until reaching 2,100 ft msl at 2104:46 when it began to 
climb. At 2104:59, after noticing that the flight had not turned to the assigned heading, the 
approach controller told the pilot to turn to a heading of 080°. The pilot acknowledged the 
assigned heading, and radar data showed the flight entering a climbing left turn toward the 
Page 4 of 12CEN15FA136
east.
At 2105:39, when the flight was 8 miles from the final approach fix (NULUX), the approach 
controller told the pilot to turn to a heading of 030° to intersect the final approach course, to 
maintain 2,500 ft msl until established on the final approach course, and that the flight was 
cleared for the GPS runway 36 approach. The pilot responded, "Okay, 030 maintain 2.5 until 
established on the approach." According to radar data, the flight turned to a north heading 
instead of the assigned heading of 030°.
At 2106:16, the approach controller told the pilot to contact the DTO tower controller, and the 
pilot replied with the correct frequency change. The flight continued due north until 2106:38, 
when it turned to a 030° course and subsequently descended through 2,500 ft msl at 2107:01. 
At 2107:16, the pilot established communications with the DTO tower controller. The tower 
controller told the pilot that the surface wind was 360° at 19 knots with 25 knot gusts and then 
cleared the flight to land on runway 36. The tower controller also asked the pilot if he had 
received the pilot report (PIREP) that had been issued by the preceding Cessna 172. The pilot 
confirmed that he had received the PIREP from the approach controller. According to radar 
data, the airplane continued to descend as it intersected the final approach course and 
continued northbound toward NULUX.
At 2108:44, the automated air traffic control system issued a low altitude alert for the accident 
flight. The system presented the low altitude alert on both the control tower and the approach 
control radar displays. According to radar data, at the time of the low altitude alert, the 
airplane had descended to about 1,500 ft msl. At 2108:47, the tower controller told the pilot to 
"... check your altitude, you are still a couple of miles from the marker [NULUX], and uh 
believe your altitude should be about 2,100 there." At 2108:54, the pilot replied, "Okay, going 
back to (unintelligible)." According to radar data, following the altitude alert, the airplane 
continued to descend until the final radar return, recorded at 2109:11, about 2.5 miles south of 
NULUX at 1,000 ft msl (about 300 ft above the ground). At 2109:12, the tower controller 
transmitted again that the airplane was lower than the specified minimum altitude (2,000 ft 
msl) for that segment of the instrument approach. There was no response from the accident 
pilot.
The flight path of the airplane was captured by a security video camera installed on the exterior 
of a building that was located about 1/2 mile southeast of the accident site. The video camera, 
which was facing west, captured the accident airplane's wingtip navigation and strobe lights as 
the airplane crossed from left to right in the upper portion of the camera's field of view. The 
airplane entered the camera's field of view at 2108:48 and appeared to be in a wings level 
descent as it continued across the first half of the camera's lateral field of view. At 2109:00, the 
descent angle increased substantially before the airplane entered a near-vertical spiraling 
descent. The airplane's navigational lights and strobes were not visible after 2109:09.
According to 911 emergency calls received following the accident, several individuals reported 
hearing an airplane overfly their position at a low altitude followed by the sound of a large 
ground impact. One witness, who was located about 1 mile from the accident site, reported that 
he saw an airplane's navigation lights and rotating beacon as it flew north below an overcast 
ceiling toward DTO. The witness stated that the airplane abruptly transitioned from a straight-
Page 5 of 12CEN15FA136
and-level flight attitude to a nose-down, steep left bank, vertical descent towards the ground. 
He also heard a momentary increase and then decrease in engine power before the airplane 
entered the descent. The witness lost sight of the airplane as it descended behind trees shortly 
before he heard a sound consistent with a ground impact.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/13/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/13/2013
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 4935 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4899 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
According to FAA records, the 52-year-old pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with single-
engine land, multi-engine land, and instrument airplane ratings. The pilot's last aviation 
medical examination was completed on January 13, 2014, when he was issued a second-class 
medical certificate with a limitation for corrective lenses. On the application for his current 
medical certificate, the pilot reported having accumulated 3,900 hours of total flight 
experience of which 120 hours were flown within the previous 6 months. A search of FAA 
records showed no previous accidents, incidents, or enforcement proceedings.
A comprehensive pilot logbook was not located during the investigation. A pilot journal was 
found in the accident airplane; however, the final journal entry was for simulator-based 
training for a Socata TBM 700 airplane that was completed on an unspecified date during 
2014. The final journal entry indicated that the pilot had a total flight experience of 4,935 hours 
of which 4,899 hours were flown as pilot-in-command and that he had flown 4,834 hours in 
single-engine airplanes and 101 hours in multiengine airplanes. The journal also contained a 
flight instructor's endorsement for a flight review and instrument proficiency check dated 
August 13, 2013. The pilot's estate provided an airplane utilization spreadsheet that the pilot 
used to log his recent flight experience. The spreadsheet did not document the pilot's 
instrument proficiency, night currency, or his accumulated total flight experience. According to 
the spreadsheet, the pilot had flown 56 hours during the previous 6 months, 23.6 hours during 
the previous 90 days, and 9.7 hours during the previous 30 days. The pilot's first flight in the 
accident airplane was on January 23, 2015. As of the final spreadsheet entry, dated January 25, 
2015, the pilot had flown the accident airplane 9.7 hours.
The pilot completed simulator-based training for the Cessna 441 on March 27, 2014, at 
Page 6 of 12CEN15FA136
SimCom Training Centers, located in Grapevine, Texas. On January 4, 2015, the pilot 
completed additional Cessna 441 training provided by Executive Flight Training, Beaufort, 
South Carolina.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N441TG
Model/Series:
441 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1981
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
441-0200
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/22/2014, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9850 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
62 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
3830.2 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Honeywell
ELT:
C91A installed, activated, 
did not aid in locating 
accident
Engine Model/Series:
TPE331-10N
Registered Owner:
Del Air Enterprises II, LLC
Rated Power:
715 hp
Operator:
Del Air Enterprises II, LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The accident airplane was a 1981 Cessna 441 (Conquest II), serial number 441-0200. Two 
Honeywell TPE331-10N-512S turbine engines provided thrust through constant-speed, full-
feathering, four-blade, McCauley 4HFR34C661/90LNA-2 propellers. The low-wing airplane 
was of conventional aluminum construction and was equipped with a retractable tricycle 
landing gear and a pressurized cabin that was configured to seat seven individuals. The 
airplane was approved for night operations in instrument meteorological conditions and for 
flight in known icing conditions. On April 5, 1984, the airplane was issued a standard 
airworthiness certificate and a registration number when it was imported back to the United 
States of America after being based and operated in France. The pilot purchased the airplane 
on January 22, 2015.
According to the current weight-and-balance record, dated January 3, 2011, the airplane had 
an empty weight of 5,855 pounds (lbs), a maximum takeoff weight of 9,850 lbs, and a useful 
load at takeoff of 3,995 lbs. The airplane had a total fuel capacity of 481.5 gallons (475 gallons 
usable) distributed between two wing fuel tanks. According to fueling documentation, the 
airplane departed on the accident flight with a full fuel load after being topped-off with Jet-A 
fuel premixed with an icing inhibitor.
The airplane had been maintained under the provisions of an approved manufacturer 
Page 7 of 12CEN15FA136
inspection program. The recording hour (Hobbs) meter indicated 2,070.2 hours at the accident 
site. The airplane had accumulated 3,830.2 hours since new. The airplane had accumulated 
62.4 hours since the last phase inspection that was completed on August 22, 2014, at 3,767.8 
total airframe hours. The engines had accumulated 35.4 hours since their last 100-hour 
inspections that were completed on October 22, 2014. The engines, serial numbers P-77413 
and P-77421, had accumulated a total service time of 3,830.2 hours since new and 2,303.5 
hours since being overhauled. The propellers, serial numbers 972373 and 972370, had 
accumulated a total service time of 2,303.5 hours since new and 284.6 hours since being 
overhauled. A postaccident review of the maintenance records found no history of unresolved 
airworthiness issues.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DTO, 642 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2103 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
2 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 900 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
17 knots / 25 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Clear Air
Wind Direction:
350°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Moderate
Altimeter Setting:
30.26 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
3°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Rain; Mist
Departure Point: 
Willmar, MN (BDH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Denton, TX (DTO)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1828 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
At 2103, the DTO automated surface observing system reported: wind 350° at 17 knots, gusting 
25 knots; an overcast ceiling at 900 ft above ground level (agl); 2 miles surface visibility with 
light rain and mist; temperature 3°C; dew point 3°C; and an altimeter setting of 30.26 inches of 
mercury.
The pilot of a Cessna 172 that landed at DTO about 8 minutes before the accident issued a pilot 
report (PIREP) for light-to-moderate turbulence and an inflight visibility of 1.5 miles during 
his approach.
The United States Naval Observatory data indicated that the sunset and end of civil twilight at 
the accident site were at 1803 and 1829, respectively. The moon was in a waxing gibbous 
phase, with 99% of the moon's visible disk illuminated; however, the moonlight would have 
been obscured by the overcast ceiling.
Page 8 of 12CEN15FA136
Airport Information
Airport:
Denton Municipal Airport (DTO)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
642 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
Global Positioning System
Runway Length/Width:
7002 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Denton Municipal Airport (DTO), a public airport located about 3 miles west-southwest of 
Denton, Texas, was owned and operated by the City of Denton. The airport field elevation was 
642 ft msl. The airport had a single asphalt runway, runway 18/36 (7,002 ft by 150 ft). Runway 
36 had a displaced threshold that reduced the available runway landing length by 100 ft. 
Runway 36 was equipped with medium intensity runway lights and a four-light precision 
approach path indicator. The airport was equipped with an air traffic control tower that was 
operational at the time of the accident.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.086667, -97.199722
The airplane wreckage was found in a grass-covered industrial storage yard located about 6.4 
nm south of the runway 36 threshold. The accident site was about 400 ft northeast of the final 
radar return and about 207 ft right of the final approach course. The main wreckage consisted 
of the entire airplane, which was orientated on a west-northwest heading. The elevation of the 
accident site was 679 ft msl. The wreckage was in an upright position, and there was no 
appreciable wreckage debris path. There was no evidence of an inflight or postimpact fire. All 
observed airframe structural separations were consistent with impact-related damage. The 
entire lower fuselage surface was crushed upward, consistent with a vertical impact while in a 
near level pitch attitude. The airplane's tail section was found partially separated immediately 
aft of the aft pressure bulkhead. The vertical stabilizer, rudder, horizontal stabilizers, and 
elevators remained relatively undamaged. The leading edges of both wings, the propeller 
spinners, and the airframe radome did not exhibit evidence of a ground impact.
Aileron control cable continuity was established through an overstress separation of the aileron 
sector drive cable in the mid-cabin area and a separation of the balance cable near the right 
wing root. All other flight control cables were continuous from the cockpit control inputs to 
Page 9 of 12CEN15FA136
their respective flight control surfaces. The elevator trim actuators measured 1.6 inches, which 
corresponded to the trailing-edge of the elevator trim tab being deflected up about 5°. The 
aileron trim actuator measured 1.1 inches, which corresponded to the trailing-edge of the 
aileron trim tab being deflected down about 5°. The rudder trim actuator measured 2.4 inches, 
which corresponded to the trailing-edge of the rudder trim tab being deflected right about 5°. 
The landing gear were found extended. The landing gear selector handle was damaged during 
impact. The flap actuator measured 5.7 inches, which was consistent with a 10° flap extension. 
The flap selector handle and indicator were damaged during impact. The stall warning horn 
and landing gear warning horn were extracted from the cockpit, and both horns produced an 
aural tone when electrical power was applied. Switch continuity for the wing-mounted lift 
sensor was confirmed with an ohmmeter. The left-side altimeter's Kollsman window was 
centered on 30.24 inches-of-mercury. The right-side altimeter's Kollsman window was 
centered on 30.09 inches-of-mercury.
Both engines remained attached to their respective wing nacelle structures. The first stage 
compressor impeller of each engine exhibited blade tip bends that were opposite the direction 
of rotation and visible scoring as a result of the rotating compressor impeller contacting its 
respective shroud. The third axial turbine stage of each engine exhibited re-solidified metallic 
splatter on the stator vanes and turbine blades. The observed damage to the first compressor 
stage and third turbine stage was consistent with each engine operating at the time of impact. 
Both propeller assemblies remained attached to their respective engines. There were two 
approximately 12-inch deep holes observed aside and slightly behind the engines where the 
rotating propellers had dug into the soil during impact. Both propellers exhibited significant 
bending of their blades opposite the direction of rotation. Additionally, all propeller blades 
exhibited leading edge gouges, chordwise scratches, and burnishing of the cambered side.
The postaccident wreckage examination did not reveal any anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation of the airplane during the accident flight.
Aids To Navigation
The published inbound course for the GPS runway 36 approach was 357° magnetic; the 
crossing altitude for the final approach fix (NULUX) was 2,000 ft msl; and the distance 
between NULUX and the runway threshold was 4.2 nautical miles (nm). After crossing 
NULUX, lateral-navigation (LNAV)-equipped aircraft descended to 1,300 ft msl until crossing 
the stepdown fix (SHIEV) that is located 2 nm from the end of runway 36. After crossing 
SHIEV, LNAV-equipped aircraft descended to the minimum descent altitude of 1,040 ft msl 
(413 feet agl). The instrument approach minimums required a 1-mile inflight visibility at the 
missed approach point to continue the landing. The missed approach instructions were to 
climb on runway heading to 4,000 ft msl, proceed direct to the ZITAG waypoint, then turn left 
and proceed direct to the CRAFF waypoint and hold.
Page 10 of 12CEN15FA136
Communications
A review of available air traffic control information indicated that the accident flight received 
normal services and handling. Transcripts of the voice communications recorded between the 
accident pilot, the approach controller, and the tower controller are included in the docket 
materials associated with the investigation.
Medical And Pathological Information
The Tarrant County Medical Examiner's Office, located in Fort Worth, Texas, performed an 
autopsy on the pilot. The cause of death was attributed to multiple blunt-force injuries 
sustained during the accident. The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory 
located in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed toxicology tests on samples obtained during 
the autopsy. The test results were negative for carbon monoxide, ethanol, and all tested drugs 
and medications.
The pilot had monocular vision following a childhood injury that resulted in very limited vision 
in his left eye. On June 18, 1991, after a review by an ophthalmologist and passing a medical 
flight test, the pilot was issued a Statement of Demonstrated Ability (SODA) that authorized a 
third-class medical certificate. On June 24, 1995, the pilot was issued an updated SODA after 
he passed another medical flight test and was authorized for a second-class medical certificate. 
The pilot continued to routinely receive second-class medical certificates with a limitation for 
corrective lenses.
Tests And Research
The airplane was equipped with a Honeywell KMH-820 Multi-Hazard Awareness System, 
serial number 1340. With the assistance of the manufacturer, the non-volatile memory was 
downloaded from the damaged device. The recovered data identified two alerts that had been 
issued during the accident flight. The first alert was issued when the airplane's flight path came 
near a tower during the final seconds of the flight. The airplane was located about 361 ft south 
of the accident site and about 700 ft west of the tower when the obstacle pull-up (OBPU) alert 
was issued. The airplane was at a GPS altitude of 1,030 ft (about 330 ft agl) and 46.7 knots 
groundspeed. The OBPU would have resulted in an audible alert "Obstacle, Obstacle, Pull-Up." 
The second alert was for an excessive sink rate; however, additional data was not recorded to 
non-volatile memory before there was a loss of electrical power to the device during impact.
The pilot's Apple iPhone, Apple iPad, and Appareo Stratus II were recovered at the accident 
site and sent to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Vehicle Recorders 
Laboratory to be examined. The content of the Apple iPhone and Apple iPad were examined 
using forensic software, and there was no data found that was associated with the accident 
flight. The Appareo Stratus II was an automatic dependent surveillance broadcast (ADS-B) 
device with GPS capability. The device had been configured to interface with the pilot's iPad 
ForeFlight application. An external examination of the device revealed minor impact damage; 
Page 11 of 12CEN15FA136
however, an internal examination revealed additional damage to the Wi-Fi module. The device 
was repaired and examined using laboratory hardware and software. The device contained 
flight parameter data for the accident flight.
The recovered Appareo Stratus II flight parameters and recorded ATC radar track data were 
used to develop an aircraft performance study. According to the study, at 2106:38, during the 
approach, the pilot made an engine power reduction that resulted in a 1,500 ft per minute 
descent and a 25 knot per minute airspeed deceleration. Between 2106:38 and 2109:00, the 
airplane's airspeed decreased from 162 to 75 knots calibrated airspeed (KCAS), and the angle of 
attack increased from 2.7° to 14°. At 2108:52, 5 seconds after the tower controller told the pilot 
to check his altitude, the pilot made an abrupt elevator-up input that increased the airspeed 
deceleration to 168 knots per minute. At 2109:00, the airplane entered an aerodynamic stall 
after it decelerated to 75 KCAS.
Additional Information
According to first responders with the Argyle Fire Department, upon their arrival at the 
accident site, there was no evidence of ice or frost accumulation on the airplane's fuselage, 
wings, or tail. Additionally, the first responders reported that there was a substantial smell of 
Jet-A fuel at the accident site; however, there was no evidence of an explosion or postimpact 
fire. The pilot was seated in the left cockpit seat and was secured by a lap belt. The available 
shoulder harness did not appear to have been used.
According to the FAA Airplane Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-3B), "Night flying is very 
different from day flying and demands more attention of the pilot. The most noticeable 
difference is the limited availability of outside visual references. Therefore, flight instruments 
should be used to a greater degree in controlling the airplane." The handbook further states, 
"Distance may be deceptive at night due to limited lighting conditions. A lack of intervening 
references on the ground and the inability to compare the size and location of different ground 
objects cause this. This also applies to the estimation of altitude and speed. Consequently, 
more dependence must be placed on flight instruments, particularly the altimeter and the 
airspeed indicator."
Page 12 of 12
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
05/11/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Tony Baumgard; Federal Aviation Administration, North Texas FSDO; Irving, TX
Ernest Hall; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
David Studtmann; Honeywell Aerospace; Phoenix, AZ
Publish Date:
05/11/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90692
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
