The private pilot departed on an instrument flight rules (IFR), personal, cross-country flight 
after requesting that his airplane's fuel tanks be filled. The destination airport was about 521 
nautical miles away. IFR conditions prevailed along the en route portion of the flight, but 
visual conditions prevailed at the destination airport. The airplane's fuel capacity was 90 
gallons, and the engine consumed about 16.5 gallons per hour. The airplane was in cruise flight 
above the clouds and the pilot requested a visual approach from the south when he was about 
19 miles southeast of the destination airport. The airport does not have terminal radar 
coverage, and is served by a flight service station. The request for a visual approach was not 
approved due to mountain obscuration south of the airport. The pilot was cleared for the ILS 
distance measuring equipment (DME) approach. The pilot was initially uncertain of his 
approach options, which included a radial transition to the localizer, outbound on the localizer 
with a procedure turn, or a no-procedure turn at 40 DME. He eventually understood and 
accepted the radial transition clearance, which required him to intercept the localizer course 
inbound on a 35-mile DME arc. As the airplane approached the inbound localizer heading, the 
pilot did not make the inbound turn. Air Route Traffic Control Center and Flight Service 
Station (FSS) personnel made various attempts to contact the pilot to request that he execute a 
missed approach procedure, but there was no immediate response. The pilot eventually 
reported that he had descended into visual conditions, but indicated that he was not sure 
where he was in relation to the airport. He determined his position and began to fly toward the 
airport at 3,000 feet. Communication with the airplane was garbled and broken for a short 
while since the airplane was now about 27 miles west of the airport. FSS personnel requested 
assistance from other airplanes in the area to locate the accident airplane and relay radio 
communications. About 7 minutes before the accident, the pilot radioed that he was low on fuel 
and probably would not make it to the airport. He ditched the airplane about 5.4 miles west-
northwest of the airport after his fuel supply was exhausted. The pilot and the sole passenger 
escaped the sinking airplane and were rescued by a float-equipped airplane that had responded 
to the FSS request for assistance. The pilot reported that he missed the inbound turn onto the 
localizer because his autopilot failed to capture the localizer. He also said that during the flight 
headwinds were greater than expected, the cloud ceiling at the destination airport was lower 
than expected, and the fuel vendor at the departure airport may have not completely filled the 
Page 2 of 9ANC08LA095
fuel tanks to their maximum capacity. The pilot said that he did not visually inspect the fuel 
tanks prior to departure and that there was no mechanical malfunction of the airplane.
The pilot's failure to ensure that there was sufficient fuel on board the airplane for the planned 
flight, and his inadequate flight planning and navigation, which resulted in fuel exhaustion and 
ditching short of the planned destination. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's 
geographic disorientation during his approach to the airport.
On August 1, 2008, about 1906 Alaska daylight time (ADT), a Cessna T210 airplane, N59214, 
sustained substantial damage when it ditched in the ocean following a complete loss of engine 
power, about 5.4 miles west-northwest of Ketchikan, Alaska. The airplane was being operated 
as an instrument flight rules (IFR) cross-country personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, 
when the accident occurred. The airplane was operated by the private certificated pilot who 
was not injured. The sole passenger received minor injuries due to hypothermia. Instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the en route portion of the flight, but visual conditions 
prevailed at the Ketchikan International Airport. An IFR flight plan was filed by the pilot for 
the flight that departed Bellingham, Washington, about 1530 pacific daylight time (1430 ADT).
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) personnel, and from a review of air to 
ground communication recordings between the accident airplane and FAA air traffic control 
facilities by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), the 
pilot contacted the FAA's Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) about 34 miles south of the 
Annette Island VOR, which is about 19 miles southeast of Ketchikan. The pilot requested a 
descent from 12,000 feet to 4,000 feet, but the ARTCC controller said that the lowest altitude 
he could give in that area was 8,000 feet, direct to the Annette Island VOR. The pilot requested 
a visual approach to runway 29, and commented that 8,000 feet would put him in instrument 
meteorological conditions (IMC), but he acknowledged the clearance.
The ARTCC controller then conferred with the Ketchikan Flight Service Station (FSS) about the 
possibility of a visual approach from the south to runway 29. The FSS specialist reported that 
the mountain tops at the south end of Annette Island were obscured by clouds, and suggested 
that the instrument landing system (ILS) or the area navigation (RNAV) global positioning 
system (GPS) approach to runway 11, would be the best.
The ARTCC controller then told the pilot that the lowest altitude he could give was 7,000 feet 
until Annette Island, and then to 6,500 feet after the VOR. The pilot elected to make the ILS, 
distance measuring equipment (DME) approach to runway 11 at Ketchikan with a circle to land 
on runway 29. He was cleared for the ILS DME-1 approach about 1814.
The ILS DME-1 approach to runway 11 has an initial approach fix on the 295 degree radial from 
Annette Island at 35 DME, and maintains a 35 DME arc until joining the inbound course for 
the ILS, on a 109 degree heading. The arc does not have a procedure turn. A second approach 
option is to join the outbound localizer course on a 289 degree heading, and has a procedure 
turn at 17 DME before proceeding inbound. A third approach option is to proceed to the initial 
approach fix at DOOZI, which is 40 DME from Annette Island.
The ARTCC controller inquired from the pilot about his plans for the approach by stating, 
"N59214, are you expecting the 295 radial transition." The pilot replied that he was expecting 
to go to the initial approach fix at DOOZI. The ARTCC controller again inquired, "After Annette 
Island VOR, are you going to try the Annette 295 radial, out for the arc, or are you going to go 
over toward the localizer for the procedure turn." The pilot replied that he was planning to go 
direct to DOOZI at 8,200 feet, but seemed uncertain about his approach options. The ARTCC 
controller stated, "N59214, over Annette Island VOR, as initial approach fix, you can use the 
295 radial for the arc, or there is another radial you can use to go out and join the localizer, and 
track outbound for the procedure turn. The pilot replied, "We're looking, Oh I see it, you want 
us to set up 295 outbound for [unintelligible]." The ARTCC controller replied, "affirmative."
As the accident airplane neared the ILS localizer, the pilot was advised by ARTCC personnel to 
contact the Ketchikan FSS and radar services were terminated. The pilot made radio contact 
with Ketchikan FSS at 1843 and said that he was on the ILS approach, and about 30 seconds 
from turning final, about 17 miles from the airport. The FSS specialist advised the pilot to 
"report the 11 DME fix."
About 1846, ARTCC personnel noticed that the airplane did not turn onto the localizer, and 
was continuing away from the airport. The FSS specialist contacted the pilot who said he must 
have gone through the localizer and inquired whether the FSS had radar coverage, which the 
FSS specialist replied, "negative, I do not." The FSS specialist advised the pilot to execute the 
missed approach procedure immediately, saying "there's mountains in these clouds." There 
was no immediate reply from the pilot, but an unidentified voice was heard on the FSS radio 
frequency saying, "burning up fuel that we don't really have." The FSS specialist then told the 
pilot to switch back to the ARTCC radio frequency, and to climb and maintain 7,000 feet. The 
FSS specialist indicated that it might be possible to get a lower altitude near the VOR and into 
VFR conditions. The pilot acknowledged the frequency change, and stated he was at 7,300 feet.
The pilot did not contact ARTCC, and about 1850, the FSS specialist called the pilot on the FSS 
frequency to advise the pilot to maintain 6,500 feet and contact ARTCC. The pilot stated that 
he was below the clouds and he would watch out for mountains. The FSS specialist confirmed 
the pilot was in VFR conditions, and asked the pilot if he wanted to cancel his IFR clearance, to 
which he stated "affirmative." 
The FSS specialist was concerned about the pilot's location, and asked, "Do you know where 
you are in relationship to the airport." The pilot replied, "not really, but we are going to 
[unintelligible] in the GPS in a second here." The FSS specialist made several additional calls to 
the pilot, but there was no response. At 1855, the FSS specialist asked the ARTCC if they still 
had radar contact with the accident airplane, to which they replied no, but the last position 
before loss of radar contact was about 30 miles on the 280 degree radial from Ketchikan, 
headed toward the airport.
The FSS specialist continued to attempt radio contact with the pilot, and about 1856, he asked 
a float-equipped airplane, N08Q, to look for the accident airplane, and to assist in relaying 
radio messages between the FSS and the accident pilot. The accident pilot's radio messages 
were being received by the FSS as broken and garbled, and the pilot of N08Q relayed that the 
accident pilot was 27 DME west, inbound to Ketchikan on a 093 degree heading toward the 
airport. The FSS specialist asked N08Q and several other float-equipped airplanes to begin 
looking for the accident airplane.
About 1859, the pilot reported to the FSS that he was level at 3,000 feet, over the water, and 
was low on fuel. About 1902, the pilot said that the engine had stopped running. He said that 
he was 16.3 miles from the airport, and had switched from the right fuel tank to the left tank, 
which was "flat." The pilot continued to report his status by stating he was at 3,400 feet, but it 
"does not look good, I think we are going to lose it." He next reported that he was on a 080 
degree heading at 15.1 miles, with a desired GPS track of 093 degrees to the airport.
The FSS specialist continued to inquire about the status of the accident airplane, and the pilot 
reported that he had civilization in sight about 6 to 7 miles ahead of the airplane. When the FSS 
specialist next checked with the pilot about his status, he reported that he was continuing 
toward the airport, but he probably was too low to make it around a peninsula that was visible 
ahead. He then said he was at 1,000 feet, and he would call immediately if the engine quit.
At 1906, the pilot reported that he was 7.5 miles from the airport, had turned to a heading of 
060 degrees to avoid hitting little islands ahead. He then said that he saw civilization and 
smoke ahead, and was "going in." 
About 1909, the pilot of N08Q reported that he had spotted the accident airplane near Vallenar 
Point at the north end of Gravina Island, nose down in the water, and stated that he was 
landing to assist.
About 1911, the pilot of N08Q said that he saw two persons swimming to shore. He was able to 
get the accident pilot and passenger aboard his airplane, and flew to Ketchikan where they 
were met by an ambulance. The airplane subsequently sank in about 50 feet of water.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC, on August 5, the pilot reported that he 
requested a fuel vendor at the Bellingham Airport to fill the airplane fuel tanks, and he received 
a weather briefing from the Seattle Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS), which included a 
winds aloft forecast. After departure, the pilot said that during the flight, headwinds were 
greater than expected, and the cloud ceiling at Ketchikan was lower than expected. He also said 
that the fuel vendor may have not completely filled the fuel tanks to their maximum capacity.
The pilot said that his airplane has a fuel capacity of 90 gallons, and usually burns between 16 
to 17 gallons per hour. He used a cruise altitude of 12,000 feet, his total flight time for the 
accident flight was 4 hours and 15 minutes, and his usual ground speed of about 160 knots was 
as low as 143 knots. He indicated that during the approach to Ketchikan, his autopilot system 
was coupled to the GPS receiver, but as the airplane approached the localizer heading, the 
autopilot failed to capture the localizer and initiate a turn on course. Consequently, the 
airplane flew through the localizer, which prompted ARTCC to request a climb. The pilot 
reported that he was low on fuel, and saw an opening in the clouds. He descended into visual 
conditions, and flew toward the airport, but the engine lost power. He selected an emergency 
landing spot in the water, just off the north end of Gravina Island. He and his passenger were 
rescued by other airplanes.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, the 
pilot estimated that the airplane received between 82 to 84 gallons of fuel before departure. He 
indicated that in the future, he would "stay with the airplane while it is being fueled to use his 
ladder to check visually to be certain the fueler has fully topped both tanks." In addition, the 
pilot noted that the airplane did not have a mechanical malfunction or failure.
Aircraft and Flight Information
The straight-line distance between Bellingham, Washington, and Ketchikan, Alaska, without 
any maneuvering turns, is about 521 nautical miles. The accident airplane's Pilot's Operating 
Handbook (POH) was reviewed by the NTSB IIC, and the following data was noted for a no-
wind condition at 12,000 feet, with a 45 minute reserve at 45 percent power:
The airplane's range at 65 percent power was about 890 nautical miles. At 70 percent power, 
the range was about 860 nautical miles.
At 65 percent power, the airplane POH listed a speed of about 168 knots, with an endurance of 
about 5 hours and 30 minutes, and consuming about 14.2 gallons per hour.
At 70 percent power, the POH listed a speed of about 173 knots, with an endurance of about 5 
hours and 6 minutes, and consuming about 15.5 gallons per hour.
At 168 knots, the airplane would cover 521 miles in about 3 hours and 8 minutes. At 143 knots, 
which the pilot said he flew, the airplane would cover 521 miles in about 3 hours and 38 
minutes.
Using the speed of 143 knots provided by the pilot, and using a fuel consumption rate of 16.5 
gallons per hour, also provided by the pilot, the airplane would have consumed 90 gallons of 
fuel in about 5 hours and 27 minutes.
Weather Data
The area forecast for southern, southeast Alaska, issued at 1145 and valid until 2400, was 
indicating, in part:  Synopsis, valid until August 2, at 0600; High pressure ridge persists over 
eastern Gulf of Alaska and southeast Alaska panhandle through 2400. AIRMET Sierra was 
issued for mountain obscuration, and mountains occasionally obscured in clouds, and was 
valid until 1800. Clouds and weather: 2,500 feet scattered, 4,500 feet broken with layers 
above. Tops at 20,000 feet. Occasionally, 2,500 feet broken, 4,500 feet overcast. Turbulence, 
nothing of significance. Icing and freezing level, nothing of significance. Freezing level, 7,000 
feet.
The winds aloft forecast for the accident route of flight at 12,000 feet msl, based on data that 
was for use between 1300 and 2200 on August 1, was reporting, in part:
Vancouver International Airport, Canada310 degrees (true) at 10 knots
Seattle, Washington250 degrees (true) at 30 knots
Port Hardy, Canada330 degrees (true) at 15 knots
Sandspit, Canada320 degrees (true) at 15 knots
Annette Island, Alaska330 degrees (true) at 15 knots
The terminal forecast for Ketchikan, valid between 1600 on August 1, and 1600 on August 2, 
was reporting, in part:  Wind, 330 degrees at 6 knots, visibility greater than 6 statute miles; 
clouds and sky condition, 4,000 feet broken, 6,000 feet overcast.
At 1853, an aviation routine weather report (METAR) at Ketchikan was reporting, in part:  
Wind, 350 degrees (true) at 5 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, few 
at 2,500 feet, 3,500 feet broken, 4,500 feet overcast; temperature, 57 degrees F; dew point, 52 
degrees F; altimeter, 30.01 inHg; remarks, rain began 15 minutes past the hour and ended 26 
minutes past the hour, harbor wind 280 degrees at 10 knots.
History of Flight
Approach-IFR initial 
approach
Miscellaneous/other
Approach
Fuel exhaustion (Defining event)
Ditching
