The pilot reported that he noticed smoke in the cabin and turned back to the departure airport. 
Oil began to accumulate on the windshield, which obscured his forward visibility. He made a 
five-mile straight-in approach using the airplane's global positioning system.  He said that he 
attempted to maintain 2,500 feet above mean sea level and began to lose engine power about 
three miles from the airport. The engine "sputtered then froze" about two miles from the 
airport. The pilot then made a forced landing on a field that the passenger saw out of his 
window. The pilot said that the airplane came to rest at the end of that field, where it impacted 
trees at about 30 knots. Subsequent to the accident the propeller and starter ring gear were 
removed. The oil plug on the nose of the engine case that covers the governor idler gear shaft 
was not in place and it was found in the cowling. A safety wire that had secured the oil plug was 
observed attached to engine case with a separation at its plug end.
A total loss of engine power due to a loss of all of the engine's oil as a result of the safety wire 
on the governor idler gear shaft's oil plug breaking, leading to the oil plug coming unscrewed. 
Contributing to the accident was the lack of a suitable area for a forced landing.
On August 1, 2008, about 1915 central daylight time, a Cessna 172RG, N6520R, piloted by a 
private pilot, sustained substantial damage on impact with terrain following an in-flight loss of 
engine power near the Tomahawk Regional Airport (TKV), Tomahawk, Wisconsin.  The 
personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the time of the accident.  No flight plan was on file. The pilot and a passenger sustained 
minor injuries.  The local flight originated from TKV about 1900.
The pilot reported that he and his passenger noticed light smoke in the cabin during cruise at 
2,500 feet above mean sea level (MSL) about five miles east-northeast of TKV.  He turned left 
to return to TKV and opened the windows to vent the cabin.  He stated that all the airplane's 
instruments indicated normal.  After the turn, oil began to accumulate on the windshield, 
which obscured his forward visibility.  He made a five mile straight-in approach using the 
airplane's global positioning system.  He said that he attempted to maintain 2,500 feet MSL 
and began to lose engine power about three miles from TKV.  The engine "sputtered then froze" 
about two miles from TKV.  The pilot made a forced landing on a field that the passenger saw 
out of his window.  The pilot said that the airplane came to rest at the end of that field where it 
impacted trees at about 30 knots.
Subsequent to the accident, the propeller and starter ring gear were removed.  The oil plug on 
the nose of the engine case that covers the governor idler gear shaft was not in place and it was 
found in the cowling.  Safety wire that had secured the plug was observed attached to engine 
case with a separation at its plug end.
The pilot's safety recommendation stated he had accumulated 23 hours of simulated 
instrument training.  He said, "Without the instrument time I am certain the loss of all forward 
visibility would have been unnerving."
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of engine power (partial)
Loss of engine power (total)
Off-field or emergency landing
