The pilot flew the airplane for 45 minutes after filling the fuel tanks, then secured the airplane. 
Before the next departure, the operator advised the pilot twice to fuel the airplane; however, it 
was not fueled. The pilot departed on a banner-tow flight, during which time he reported 
monitoring the fuel level. Approximately 1 to 2 minutes after noticing the left and right fuel 
quantity gauges indicated "1/4" and "1/3" capacity respectively, the engine sputtered once then 
lost power. He notified air traffic control, released the banner, and ditched the airplane. 
Examination of the airplane revealed that no fuel was present in the airplane's fuel tanks or 
carburetor. An unquantified amount of fuel was found in the gascolator.
A total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion as a result of the pilot's inadequate fuel 
planning.
On August 1, 2008, about 1546 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-12, N3424M, registered to 
and operated by Barnstormer Flite Signs, Inc., experienced a total loss of engine power and was 
ditched in the Atlantic Ocean near Grand Strand Airport (CRE), North Myrtle Beach, South 
Carolina. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for 
the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 banner-tow flight from CRE. The airplane 
was substantially damaged and the certificated commercial pilot sustained minor injuries. The 
flight originated about 1300, from CRE.
The pilot stated that earlier that day the fuel tanks were filled and he flew the airplane for 45 
minutes, while remaining in the traffic pattern. He secured the airplane and after landing, the 
operator reportedly advised the pilot twice to fuel the airplane before departure. It was not 
fueled, and the pilot elected to depart on a banner-tow flight. While monitoring the fuel level 
during the flight, he noticed the left and right fuel quantity readings were "1/4" and "1/3," 
respectively. Approximately 1 to 2 minutes later, or at 1545, the engine sputtered once then 
quit. He notified CRE air traffic control tower that he would attempt to land on the runway and 
released the banner. After realizing that he was unable to reach the airport, he elected to ditch 
the airplane.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed no fuel or 
water in the airplane's fuel tanks. The gascolator contained an unquantified amount of fuel 
only, and the carburetor contained only water.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Fuel exhaustion (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent
Ditching
