During the instrument-flight-rules flight at 11,000 feet mean sea level, the pilot's last 
transmission to air traffic control confirmed his altimeter setting. Shortly thereafter, radar data 
indicated that the airplane started a descending right-hand turn. The final radar return was at 
9,700 feet msl. The airplane wreckage was located about 1 mile west of the final radar return, at 
a terrain elevation of 3,830 feet. The debris field was consistent with an in-flight breakup, with 
airplane wreckage distributed over a distance of 0.5 miles. A study of the meteorology in the 
vicinity at the time of the accident indicated that a broken to overcast ceiling existed between 
5,000 to 6,000 feet msl and extended up to 14,000 feet msl. Satellite imagery depicted cloud 
top temperatures of -1 to -3 degrees C between 11,000 and 12,000 feet msl.  The location of the 
last radar return was immediately downwind of Mt. Rainier and the sounding wind profile 
indicated favorable conditions for mountain wave formation. Digital photos of Mt. Rainier 
taken a few minutes before the accident were recovered from a camera onboard the airplane.  
The images depict a clear view of clouds surrounding Mt. Rainier and that the airplane was 
operating immediately above a broken-to-overcast cloud layer, in visual meteorological 
conditions. The radar track combined with weather radar imagery and satellite imagery 
indicated that the airplane was in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) at the time it 
entered the descending right turn and dropped below the radar floor. Flight performance data 
recovered from cockpit instrumentation indicate that 5 minutes prior to the accident the 
airplane experienced continuous turbulence ranging from 0.77 to 1.5 vertical g's, consistent 
with a mountain wave encounter. Upon entering IMC conditions, the airplane began a right 
turn that developed into a spiral descent. During the last few seconds of flight the airplane was 
oriented 88.6 degrees nose down, 113 degrees angle of bank, and 290 knots. Upon exiting the 
bottom of the cloud layer, at 6,135 msl, the airplane experienced a rapid onset of g's that 
exceeded the strength of the airplane.  The sudden onset of g-load is constant with the pilot's 
attempt to recover from the rapid descent and unusual attitude.
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control while in cruise flight due to spatial 
disorientation.  Contributing to the accident was turbulence and clouds.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 2008, about 1433 Pacific daylight time (PDT), an amateur built experimental 
category, Long Lancair ES, N45EL, disappeared from radar and radio contact was lost 40 miles 
northwest of Yakima, Washington.  The airplane wreckage was located 9 miles northwest of 
Cliffdell, Washington.  The private pilot operated the airplane under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 91.  The pilot and single passenger were killed, and the 
airplane was destroyed.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight 
rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed.  The flight originated at Ketchikan, Alaska, about 0957 
Alaska daylight time (ADT).  
The pilot and his passenger were traveling from Ketchikan to Mountain Home, Idaho.  A 
review of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) air traffic control documents revealed that 
the pilot received a standard weather brief from the Juneau Automated Flight Service Station 
at 0608 ADT, and filed an IFR flight plan.  At 0954 ADT, N45EL was released for departure.  
While en route the pilot received normal services from Anchorage Air Route Traffic Control 
Center (ARTCC) and Seattle Terminal Radar Approach Control Facility (TRACON).  At 1422 
PDT, the pilot checked in with Seattle ARTCC at 11,000 feet mean sea level (msl) with a 
clearance to proceed direct to Yakima.  At 1432 PDT, the pilot confirmed his altimeter setting, 
29.87, which was the pilot's last transmission.  At 1433 PDT, an altitude deviation to 9,700 feet 
was noted by the controller and then radar and radio contact were lost.  Repeated attempts to 
contact N45EL were unsuccessful.
Examination of the radar file depicted the airplane on a steady southeast course at 11,000 feet 
msl.  At 1431:30, the track started a descending right-hand turn.  The final radar return was at 
1432:06, at 9,700 feet msl.  The airplane wreckage was located about 1 mile west of the final 
radar return, at a terrain elevation of 3,830 feet.  The debris field consisted of individual 
airplane parts, left wing, right wing, horizontal stabilizer, fuselage, and engine, distributed over 
a distance of 0.5 miles, in a densely wooded mountain slope.  No initial point of impact was 
identified.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 68, held a private pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land with an 
instrument airplane rating, issued on December 9, 2001.  He held a third-class medical 
certificate, issued in May 2008, with the limitation that he wear lenses for distant vision, and 
possess glasses for near vision.  The pilot's logbook was examined.  The most recent entry was 
dated July 16, 2008, with a recorded 592.7 hours total time, 176 hours simulated instrument 
time, and 4 hours of actual instrument time.  In the last 30 days he had logged 10.8 hours, all 
in the accident airplane.  He had logged a total of 266.2 hours in the accident airplane. The 
pilot's most recent flight review was on May 14, 2008, and his instrument proficiency check 
was dated July 9, 2008.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The four seat, single engine, low wing, fixed gear, experimental category airplane was 
constructed by the pilot, and was issued an airworthiness certificate on September 12, 2004.  
The airplane was powered by a Teledyne Continental IO-550 motor. The propeller was an Aero 
Composites three bladed propeller. The maintenance logbook recorded the most recent annual 
inspection was completed on April 5, 2008.  The most recent oil change was on July 14, 2008, 
at a total time of 267.2 hours. 
METEROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The northwest portion of the National Weather Service (NWS) Surface Analysis Chart for 1400 
PDT (2100Z) depicted a low pressure system with a central pressure of 1007 hectopascals 
(hPa) over southeastern British Columbia north of the Washington and Idaho boarders, and a 
high pressure system located off the Pacific northwest coast. A cold front extended from the 
low southwestward through Washington, Oregon, and into the Pacific Ocean. The accident site 
was located behind the cold front. Several station models over western Washington and 
Oregon, to the west and southwest of the accident site, indicated light to heavy rain showers, 
with overcast skies. The closest station model depicted was from Yakima (KYKM) located 
southeast of the accident site, which depicted winds from the west-southwest at approximately 
10 knots, scattered clouds, temperature of 78 degrees Fahrenheit (F) and a dew point of 48 
degrees F, with a sea level pressure of 1010.8 hPa. The station model northwest of the accident 
site from Stampede Pass (KSMP) indicated calm winds, overcast skies, temperature of 52 
degrees F, dew point of 48 degrees F, and sea level pressure of 1015.4-hPa. 
The northwest portion of the NWS Weather Depiction Charts for 1500 PDT (2200Z) depicts 
the coastal section of Washington near the Seattle area indicated IFR conditions due to low 
overcast ceilings near 600 feet above ground level (agl). Surrounding that area was an area of 
marginal visual flight rules (MVFR) conditions that extended over western Washington and a 
second area over Oregon and northern California. Visual flight rule (VFR) conditions were 
depicted over the accident site and all of central and eastern Washington and Oregon. The 
Yakima station mode indicated ceilings broken at 9,000 feet agl in the immediate vicinity of 
the accident site. 
The NWS Radar Summary Chart for 1421 PDT (2121Z) depicted several areas of light to strong 
intensity echoes over central Washington associated with rain showers with tops to 29,000 
feet. The regional radar mosaic chart from the National Center for Atmospheric Research 
(NCAR) for 1502 PDT indicated a band of echoes along the Cascade Mountain Range to the 
west of the accident site, with several areas of scattered echoes over central Washington and 
northern Oregon to the southwest of the accident site. A small area of echoes was identified in 
the immediate vicinity of the accident site. 
 
The closest weather reporting facility was from the NWS remote automated surface 
observation system (ASOS) located at Stampede Pass, in Kittitas County, Washington, 13 miles 
northwest of the accident site at an elevation of 3,967 feet msl. The following conditions were 
reported surrounding the time of the accident; Stampede Pass weather at 1423 PDT (2123Z), 
automated, wind from 290 degrees at 9 knots; visibility 10 miles; scattered clouds at 800 feet, 
ceiling overcast at 1,500 feet; temperature 11 degrees C; dew point 8 degrees C; altimeter 30.01 
inHg.
The next closest weather reporting facility was from Bowers Field (KELN), Ellensburg, located 
approximately 28 miles east of the accident at an elevation of 1,764 feet. The airport had an 
automated weather observation; Bowers Field weather observation at 1453 PDT (2153Z), 
automated, winds from 310 degrees at 9 knots; visibility 10 miles; few clouds at 7,500 feet, 
scattered at 9,000 feet; temperature 25 degrees C; dew point temperature 9 degrees C; 
altimeter setting 29.89 inHg. Remarks: automated observation system, rain began at 1432, 
ended at 1442 PDT; sea level pressure 1010.9 hPa; hourly precipitation total trace or less than 
0.01 inches; temperature 25.0 degrees C; dew point 9.4 degrees C. 
Upper wind data documented the wind profile over the region. The profile indicated surface 
winds from the southwest at 13 knots, with little directional variation with height and wind 
speeds increasing to 25 knots at 4,800 feet, then decreased and increased again, with wind 
speeds in excess of 50 knots above 18,000 feet. The mean 0-6 kilometer (18,000 feet) wind was 
from 236 degrees at 38 knots, with the maximum wind from 230 degrees at 98 knots identified 
at 41,000 feet. At the accident airplane's cruising level of 11,000 feet, the wind was from 245 
degrees at 27 knots with a temperature of -1 degree C. The sounding indicated a chance of light 
to moderate turbulence at that level. 
The sounding wind profile was also favorable for mountain wave development. The standard 
default values of the rawinsonde observation (RAOB) program identified the predominate 
wave at 42,650 feet or 175 hPa with a wavelength of 14.4 miles, an amplitude of 2,260 feet, and 
maximum vertical velocity of 1,246 feet per minute (fpm). Near the accident airplane's cruising 
level, a wave at 10,113 feet or 700 hPa was identified, which was 72 percent of the predominate 
wave strength with winds from 240 degrees at 32 knots, a wavelength of 10.4 miles, with 
vertical motions of 2,316 fpm, and potentially moderate-to-severe turbulence. Modifying the 
mountain wave program data for Mt. Rainier at an elevation of 14,411 feet, located 24 miles 
southwest of the accident site, increased the predominate waves strength at 42,000 feet to an 
amplitude of 8,255 feet, and a maximum vertical velocity of 4,551 fpm with severe turbulence 
likely. The height of Mt. Rainier is higher than the default values of the RAOB program, which 
had the effect of raising the lowest wave height to 16,388 feet. That wave had a wavelength of 
4.46 miles, an amplitude of 446 feet, maximum vertical velocity of 523 fpm, with light 
turbulence likely. 
Reflectivity is the measure of the efficiency of a target in intercepting and returning radio 
energy. With hydrometeors it is a function of the drop size distribution, number of particles per 
unit volume, physical state (ice or water), shape, and aspect. Reflectivity is normally displayed 
in decibels (dBZ), and is a general measure of echo intensity. The chart in the Meteorologists 
Factual Report relates the NWS video integrator and processor (VIP) intensity levels versus the 
WSR-88D's display levels, precipitation mode reflectivity in decibels, and rainfall rates. 
The KATX WSR-88D base reflectivity image for the 0.5-degree elevation scan completed at 
1431 PDT, and with a resolution of 1° X 1 kilometers was examined. The flight track from 2129 
to 2132 PDT was overlaid with the airplane heading on a southeasterly direction. The image 
depicted an area of echoes with reflectivities from 5 to 35 dBZ or very light to light intensity 
echoes extending from Mt. Rainier east-northeastward through the accident site. The accident 
airplane was then observed encountering the band of echoes and making a right turn towards 
the west when the upset occurs. 
Numerous photos of Mt Rainer were taken by the occupants minutes before the accident 
sequence.  These photos were recovered from a personal camera that survived the accident. 
The accident airplane recorded altitude at this time was approximately 11,000 feet and 
operating immediately above a broken to overcast cloud layer. A band of higher clouds 
extended immediately downwind from Mt. Rainier with tops as high as the mountain, which 
was also confirmed by satellite radiative cloud top temperatures. The last known picture taken 
shows similar features with the band of higher clouds with some signs of undulation motions 
or wave action at the cloud top, with a higher band of cirriform cloud layer further south along 
the track. 
The FAA Airman's Information Manual (AIM), Chapter 4 - Air Traffic Control, Section 6 - 
Operational Policy/Procedures for Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum (RVSM) in the 
Domestic Airspace, provides the following information on encountering turbulence and 
mountain wave activity (MWA) under section 4-6-6. That section is as follows: 
(c) Inflight MWA Indicators (Including Turbulence). Indicators that the aircraft is being 
subjected to MWA are: 
(1) Altitude excursions and/or airspeed fluctuations with or without associated 
turbulence. 
(2) Pitch and trim changes required to maintain altitude with accompanying airspeed 
fluctuations. 
(3) Light to severe turbulence depending on the magnitude of the MWA. 
FAA Advisory Circular AC 00-57 "Hazardous Mountain Winds And Their Visual Indicators", 
identified several turbulence generation methods in mountain wave activity. 
"Laboratory studies suggest that a surge of wind across a ridge can initiate a vortex downwind 
of the ridge. The vortex rolls up to maximum strength of rotation as it continues to move 
downwind away from the ridge and slowly dissipates. In its wake, with a return to steady flow, 
Kelvin-Helmholtz (K-H) waves develop at the top of the shear layer."
The entire Meteorological Factual Report is contained in the public docket of this accident 
investigation.
MEDICAL & PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Kittitas County Coroner could not locate a pathologist to perform an autopsy or collect tissue 
samples for toxicology analysis. Other than the Coroner's on-scene observation of the victims, 
no other medical examination was performed.   The victims' remains were released to the 
funeral home for cremation on August 7, 2008.
TESTS & RESEARCH
The primary flight display (PFD) and the multifunction flight display (MFD) were recovered 
and sent to the Safety Board's Vehicle Recorders Laboratory.  The non-volatile memory 
containing flight data was recovered.  The following parameters had been recorded at 1-second 
intervals during the accident flight; date, time, latitude, longitude altitude, pitch, bank, 
heading, course, indicated air speed, true air speed, ground speed, rate of climb, glide path 
angle, g-loading, corrected wind speed, corrected wind direction, outside air temperature, 
density altitude, fuel total quantity, engine rpm, fuel flow, center fuel tank level, left fuel tank 
level, right fuel tank level, fuel pressure, oil temperature, oil pressure, volts, cylinder head 
temperature, cylinder exhaust temperature, and torque. The time, altitude, latitude, longitude, 
pitch, roll, and heading parameters were written into a file that could be read by the X-Plane 
program. X-Plane has a built-in capability to "replay" a flight utilizing specified parameters.  
Utilizing the compiled PFD data and X-Plane animation, a timeline of events was created.
 
Approximately 5 minutes 36 seconds before the end of the flight data, at 11,000 feet msl, the 
airplane experienced continuous turbulence, ranging from 0.77 to 1.5 vertical g's.  
Approximately 1 minute prior to the end of the flight data, at 11,000 feet msl, the airplane 
entered a right-hand turn using approximately 30 degrees angle of bank, and enters in a 600- 
to 900-feet-per-minute (fpm) rate of descent.  Approximately 25 seconds before the end of the 
flight data, at 10,500 feet msl, the angle of bank increases past 30 degrees towards 100 degrees, 
the rate of descent increases from 1,000 to 11,500 feet per minute, and the airspeed increases 
from 150 to 280 knots; however, the average g-load remained about 1.1-g's.  The last 6 seconds 
of data depict a rapid increase of g's from 1 to 4.8. The last data point depicts the airplane at 
6,135 feet msl, 88.6 degrees nose down, 113 degrees angle of bank, 290 knots, and 4.8 g's.  
Throughout the entire event the engine rpm stayed approximately 2,400 rpm, fuel flow was a 
steady 11.8-12.0 gallons per hour.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Elevator Push Rod
While moving the airplane wreckage for final disposition the recovery contractor identified 
what he thought was an unusual finding regarding the elevator control rod.  He notified the 
Safety Board investigator-in-charge (IIC), and preserved that portion of the wreckage. FAA 
inspectors examined the elevator control rod (torque tube/idler arm push rod) and the 
remaining portions of the wreckage on March 16, 2009.  The inspectors identified the 'elevator 
torque tube/idler arm push rod' end that connected to the 'elevator torque tube' behind the 
cockpit seats, had the lock nut on the rod end bearing positioned such that only 2-3 threads 
were exposed from the end.  The push rod end, at that location, consists of a fixture 
manufactured out of anodized aluminum.  The threads in the anodized aluminum showed wear 
on the first 2-3 threads.  All thread grooves after the first 2-3 threads remained unworn, with 
the anodized surface undamaged.  At the opposite end of the push rod, the rod end bearing was 
screwed all the way in to the rod end fixture with the lock nut up against the shoulder of the 
rod end bearing (minimum extension length).  The Lancair ES builders guide states that the 
builder should, "Thread the rod end bearings into the rod ends until the bearing hole is 2 7/16" 
(62mm) from the end of the push rod tube."  This configuration would place the majority of the 
threads of the rod end bearing into the torque tube end fixture. 
An examination of drawings that are included in the Lancair ES builder's guide depict the 
elevator torque tube and push rod connections from the cockpit hand control to the elevator 
control surface.  Simple kinematics indicate that an aft movement of the cockpit hand 
controller would move the connected push rods aft, and deflect the elevator up (nose up pitch). 
An upward deflection of the elevator would impart a compressive load into the elevator push 
rod control system.
Spatial Disorientation
The Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-083-15A) defines spatial disorientation as " the lack 
of orientation with regard to position in space and to other objects."
"A pilot in a prolonged coordinated, constant rate turn, will have the illusion of not turning. 
During the recovery to level flight, the pilot will experience the sensation of turning in the 
opposite direction. The disoriented pilot may return the aircraft to its original turn. Because an 
aircraft tends to lose altitude in turns unless the pilot compensates for the loss in lift, the pilot 
may notice a loss of altitude. The absence of any sensation of turning creates the illusion of 
being in a level descent. The pilot may pull back on the controls in an attempt to climb or stop 
the descent. This action tightens the spiral and increases the loss of altitude; hence, this 
illusion is referred to as a graveyard spiral.  At some point, this could lead to a loss of control by 
the pilot." (FAA-H-083-15A)
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Aircraft structural failure
