Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SEATTLE, WA
Accident Number:
SEA97FA202
Date & Time:
09/01/1997, 2110 PDT 
Registration:
N951AS
Aircraft:
McDonnell Douglas DC-9-82 (MD-82)
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
19 Minor, 97 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
During the landing roll-out, the nose landing gear collapsed.  Examination of the nose landing 
gear revealed the nose gear upper lock link, PN 3914464-503, had failed, and had separated 
into two pieces. The link, which was subject to recurring non-destructive testing every 5000 
cycles (per AD 97-02-10), had an eddy current inspection by the operator, 1075 cycles before 
the accident.  The link was one of a series manufactured from plate stock, rather than being 
forged.  Due to this changed process, the lack of draft angle allowances on the machined parts 
reduced the load-carrying cross sectional area of the machined links to less than that of the 
forged links, resulting in a decrease in the overall strength. Metallurgical analysis revealed that 
about 10,000 major fatigue progression cycles had occurred within about .6 inches of the crack 
progression.  Based on two major stress cycles per gear retraction/extension cycle, the crack 
length at 1075 cycles before the accident would have been greater than .25 inches.  The 
inspection procedure and process provided by the airframe manufacturer did not specify 
removal of the upper lock link from the aircraft before recurring non-destructive tests (NDT). 
During the investigation, NTSB investigators and FAA inspectors observed that access to the 
upper lock link for NDT was limited when the part remained installed on the airplane. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
fatigue failure of the nose landing gear upper lock link, due in part to reduced strength after the 
manufacturing process was changed from forged to machined plate stock; and inadequate non-
destructive inspection process for testing the link. 
Page 2 of 6SEA97FA202
Findings
Occurrence #1: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (C) LANDING GEAR,GEAR LOCKING MECHANISM - FATIGUE
2. (C) ACFT/EQUIP,INADEQUATE AIRCRAFT COMPONENT - MANUFACTURER
3. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE
4. (C) PROCEDURE INADEQUATE - MANUFACTURER
Page 3 of 6SEA97FA202
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 1997, at 2110 Pacific daylight time, N951AS, a McDonnell-Douglas DC-9-82 
(MD-82), operating as Alaska Airlines flight 255 from Los Angeles, California, to Seattle, 
Washington, sustained substantial damage when its nose landing gear collapsed during 
landing roll-out on runway 16L at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport.  The two flight 
crewmembers and three flight attendants were uninjured.  Seventeen of the 111 passengers 
incurred minor injuries during the emergency evacuation commanded by the captain after the 
airplane slid to a stop.  There was no fire.
According to the flight crewmembers, the airplane had departed Los Angeles, California with 
no indication of vibration or other abnormality.  The flight was uneventful until the landing 
gear was extended and the nose landing gear warning light indicated an unsafe landing gear 
indication.  At that time, the crew initiated a go-around (retracting the landing gear), climbed 
to a safe altitude in safe airspace, and then completed appropriate checklists in an attempt to 
obtain a safe gear-down indication with the landing gear extended.  After completing 
appropriate checklists, the mechanical nose landing gear position indicator indicated that the 
nose landing gear was extended in a down and locked position, while the light continued to 
indicate an unsafe condition.  The crew elected to land, and requested emergency equipment 
standing by.  
The captain stated that he landed the airplane smoothly; at about 60 knots indicated airspeed, 
the nose settled onto the runway and the airplane slid to a stop.  The airplane slid about 1300 
feet and drifted slightly to the right of centerline.  He commanded an evacuation.  All slides 
were deployed manually and the passengers evacuated quickly.  
During the course of recovering the airplane from the runway, it was determined that the nose 
landing gear upper lock link, part number 3914464-503, had failed, separating into two pieces.  
This item, which is subject to recurring non-destructive testing every 5000 cycles according to 
AD 97-02-10, had undergone an eddy current inspection 1075 cycles previous to the accident.  
This part was one of a series manufactured from plate stock, rather than being forged.  Due to 
this changed process, according to the aircraft manufacturer, the lack of draft angle allowances 
on the machined parts reduced the load-carrying cross sectional area of the machined links to 
less than that of the forged links, resulting in a decrease in the overall strength.  Metallurgical 
analysis revealed that approximately 10,000 major fatigue progression cycles had occurred 
within about .6 inches of the crack progression.  Based upon the manufacturer's determination 
that there are two major stress cycles per gear retraction/extension cycle, the expected crack 
length 1075 cycles prior to the accident would have been greater than .25 inches.
The Safety Board determined that there have been seven cracked or fractured upper lock links 
reported; all have RM serial numbers indicating that they came from Ready Machine, a now-
defunct supplier to the airplane manufacturer.
INJURIES TO PERSONS
Nineteen individuals sustained minor injuries during the evacuation, including three with neck 
or back pain or spasms, some knee injuries, and one with a sprained ankle.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
Page 4 of 6SEA97FA202
The flight data recorder readout for the approach, landing, and landing rollout is attached.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane was inspected on-scene.  The cockpit switches and controls were found to be 
secured.  Their positions were not recorded.  The cockpit crew side windows were open and the 
cockpit door was locked.  During interviews, the flight crew noted that after calling for 
evacuation, they had evacuated out the cockpit windows.
Damage included nose gear doors, skin scraping, and a wrinkled forward pressure bulkhead.  
During the course of on-scene investigation, it was noted that the jump seat at the mid-cabin 
flight attendant position was not retracted.  The flight attendant at that duty station at the time 
of the accident noted that she did not notice that anomaly until after the evacuation was 
completed, and noted that it did not hamper the evacuation.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The nose landing gear upper lock link, P/N 3914464-503, s/n RM 486, was analyzed by the 
material laboratory division of the NTSB.  The metallurgist's factual report is attached.
The inspection procedure and process provided by the airframe manufacturer does not specify 
removal of the upper lock link from the aircraft prior to recurring non-destructive tests (NDT).  
During the course of investigation, NTSB investigators and FAA inspectors observed that 
access to the upper lock link for NDT is limited when the part remains installed in the airplane.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The aircraft was moved from the scene to the Alaska Airlines maintenance facility at SEATAC 
airport on the night of the accident.  The Safety Board did not take possession of the wreckage.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/04/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
27388 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1491 hours (Total, this make and model), 18068 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 222 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 69 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6SEA97FA202
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
McDonnell Douglas
Registration:
N951AS
Model/Series:
DC-9-82 (MD-82) DC-9-82 (M
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
49111
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
138
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/30/1997, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
149500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
45378 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
JT8D-217
Registered Owner:
INTEGRATED AIRCRAFT 
SERVICES
Rated Power:
20800 lbs
Operator:
ALASKA AIRLINES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
ASAA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
LOS ANGELES, CA (KLAX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 (KSEA)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1821 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class B
Airport Information
Airport:
SEATTLE-TACOMA INTL (KSEA)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
420 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
16L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
11900 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Page 6 of 6SEA97FA202
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
5 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
19 Minor, 92 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
19 Minor, 97 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
MICHAEL    L STOCKHILL
Adopted Date:
04/15/1999
Additional Participating Persons:
WILLIAM   WHITAKER; RENTON, WA
TERRY   CLARK; SEATTLE, WA
JOHN   BENTLEY; RENTON, WA
RONDA   RUDERMAN; SEATTLE, WA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
