National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Vega Baja, PR
Accident Number: ERA11LA230
Date & Time: 04/01/2011, 1635 AST
Registration: N98FR
Aircraft: CESSNA 172P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During cruise flight, about 1,000 feet above ground level, the engine lost power and began to vibrate.
The pilot was unable to maintain altitude, so he performed a forced landing to a nearby abandoned military airfield.
After touchdown, the airplane departed the end of the runway and collided with trees and bushes resulting in substantial damage to the airframe.
A postaccident examination of the engine revealed that the No.
2 cylinder exhaust valve failed, and the valve parts exited the engine through the exhaust system.
The operator reported that the exhaust valve had accumulated about 1,120 hours since installation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the No.
2 cylinder exhaust valve resulting in a loss of engine power.
Findings Aircraft Recip eng cyl section - Failure (Cause) Factual Information On April 1, 2011, about 1635 Atlantic Standard Time, a Cessna 172P, N98FR, experienced a loss of engine power and force landed on a closed, abandoned airfield near Vega Baja, Puerto Rico.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The airplane was registered to Flight World, Inc. and was operated by Isla Grande Flying School under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The private pilot and two passengers were not injured.
The flight originated from Borinquen, Puerto Rico (BQN) about 1600 and was destined for San Juan, Puerto Rico (SIG).
The pilot reported that the airplane was in cruise at 1,000 feet above ground level when the engine lost power and began to vibrate heavily and the altitude could not be maintained.
About 250 feet, he observed a runway at a closed, former military base and attempted a landing.
During the landing attempt, the airplane collided with trees and bushes.
Structural damage to the wings and fuselage resulted.
Initial examination of the engine by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the number 2 cylinder exhaust valve spring was loose.
The cylinder was subsequently examined and the exhaust valve, manufactured by Superior Air Parts, was found to have failed.
The operator reported that all of the exhaust valve parts, with the exception of the valve keepers and associated parts, exited the exhaust system.
The exhaust valve reportedly had accumulated about 1,120 hours since installation.
