Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Centerville, MO
Accident Number:
CEN10LA370
Date & Time:
07/02/2010, 1215 CDT 
Registration:
N5798P
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-24-250
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane sustained a loss of engine power in cruise flight at 6,000 feet mean sea level. The 
pilot observed the propeller RPMs increase and then noticed the engine was not producing full 
power. He selected both main fuel tanks and turned on the electric fuel pump. The airplane 
impacted a tree during the forced landing, resulting in substantial damage to the right wing. A 
postaccident examination of the wreckage, which included an engine operational test run, 
revealed no evidence of a mechanical malfunction. The recorded temperature, dew point, and 
calculated values aloft were plotted on an icing chart and their intersection fell in the ﬁserious 
icing (glide power)ﬂ range. The airplane Owner™s Handbook for emergency procedures during 
an engine failure indicated, in part, that the pilot should apply carburetor heat. The pilot 
reported that he did not use carburetor heat following the loss of engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to carburetor icing as a result of the pilot not using carburetor heat.
Findings
Personnel issues
Use of checklist - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Effect on equipment (Cause)
Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome
Page 2 of 5CEN10LA370
Factual Information
On July 2, 2010, about 1215 central daylight time, a Piper PA-24-250, N5798P, piloted by a 
private pilot, sustained substantial damage on impact with a tree during a forced landing near 
Centerville, Missouri, following a loss of engine power in cruise flight.  The personal flight was 
operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed in the area at the time of the accident.  The flight was on an activated instrument 
flight rules flight plan.  The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.  The flight originated 
from the Moraine Air Park, near Dayton, Ohio, about 1040 and was destined for the Branson 
Airport, near Springfield, Missouri.
The pilot reported that he was in cruise at 6,000 feet above mean sea level when he saw the 
propeller RPMs jump and then noticed the engine not producing full power.  He turned on 
both main fuel tanks and the electric fuel pump.  He advised the air traffic controller that he 
had a problem.  He indicated that the terrain was hilly and wooded.  He lined up for a forced 
landing on a road.  When he descended, he noted a bridge across the road.  He ﬁhoppedﬂ the 
airplane over a fence and landed in a pasture that contained low brush and a small tree.  The 
airplane™s right wing sustained substantial damage on impact with the tree.
The airplane was examined on-scene by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors.  No 
airframe anomalies were detected.  The airplane wreckage was recovered from the field and 
held for further examination by a FAA inspector.  The FAA inspector was able to get the engine 
to run during the examination.
At 1152, the recorded weather about 112 nautical miles and 260 degrees from the accident site 
at the Springfield-Branson National Airport (SGF), near Springfield, Missouri, was: Wind 120 
degrees at 7 knots; Sky condition clear; Temperature 26 degrees C; Dew point 14 degrees C; 
Altimeter 30.17 inches of mercury.
A -2 degrees C per 1,000 feet standard lapse rate to 6,000 feet above mean sea level in 
reference to SGF was applied to the recorded temperature and dew point.  The surface 
temperature and dew point values and the calculated aloft values were plotted on the icing 
chart listed in Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin CE-09-35.  Both their intersection 
fell in the ﬁserious icing (glide power)ﬂ range.
The airplane owner™s handbook emergency procedures, in part, indicated:
Engine Failure:
The most common cause of engine failure is mismanagement or
malfunction of the fuel system.  Therefore, the first step to take after
engine failure is to move the fuel selector valve to the tank not being
used.  This will often keep the engine running even if there is no
apparent reason for the engine to stop on the tank being used.
If changing to the opposite fuel tank does not restore the engine:
(1) Check fuel pressure and turn on electric fuel pump, if off.
(2) Push mixture control to full rich.
Page 3 of 5CEN10LA370
(3) Apply carburetor heat.
(4) Check ignition switch.
The pilot reported that he did not use carburetor heat following the loss of engine power and 
did not note the indications on the carburetor temperature gauge.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Other weather encounter
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/22/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/05/2008
Flight Time:
2002 hours (Total, all aircraft), 447 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N5798P
Model/Series:
PA-24-250 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
24-878
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/05/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4662 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-540-A1A5
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN10LA370
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SGF, 1268 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
112 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1152 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
260°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.17 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Dayton, OH (I73)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Branson, MO (BBG)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1040 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.433333, -90.950000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Edward F Malinowski
Adopted Date:
05/11/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven Long; Federal Aviation Administration; St Ann, MO
Publish Date:
05/11/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=76533
Page 5 of 5CEN10LA370
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
