Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Livermore, CA
Accident Number:
WPR15FA174
Date & Time:
06/01/2015, 2058 PDT 
Registration:
N1348C
Aircraft:
PIPER PA 22-135
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airline transport pilot departed on a local night flight. Shortly after takeoff, he reported a 
control difficulty to air traffic control tower personnel; he stated that he was going to make a 
circle, and troubleshoot the issue. There were no further transmissions from the pilot. A 
witness about 1/2 mile away from the airport said that the airplane caught his attention when 
he heard the engine cut out. He looked up, but couldn't see the airplane as it was dusk. He 
finally saw two outboard lights, one on each wing, and realized that the airplane was in a nose 
dive. According to the witness, it was not spinning, and the engine sounded like it was at full 
throttle. Radar data indicated that the airplane departed about on runway heading, and about 
2 minutes into the flight it began a 180° turn. The airplane lost about 1,100 ft of altitude in 18 
seconds during the turn. The radar track continued in a straight line until ground impact. 
Postaccident examination revealed no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation 
of the airframe or engine or would have caused a control difficulty.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of control for reasons that could not be determined, because examination of the airframe 
and engine revealed no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 6WPR15FA174
Factual Information
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Unknown or undetermined
On June 1, 2015, about 2058 Pacific daylight time, a Piper PA22-135, N1348C, collided with 
terrain while maneuvering near Livermore Municipal Airport, Livermore, California. The 
airline transport pilot sustained fatal injuries, and the airplane was destroyed. The pilot/owner 
was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 
91. The local personal flight departed Livermore at 2052. Night visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
Shortly after takeoff, the pilot reported a control difficulty to air traffic control tower 
personnel; he stated that he was going to make a circle, and troubleshoot the issue. There were 
no further transmissions from the pilot.
A witness about 1/2 mile away from the airport said that the airplane caught his attention when 
he heard the engine "cut out." He looked up, but couldn't see the airplane as it was dusk. He 
then heard the engine "revving to a higher rpm like a crop duster swooping down." He heard 
the engine sputter twice, and then increase rpm again. He finally saw two outboard lights, one 
on each wing, and realized that the airplane was in a nose dive. According to the witness, it was 
not spinning, and the engine sounded like it was at full throttle.
A plot of recorded radar data indicated that the airplane climbed about on the runway heading 
to a maximum mode C reported altitude of 3,100 ft mean sea level. About 2 minutes into the 
flight, the airplane made a 180° left turn, and lost 1,100 ft of altitude in 18 seconds. The radar 
track continued in a straight line until it ended; the total duration of the flight was 2 minutes 
48 seconds.
Page 3 of 6WPR15FA174
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial; 
Flight Engineer
Age:
75, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/06/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
26501 hours (Total, all aircraft)
The last flight recorded in the pilot's notebook was on February 6, 2015. The pages from the 
previous 2 years totaled over 49 hours with none listed in the accident make and model.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N1348C
Model/Series:
PA 22-135 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1953
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
22-1141
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/01/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3612 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
O-290-D2
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
135 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 6WPR15FA174
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dawn
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KLVK, 400 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
3 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2053 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 2200 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.03 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Livermore, CA (LVK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Livermore, CA (LVK)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2052 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Livermore (LVK)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
400 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
37.720833, -121.760000
A National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator and a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector examined the wreckage on site on June 2, 2015.
The first identified point of ground contact was a series of ground scars consistent with the left 
Page 5 of 6WPR15FA174
and right main landing gear, gear legs, engine, cowling, left and right wing lift struts, and 
wings. A propeller blade had separated about 6 inches from the hub along an angular plane. 
The rest of the propeller was in the principal impact crater; it was not charred. The main 
wreckage was burned, and was in the middle of a charred area. All of the airplane's fabric 
covering was consumed by fire.
The debris path was about 108 ft long, and oriented on a 318° magnetic heading. All major 
structural components of the airplane were located at the accident site.
Further examination of an aileron cable distortion by the NTSB Office of Research and 
Engineering Materials Laboratory determined that the cable distortion was a result of overload 
conditions. The postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any mechanical 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
Medical And Pathological Information
The Alameda County Coroner completed an autopsy on the pilot, and determined that the 
cause of death was blunt force trauma. The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory 
performed toxicological testing of specimens of the pilot, which were negative for volatiles and 
tested drugs. The laboratory did not perform tests for carbon monoxide or cyanide.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard D Plagens
Adopted Date:
07/20/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
David Jensen; Oakland; Oakland, CA
Charles Little; Piper Aircraft Inc; Vero Beach, FL
Mark Platt; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
07/20/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91284
Page 6 of 6WPR15FA174
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
