National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: INDIANAPOLIS, IN
Accident Number: CHI00LA002
Date & Time: 10/02/1999, 1040 EST
Registration: N602H
Aircraft: Enstrom EN-28
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said that prior to initiating the flight he conducted a 'run-up.'
He said, during the magneto check the engine ran rough and exceeded the normal magneto drop.
He said he continued to run the engine at high RPM and leaned the fuel mixture for a minute.
He said he then conducted another 'run-up' and the magneto drop was within specified limits..
He stated that during the initial climb the engine began to 'pop' and the rotor RPM was dropping.
He said he elected to attempt a turn to the heliport; however, due to the continued loss of power he elected to conduct an autorotational landing in a gravel construction area.
During the autorotational landing the helicopter landed hard and received substantial damage.
Subsequent to the accident an examination of the helicopter and engine was conducted.
The magneto and harness were examined and no discrepancies were found.
All the spark plugs were removed and examined.
The bottom spark plug from the #2 cylinder was oil fouled and did not test fire.
The top spark plug from the same cylinder (#2) fired with a weak and intermittent spark.
All the other spark plugs test fired.
No additional anomalies were found in the helicopter or engine.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's attempted operation of the helicopter with known deficiencies, and his improper autorotation to landing.
Factors were one fouled spark plug and another partially failed spark plug in the same cylinder, and the construction area.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) IGNITION SYSTEM,SPARK PLUG - FOULED 2.
(C) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) IGNITION SYSTEM,SPARK PLUG - FAILURE,PARTIAL ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - CONSTRUCTION AREA 5.
(C) AUTOROTATION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On October 2, 1999, at 1040 eastern standard time, an Enstrom EN-28, N602H, sustained substantial damage during an autorotational landing in a construction area, near the Downtown Indianapolis Heliport, in Indianapolis Indiana, following a partial loss of engine power.
The pilot and one passenger reported minor injuries.
The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.
No flight plan was on file.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot said that prior to initiating the flight he conducted a "run-up."
He said, during the magneto check the engine ran rough and exceeded the normal magneto drop.
He said he continued to run the engine at high RPM and leaned the fuel mixture for a minute.
He said he then conducted another "run-up" and the magneto drop was within specified limits..
He stated that during the initial climb the engine began to "pop" and the rotor RPM was dropping.
He said he elected to attempt a turn to the heliport; however, due to the continued loss of power he elected to conduct an autorotational landing in a gravel construction area.
During the autorotational landing the helicopter landed hard and received substantial damage.
Subsequent to the accident an examination of the helicopter and engine was conducted.
The flight and engine controls were found to work correctly and have continuity.
Both magnetos and harnesses were examined and no discrepancies were found.
All the spark plugs were removed and examined.
The bottom spark plug from the #2 cylinder was oil fouled and did not test fire.
The top spark plug from the same cylinder (#2) fired with a weak and intermittent spark.
All the other spark plugs test fired.
No additional anomalies were found in the helicopter or engine.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
