National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FAYETTEVILLE, AR
Accident Number: FTW00LA002
Date & Time: 10/01/1999, 1530 CDT
Registration: N2157S
Aircraft: Cessna 210L
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he was cleared to land.
He extended the landing gear on 1/2 mile final, and he 'heard the gear lock into position.'
He added that he then visually checked to see that the gear was extended and confirmed this by noting the illuminated green light in the cockpit.
Upon touchdown, a noise was heard, and the right main landing gear collapsed.
The airplane exited the runway surface and came to rest in a grassy area.
Examination of the landing gear system revealed that the right main gear down lock switch failed in the 'closed' or 'down locked' position.
Furthermore, 'dried paint stripper and paint' were observed around the plunger portion of the switch, which prevented the plunger from extending.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The cause of the right main gear collapse was undetermined.
A factor was the failure of the gear 'down & locked' switch resulting in a false 'down & locked' indication in the cockpit.
Findings Occurrence #1: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED 2.
(F) LANDING GEAR,GEAR SWITCH - FAILURE 3.
LANDING GEAR,GEAR INDICATING SYSTEM - FAILURE Factual Information On October 1, 1999, at 1530 central daylight time, a Cessna 210L airplane, N2157S, was substantially damaged when the right main gear collapsed upon landing at the Northwest Arkansas Regional Airport, near Fayetteville, Arkansas.
The non-instrument rated private pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight and a flight plan was not filed.
The cross-country flight originated from the Sally Wofford Airport, Weiner, Arkansas, at 1300.
According to the pilot, when the airplane was 5 miles from the destination airport in Fayetteville, he was cleared to land on runway 16.
He extended the landing gear while on a 1/2 mile final.
He "heard the gear lock into position," and then visually confirmed that the landing gear had extended.
Furthermore, the green light in the cockpit illuminated, confirming that the gear was extended.
Upon touchdown, a noise was heard, and the passenger stated, "I think we had a blowout."
The right wing tip contacted the pavement, and the airplane exited the runway surface to the right of the runway centerline.
The airplane came to rest upright in a grassy area adjacent to the runway.
Examination of the airplane, by an FAA certified mechanic revealed that the right horizontal stabilizer and elevator were "severely bent in an upward direction."
The outboard leading edge skin and two nose ribs of the right wing were structurally damaged.
Additionally, the tail tie down ring and two antennas mounted on the belly were damaged.
The mechanic stated that the right main gear down lock switch (Cessna part number S1377-1) failed in the "closed" or "down locked" position.
"Dried paint stripper and paint" were observed around the plunger portion of the switch, which prevented the plunger from extending.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
