National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GALLUP, NM
Accident Number: DEN00LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/1999, 0645 MDT
Registration: N716JB
Aircraft: GRAY ROTORWAY EXEC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilot remained in the traffic pattern to practice touch and go landings.
At approximately the point where the helicopter would turn onto the base leg, rotor rpm began to decay (95%).
The pilot turned towards the runway and began autorotation.
During the descent, the pilot managed to avoid houses and powerlines.
The helicopter struck the ground tail first, then rolled over on its left side.
The engine was later functionally tested and, despite impact damage to the crankshaft, operated normally.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot inadvertently allowing main rotor rpm to decay while avoiding obstacles during an emergency autorotation following a loss of power for reasons undetermined.
Factors were houses and powerlines.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - BASE TURN Findings 1.
AUTOROTATION - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY Findings 3.
OBJECT - RESIDENCE 4.
ROTOR RPM - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
The solo student pilot was seriously injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the instructional flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated at Gallup, New Mexico, approximately 0630.
In his accident report, the pilot said he intended on remaining in the traffic pattern to practice touch and go landings.
He had purposely planned the early morning flight because the "wind is usually calm and density altitude is lowest, giving the helicopter best performance capabilities."
The flight was uneventful until the helicopter reached the point where the pilot would turn from downwind to base leg, and he noticed the "rotor rpm was low (95%)."
He turned the helicopter towards the runway and "lowered collective [to] stabilize rotor rpm."
At this point, "the engine failed."
He "lowered collective [control] all the way down, [pushed] the cyclic [control] forward, and began autorotation."
The helicopter descended toward houses, so he "extended [the descent path] by pulling collective."
Rotor rpm fell to 80%.
The pilot headed towards a small open field but as he descended to 100 feet agl (above ground level), he noticed powerlines ahead.
He did a "second extension," and power dropped to 60%.
Approximately 30 feet agl, he pulled the nose up and added full up collective to arrest the descent.
The helicopter struck the ground tail first, then rolled over on its left side.
In December 1999, the engine was functionally tested at the facilities of Rotorway in Chandler, Arizona.
Despite impact damage to the crankshaft, the engine operated normally.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
