National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LAS CRUCES, NM
Accident Number: DEN00LA003
Date & Time: 10/02/1999, 0750 MDT
Registration: N2493M
Aircraft: Piper PA-12
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said that while on final approach to runway 26, engine power remained too high even though the throttle had been completely retarded.
On the second approach, engine power was still too high even with the throttle closed.
He initiated a second go around and when the airplane was 50 feet above the ground, the mixture control was slowly moved towards idle cutoff 'to decrease power.'
The airplane touched down at high speed.
Directional control was lost when the pilot became distracted, and the airplane ground looped to the right.
The left wing buckled when it struck the runway, and the side loads tore off the left main landing gear and damaged the right main landing gear.
It was later discovered that the clamp securing the throttle sleeve to the throttle housing had come loose, allowing the sleeve (not the cable) to move when the throttle control was operated.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadvertent ground loop/swerve during landing.
A factor was his attention being diverted by a malfunctioning throttle control.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
THROTTLE/POWER CONTROL - NOT AVAILABLE 4.
(F) THROTTLE/POWER LEVER,LINKAGE - LOOSE PART/BOLT/NUT/CLAMP/ETC ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - RUNWAY Factual Information On October 2, 1999, approximately 0750 mountain daylight time, a Piper PA-12, N2493M, registered to and operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged when it veered off the side of the runway while landing at Las Cruces International Airport, Las Cruces, New Mexico.
The private pilot and his private pilot certificated passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated at El Paso, Texas, approximately 0730.
The pilot said that while on final approach to runway 26, he noticed that engine power remained too high even though the throttle had been retarded completely.
He made a go around.
On the second approach to the same runway, he noticed engine power was still too high with the throttle closed.
He initiated a second go around and when the airplane was 50 feet above the ground, he slowly moved the mixture control towards idle cutoff "to decrease power."
The airplane touched down at high speed and, according to the pilot, directional control was lost when he became distracted, and the airplane ground looped to the right.
The left wing buckled when it struck the runway, and the side loads tore off the left main landing gear and damaged the right main landing gear.
The pilot later reported the clamp that secures the throttle sleeve to the throttle housing had come loose, allowing the sleeve (not the cable) to move when the throttle control was operated.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
