Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Telluride, CO
Accident Number:
DCA13FA148
Date & Time:
09/01/2013, 1310 MDT 
Registration:
N169GL
Aircraft:
BEECH 1900D
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing gear collapse
Injuries:
12 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
During approach to landing the crew selected landing gear down and observed a problem with 
the left main landing gear (MLG). The landing gear hydraulic motor pump automatically shut 
down when the landing gear was not locked down after 16 seconds and an internal mechanical 
lock intended to hold the landing gear actuator in the selected position, did not engage.
The crew carried out the abnormal procedures checklist and attempted to extend the left MLG 
using the manual landing gear extension procedures, but was unsuccessful. The crew then 
prepared for landing in accordance with the procedures contained in the quick reference 
handbook for landing with main gear up or unsafe.
As the airplane slowed through about 80 knots on the landing roll, the left main landing gear 
collapsed.
Post-accident inspection indicated hydraulic fluid had leaked from a hole, which was normally 
plugged with a Lee plug, on the left main actuator between the primary and secondary extend 
ports. The Lee plug was missing and was not found. Examination of the actuator and of the 
hydraulic fluid quantity remaining indicated the Lee plug was in place during the in-flight 
attempts to extend the landing gear.
The airplane landed with the gear not locked down and as the landing gear collapsed, the 
piston in the actuator forced hydraulic fluid back through the system increasing the landing 
gear actuator internal hydraulic pressure sufficiently to force the Lee plug out of position. The 
remaining fluid in the actuator leaked out of the hole until system pressure decreased to 
ambient pressure.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Failure of the left main landing gear actuator internal lock to engage in the locked position for 
undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 10DCA13FA148
Findings
Aircraft
Landing gear actuator - Malfunction (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 10DCA13FA148
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 2013, at about 1310 mountain daylight time (MDT), Great Lakes Airlines 
flight 7125, a Beechcraft 1900D, N169GL, suffered a left main landing gear collapse during 
landing on runway 27 at Telluride Regional Airport (TEX), Telluride, Colorado. The two flight 
crew members and 10 passengers were not injured and the airplane sustained substantial 
damage. The scheduled passenger flight was operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulation 
Part 121 and originated from Denver International Airport (DEN), Denver, Colorado.
The first officer was the pilot flying and the captain was the pilot monitoring. Takeoff, climb, 
and cruise were normal.
At 1231, the crew selected landing gear down and observed a problem with the left main 
landing gear. The captain began the "Failure of Landing Gear to Extend Normally" checklist 
and noted that both green left landing gear down and locked lights were not illuminated and 
the landing gear circuit breaker had tripped.
At 1240, the captain began the "Landing Gear Manual Extension" checklist and advised 
maintenance control via radio through Telluride operations that there was no green left gear 
down and locked indication, the red in transit light was illuminated, and the circuit breaker 
had tripped. Telluride operations relayed a message from company dispatch asking if the crew 
could consider diverting to Farmington, NM (FMN) for landing. After discussing fuel burn, 
safety concerns, and the Airport Rescue and Fire Fighting (ARFF) capabilities at Telluride, the 
crew decided landing at Telluride was the best option and advised operations accordingly.
At 1247, the captain attempted to pump the landing gear down in accordance with the checklist 
and reported to the first officer that the landing gear extension handle would not move.
At 1250, the captain began the "Gear Up Landing" checklist and then proceeded with the 
"Planned Emergency Preparation" checklist. He contacted Telluride Unicom to request ARFF 
services and briefed passengers regarding the situation.
At 1259, the captain began the "Landing with One Main Up or Unsafe" checklist and after 
preparing for landing, the crew conducted the approach and landing on runway 27. During the 
landing roll, as the airplane slowed through about 80 knots, the left main landing gear 
collapsed. The airplane stopped on runway 27 at 1309 and the crew initiated an evacuation.
 
INJURIES TO PERSONS
There were no injuries to the 10 passengers or 2 crewmembers on board.
 
DAMAGE TO AIRCRAFT
The airplane received substantial damage, coming to rest on the nose landing gear, the right 
main landing gear, and the left wingtip. The left wingtip lower skin suffered abrasion damage, 
the left inboard flap was deformed and wrinkled and the trailing edge and aft nacelle were 
abraded where they contacted the ground. The left outboard flap was deformed and wrinkled 
and the trailing edge was abraded. The left aileron had abrasion damage to the outboard 2 feet 
Page 4 of 10DCA13FA148
of trailing edge and lower trailing edge skin. The left ventral strake was damaged along its 
lower edge where it contacted the ground. The left engine inboard machined mount fitting was 
fractured and portions were separated. The firewall was deformed and bent. The left engine 
and propeller were also damaged.
 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The flight crew consisted of two pilots and the accident occurred on their first flight of the day.
The captain, age 32, reported 5,800 hours total flight time, including 4,700 hours as pilot in 
command and 3,000 hours in the BE-1900 at the time of the accident. The captain held a valid 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Airline Transport Pilot (ATP) certificate with type 
ratings for EMB-120 and BE-1900, and a current FAA first-class medical certificate with a 
limitation requiring that he must wear corrective lenses.
The first officer, age 30, reported 2,576 hours total flight time, including 1,350 hours pilot-in-
command, and 1,350 hours in the BE-1900 at the time of the accident.  He held a valid FAA 
ATP certificate with a type rating for the BE-1900 and a current FAA first-class medical 
certificate with no limitations or waivers.
 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N169GL, manufacturer serial number UE-169, was a Beech 1900D equipped with two Pratt 
and Whitney PT6A-65B turbo-prop engines.  The company reported that the airplane had 
logged 35,184 hours total time on the airframe at the time of the accident.  Recorded data and 
airline records indicated no open maintenance items with the airplane.
Landing Gear System
The airplane is equipped with a retractable tricycle landing gear system. Extension and 
retraction of the nose landing gear (NLG) and the two main landing gear (MLG) is 
accomplished by the action of individual hydraulic actuators installed on each landing gear 
assembly. The MLG actuators retract for gear extension and extend for gear retraction while 
the NLG actuator extends for gear extension and retracts for gear retraction. Hydraulic 
pressure for the system is supplied by a hydraulic power pack located in the left wing leading 
edge inboard of the engine nacelle.
The hydraulic system has a nominal operating pressure of 3,000 psi and includes a system 
relief valve that will open automatically to prevent over pressurization and damage.
Landing Gear Controls and Indications
The landing gear control selector handle was located on the captain's side of the cockpit on the 
lower right subpanel and included two positions: UP and DOWN.  The control handle must be 
pulled out of a detent before it can be selected either UP or DOWN. When the handle is placed 
in either the UP or DOWN position, a hydraulic pump motor is activated and a solenoid allows 
hydraulic fluid to flow to the appropriate side of the actuators. When the landing gear are fully 
extended, an internal mechanical lock in each actuator holds the landing gear in the down 
position, and activates a switch that removes power from the hydraulic pump.
Landing gear position indication is provided by six green lights; two for each of the nose and 
Page 5 of 10DCA13FA148
the left and right main gear, on the subpanel adjacent to the landing gear control selector 
handle. The two green lights for the left main landing gear are labeled "L" and "H". Two red in 
transit lights are provided on the landing gear control selector handle which illuminate when 
the landing gear control has been selected and any of the landing gear are not either fully 
extended or fully retracted.
A landing gear relay circuit breaker is located on the pilot's right sub panel to protect the 
system from electrical overload. The relay circuit breaker will trip open if the landing gear does 
not reach the down and locked position after the hydraulic pump motor has run continuously 
for about 16 seconds.
Manual Landing Gear Extension
An alternate landing gear extension handle is located on the floor on the pilot's side of the 
flight deck. To engage the manual extension system, the landing gear control lever must be in 
the down position, the landing gear relay circuit must be pulled and the handle is then pumped 
until the green gear down annunciators are illuminated.
Maintenance History
Review of maintenance records indicated the left main landing gear actuator was purchased by 
Great Lakes Airlines and sent for overhaul in August 2011. At that time, a component upgrade 
included replacement of the end cap and Lee plug in addition to the standard overhaul parts. 
The actuator was received from the overhaul facility in September 2011 and installed on the 
accident airplane in March 2012.
Since the installation of the left main gear actuator, landing gear problems were noted in the 
airplane logbook in June 2012, September 2012, and July 2013. The most recent maintenance 
issues documented in July 2013 included three separate instances in which the landing gear 
would not retract when commanded. These discrepancies were corrected by performing 
maintenance on the landing gear safety switches.
Flight Crew Procedures
The Quick Reference Handbook (QRH) includes the following abnormal procedures; Failure Of 
The Landing Gear To Extend Normally, Landing Gear Manual Extension, Landing With One 
Main Up Or Unsafe and, Planned Emergency Preparation. These procedures include guidance 
to pull the landing gear relay circuit breaker, the landing gear warning horn circuit breaker, 
and the TAWS (Terrain Awareness Warning System) circuit breaker. The Landing With One 
Main Up Or Unsafe procedure includes a step directing the landing gear alternate extension 
handle should be pumped "–until maximum resistance is felt.  Do not stow".
 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The Telluride 
Airport surface observation at 1255 MDT, the most recent observation at the time of landing, 
reported wind from 260 degrees at 9 knots gusting to 16 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, 6,500 
feet  broken, 11,000 feet overcast, temperature 20 degrees Celsius, dew point temperature 8 
degrees Celsius, and altimeter 30.43 inches mercury.
 
Page 6 of 10DCA13FA148
AERODROME INFORMATION
The Telluride Regional Airport (TEX) is located about 5 miles west of the city of Telluride, CO.  
The airport has 2 runways for commercial and general aviation.  Runway 27 is asphalt, 7,111 
feet long, 100 feet wide with a touchdown zone elevation of 9,070 feet above mean sea level. 
The runway is served by a precision approach path indicator system (PAPI) with a 4 degree 
glide path on the left side of the runway.
 
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The cockpit voice recorder (CVR), an L-3/Fairchild model FA2100-1020, serial number 
000694648, was removed from the airplane and downloaded at the NTSB Vehicle Recorder 
Laboratory.  The cockpit voice recorder contained 2 hours, 4 minutes of recording on 4 audio 
channels.  The audio quality of the channels containing information from the captain's and first 
officer's audio panels, and public address system were each characterized as excellent, and the 
audio quality of the channel containing information from the cockpit area microphone was 
characterized as fair. The recording included events from the entire flight beginning with 
ground operations prior to departure from DEN.  Timing on the transcript was established by 
adjusting CVR elapsed time to align with the reported time the aircraft came to a stop on the 
runway.
The FDR, a Loral/Fairchild F1000, S703-1000-00 64 wps, serial number 01318, was removed 
from the airplane and downloaded at the NTSB Vehicle Recorder Laboratory.  The recorder 
was in good condition and contained approximately 98 hours of data which was extracted 
normally.  The pitch parameter evaluated during this investigation was out of calibration and 
not in accordance with FDR carriage requirements. Correlation of the FDR data to event local 
time, Mountain Daylight Time, was established by aligning common events observed on the 
CVR.
 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The airplane was lifted, the left main landing gear was pulled to the extended position, and the 
airplane was towed to a hangar for examination. Initial inspection of the flight deck indicated 
the LANDING GEAR RELAY, the LANDING GEAR WARNING HORN, the TAWS, the CKPT 
VOICE RCDR, and the 26VAC FLT DATA RCDR circuit breakers were popped out. The landing 
gear selector lever was in the DOWN position and the alternate landing gear extension handle 
was not stowed.
Initial inspection of the left main landing gear indicated hydraulic fluid was present on the 
actuator and strut. The hydraulic reservoir quantity was between the cold and warm fill levels 
on the dipstick. The hydraulic system was pressurized and fluid was found to be exiting a hole 
on the left main actuator between the primary and secondary extend ports.
According to the manufacturer, the hole between the extend ports was a design feature that 
facilitated the manufacturing of the end cap and was supposed to be plugged with a Lee plug 
during the manufacturing process. There was damage to the outboard section of the hole. The 
Lee plug was missing and was not found.
The actuator end cap was removed for inspection and disassembled. There was no damage 
Page 7 of 10DCA13FA148
found to the end cap or actuator. A new end cap was built and installed for functional testing of 
the actuator. No anomalies were noted during functional testing.
Disassembly and inspection of the actuator indicated signs of normal wear on internal 
components. Dimensional analysis of the actuator's internal components indicated some 
measurements were outside of manufacturer drawing specifications. The actuator lock spring 
length, the slide length, the piston length, the outside diameter of the piston, and the inside 
diameter of the end cap and cup were found to exceed drawing requirement tolerances.
Analysis of the hydraulic fluid indicated the fluid was rated at NAS Class 12 due to a high 
particle count in the 5-15 micron size range. Beech has not set an in-service limit for hydraulic 
fluid cleanliness on the 1900 series airplanes.
ORGANIZATIONAL INFO
Great Lakes Airlines is certificated as a 14 CFR Part 121 air carrier and operates as an 
independent carrier and as a code share partner under agreements with multiple airlines. As of 
September 30, 2013, the company had 651 full-time and 328 part-time employees and 
operated a fleet of 6 Embraer EMB-120 aircraft and 28 Beechcraft 1900D aircraft out of four 
hubs located at Denver, CO, Los Angeles, CA, Minneapolis, MN, and Phoenix, AZ, serving 45 
airports in 13 states. 
The accident airplane was owned by Great Lakes Aviation Ltd., and operated by Great Lakes 
Airlines for common carrier passenger operations.
History of Flight
Landing-landing roll
Landing gear collapse (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
32
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/01/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/15/2013
Flight Time:
5800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3000 hours (Total, this make and model), 4700 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Page 8 of 10DCA13FA148
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
30
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/05/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/23/2013
Flight Time:
2576 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1350 hours (Total, this make and model), 1011 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 261 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 99 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N169GL
Model/Series:
1900D 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
UE-169
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
19
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/2013, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
17120 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
35184 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A SER
Registered Owner:
GREAT LAKES AVIATION LTD
Rated Power:
750 hp
Operator:
GREAT LAKES AVIATION LTD
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
GLBA
Page 9 of 10DCA13FA148
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KTEX, 9078 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1315 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
125°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 7500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 10000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
90°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.43 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
DENVER, CO (DEN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Telluride, CO (TEX)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1140 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
TELLURIDE RGNL (TEX)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
9070 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
7111 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
10 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
12 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.953056, -107.905556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
David Helson
Adopted Date:
09/02/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Hendrickson; Federal Aviation Administration
Mike Gibbons; Hawker Beechcraft
Scott Lewis; Great Lakes Airlines
Publish Date:
09/02/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=87932
Page 10 of 10DCA13FA148
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
