Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Hardwick, VT
Accident Number:
ERA13LA397
Date & Time:
09/01/2013, 1030 EDT 
Registration:
N31915
Aircraft:
AERONCA 65CA
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that a preflight inspection and engine run-up revealed no anomalies. Shortly 
after the airplane lifted off the runway, the engine began ﬁmisfiringﬂ and then experienced a 
total loss of power. The pilot maneuvered the airplane straight ahead, and it subsequently 
impacted a tree, which resulted in substantial damage to the forward fuselage, engine firewall, 
and left wing. Although the pilot and passenger were both seriously injured during the 
accident, both of their seat belts remained intact and firmly anchored to their respective seats; 
the belts™ latching mechanisms operated normally.
The engine sustained extensive impact damage, and the crankshaft could not be rotated by 
hand during postaccident examination. Several of the spark plugs were loose and could be 
removed by hand; it could not be determined whether the spark plugs had been improperly 
installed during the airplane™s most recent inspection or sometime thereafter. In addition, the 
spark plugs exhibited black sooty deposits, which is indicative of the engine operating with an 
excessively rich fuel/air mixture. Examination of the carburetor revealed that the float needle 
would not seat properly and that the float level specified by the manufacturer could not be 
maintained; these conditions would be expected to result in an excessively rich fuel/air mixture 
at high engine power settings. Therefore, based on the evidence, it is likely that the engine was 
operating with an excessively rich fuel/air mixture, which resulted in the carburetor flooding 
and the subsequent loss of engine power. Although the engine maintenance logbooks 
documented that an overhauled carburetor had recently been installed on the airplane and that 
a subsequent test run was successfully performed, they did not document when or by whom the 
carburetor overhaul was performed. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The improper maintenance of the carburetor, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due 
to carburetor flooding. 
Page 2 of 6ERA13LA397
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel control/carburetor - Malfunction (Cause)
Fuel control/carburetor - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Repair - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Aircraft/maintenance logs - Pilot
Environmental issues
Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome
Page 3 of 6ERA13LA397
Factual Information
On September 1, 2013, approximately 1030 eastern daylight time, an Aeronca 65CA, N31915, 
was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power after 
takeoff from a private airfield in Hardwick, Vermont. The certificated private pilot and 
passenger were seriously injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight 
plan was filed for the flight. The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
The pilot reported that a preflight inspection revealed no anomalies of the airplane. The 
airplane's fuel tank contained 6.5 gallons of fuel, and a fuel sample exhibited no contaminants. 
The pilot started the engine and observed no abnormal indications on the engine gauges. A 
subsequent engine run-up check also revealed no anomalies, and the pilot initiated the takeoff 
roll from the turf runway utilizing a short-field takeoff procedure. Shortly after the airplane 
lifted off the runway, the engine began "misfiring" and experienced a total loss of power. The 
pilot maneuvered the airplane straight ahead, and it subsequently impacted the base of a large 
tree, resulting in substantial damage to the forward fuselage, engine firewall, and left wing. 
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land. His most 
recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third-class medical certificate was issued August 
2, 2013. The pilot reported 92.5 total hours of flight experience, of which 46.8 hours were in 
the accident airplane make and model. 
The tailwheel-equipped airplane was manufactured in 1941, and was purchased by the pilot in 
September 2008. The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on May 6, 2013 
at a total airframe time of 1533.56 hours and a total tachometer time of 215.36 hours. Review of 
maintenance logs showed that an overhauled carburetor, new mixture control cable, and new 
carburetor heat control cable were installed in the airplane on June 22, 2013, and a subsequent 
test run of the engine was performed with no anomalies noted. There was no documentation 
regarding when or by whom the carburetor overhaul was performed. At the time of the 
accident, the airplane had accumulated approximately 7.5 hours since its most recent annual 
inspection.
The 1054 weather observation at Morrisville-Stowe State Airport (MVL), Morrisville, Vermont, 
located about 13 nautical miles west of the accident site, included variable wind at 3 knots, 10 
statute miles visibility, clear skies, temperature 25 degrees, dew point 17 degrees, and an 
altimeter setting of 29.90 inches of mercury. 
Postaccident examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that the airplane 
impacted an approximate 3-foot diameter tree. An odor of fuel was present at the site. 
Continuity of the flight controls from the cockpit area to all control surfaces was confirmed. As 
a result of contact with the tree, the engine was significantly damaged, and the crankshaft 
could not be rotated by hand. Visual inspection of the cylinders revealed no anomalies. Both 
magnetos were removed, and rotation of their respective input drives produced spark at all 
terminal leads. The spark plugs were removed and exhibited black sooty deposits. Several of 
the spark plugs were loose and able to be removed by hand. The carburetor filter was removed, 
and was absent of debris. The front/pilot seat assembly separated from the airframe during 
impact, but the pilot and passenger seatbelt webbing remained intact, and both belts remained 
attached to their respective seat anchor points. Each of the belts' latching mechanisms 
operated normally. 
Page 4 of 6ERA13LA397
The carburetor was removed from the engine, disassembled, and examined in detail. When 
vacuum was applied to the fuel inlet fitting, the float needle was observed to seat improperly, 
and the manufacturer's specified float level of 13/32" could not be maintained. Application of a 
½ psi fuel pressure resulted in the carburetor bowl being filled, and the needle/float being 
unable to prevent an excessively rich mixture condition. The float was within the 
manufacturer's weight specification, and when immersed in water heated to 212 degrees F, 
revealed no evidence of leaks. The main jet, air bleed, and idle air tube orifices were absent of 
any obstructions and met the manufacturer's dimensional specifications. 
The airplane was subject to FAA Airworthiness Directive (AD) 47-30-08, which required 
modification of the seat belt anchorage to prevent failure during a crash landing. Review of 
FAA airworthiness records revealed an Application for Airworthiness Certificate dated 
September 13, 1948, stating that the airplane conformed to all applicable airworthiness 
directives, including AD 47-30-08. Review of maintenance logs also revealed an entry dated 
April 23, 2009 which stated, "[complied with] AD 47-30-08 by welding seat as per AD seat 
mod." Examination of the accident airplane revealed "L"-shaped gussets welded onto the 
corners of the fore and aft seat tube support structure in accordance with the modification 
described by the AD.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
59
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/23/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/02/2013
Flight Time:
92.5 hours (Total, all aircraft), 46.8 hours (Total, this make and model), 92.5 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 15.5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA13LA397
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AERONCA
Registration:
N31915
Model/Series:
65CA 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
CA-11931
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/06/2013, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1534 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
A&C65 SERIES
Registered Owner:
RING DAVID M
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
RING DAVID M
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MVL, 732 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1054 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
295°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.9 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hardwick, VT (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Morrisville, VT (KMVL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1030 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Private Strip (NONE)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
250 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6ERA13LA397
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
44.530000, -72.300000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Allison N Diaz
Adopted Date:
03/17/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
John Keefe; FAA/FSDO; Portland, ME
Publish Date:
03/17/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=87977
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
