National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Tuttle, OK
Accident Number: FTW01LA074
Date & Time: 03/02/2001, 1545 CST
Registration: N4721K
Aircraft: Cessna 182P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that prior to takeoff, both fuel tanks were topped off.
While enroute to the intended destination, the engine RPM began to decrease, and subsequently, the engine lost total power.
During the forced landing, the nose landing gear contacted a drainage terrace, and the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.
The airplane was turned upright, the right fuel tank was found empty, and left fuel tank contained residual fuel.
The right fuel cap was found unlocked and hanging out of the fuel cell by its retaining chain.
The pilot stated that some of the fuel may have been syphoned out of the fuel tank due to a loose fuel cap.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: fuel exhaustion due to a loose fuel cap as a result of the pilot's inadequate preflight.
A contributory factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(F) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) FUEL SYSTEM,CAP - NOT SECURED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DIRT BANK/RISING EMBANKMENT 5.
The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
The airplane was registered to and operated by Kremmling Flying, Inc., of Kremmling, Colorado.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a visual flight rules flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The airplane departed Kremmling, Colorado, at 1045 mountain standard time, and was destined for the University of Oklahoma Westheimer Airport near Norman, Oklahoma.
The pilot stated that prior to takeoff, both fuel tanks were topped off.
Approximately 15 miles from the intended destination, at 3,500 feet msl, the engine RPM began to decrease.
The pilot pulled the carburetor heat ON, and the "RPMs picked back up."
Approximately 10 seconds later, the engine RPM started to decrease again.
The pilot adjusted the mixture control, applied full propeller RPM, and repositioned the fuel selector, in an attempt to regain engine power; however, no change in engine power was noted.
The pilot contacted the Westheimer control tower and declared an emergency.
With the propeller windmilling, the pilot executed a forced landing to a field.
During the touchdown, the nose landing gear contacted a "drainage terrace," and the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.
According to an FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, after the airplane was turned upright, the right fuel tank was found empty, and the left fuel tank contained residual fuel.
The right fuel cap was found unlocked and hanging out of the fuel cell by its retaining chain.
The pilot reported that the airplane was equipped with long-range 88-gallon capacity fuel tanks and had an endurance of approximately 6 hours and 45 minutes of flight time.
The pilot stated that some of the fuel may have been syphoned out of the fuel tank due to a loose fuel cap.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 66, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2950 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 48.1 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3350.9 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, activated, aided in locating accident Engine Model/Series: O-470-S Registered Owner: Kremmling Flying Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
