National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Jackson, WY
Accident Number: DEN01LA060
Date & Time: 03/02/2001, 1200 MST
Registration: N9HE
Aircraft: Bell 407
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The pilot of the helicopter was looking for a group of people to be picked up at a designated point.
Flying over the location, he realized that they had not yet arrived, so he decided to land at an alternate location and await their arrival.
He had landed at the alternate location previously but not on the day of the accident.
He said the visibility was good, but there were no shadows due to the overcast.
The approach was normal, and the pilot used a small pine tree to the right front quarter of the helicopter as a reference point.
As the helicopter touched down, the pilot heard a loud noise and the helicopter yawed.
Believing there had been a mechanical failure, the pilot lowered the collective control and closed the throttle.
Postaccident inspection revealed there had not been a mechanical failure.
Rather, the pilot had not seen the snow covered slope to the left front quarter of the helicopter.
The main rotor blades struck the surface of the ground and the helicopter settled into deep snow.
The transmission separated from its mounts, the main rotor blades were destroyed, and the tail boom was severed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain adequate lateral and vertical clearance during landing.
Factors were the clouds and snow-covered high terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH TERRAIN 2.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CLOUDS Factual Information On March 2, 2001, at approximately 1200 mountain standard time, N9HE, a Bell 407, owned and operated by Helicopter Express, Inc., of Lawrenceville, Georgia, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain while landing about 22 miles southwest of Jackson, Wyoming.
The commercial certificated pilot, the sole occupant aboard, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the positioning flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated approximately 1020.
According to the pilot's accident report, the pilot was looking for a group of people to be picked up at a designated point.
Flying over the location, he realized that they had not yet arrived, so he decided to land at an alternate location and await their arrival.
He had landed at the alternate location previously but not on the day of the accident.
He said the visibility was good, but there were no shadows due to the overcast.
The approach was normal, and the pilot used a small pine tree to the right front quarter of the helicopter as a reference point.
As the helicopter touched down, the pilot heard a loud noise and the helicopter yawed.
Believing there had been a mechanical failure, the pilot lowered the collective control and closed the throttle.
Postaccident inspection revealed that the main rotor blades struck a snow covered slope to the left front quarter of the helicopter, and the helicopter settled into deep snow.
The transmission separated from its mounts, the main rotor blades were destroyed, and the tail boom was severed.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Helicopter Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 5250 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 17 Hours Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft Airframe Total Time: 1950 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Rolls-Royce Allison ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: C250-C47B Registered Owner: Helicopter Express, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
