National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Canadian, TX
Accident Number: FTW01LA073
Date & Time: 03/02/2001, 1500 CST
Registration: N8356F
Aircraft: Hughes 369D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot made an approach to a high hover due to the rough/uneven terrain.
As the pilot was hovering the helicopter to a level area at 40 feet agl, the helicopter began to yaw to the right.
The pilot stated that he hover taxied through his "rotor wash," and the helicopter encountered "loss of tail rotor effectiveness."
The pilot increased collective in an attempt to takeoff, and the helicopter made "two quick revolutions."
The pilot stated that he elected to land the helicopter instead of continuing with the takeoff due to power lines and rising terrain.
The pilot initiated an autorotation, and the helicopter touched down on the soft ground while still rotating, collapsing the left landing skid.
Subsequently, the tail rotor and main rotor blades struck the ground.
The helicopter came to rest leaning toward its left side.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the helicopter's encounter with loss of tail rotor effectiveness while hovering out-of-ground effect, and the pilot's failure to maintain control.
A contributing factor was the soft terrain condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: HOVER - OUT OF GROUND EFFECT Findings 1.
(C) LOSS OF TAIL ROTOR EFFECTIVENESS - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
AUTOROTATION - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT Factual Information On March 2, 2001, at 1500 central standard time, a Hughes 369D helicopter, N8356F, was substantially damaged following a loss of directional control while landing near Canadian, Texas.
The helicopter was owned and operated by a private individual.
The airline transport pilot and both passengers were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 business flight.
The flight had originated from a private helipad near Amarillo, Texas, approximately 1415.
According to the pilot, he made an approach to a high hover due to the rough/uneven terrain.
As he was hovering the helicopter at 40 feet agl to a level area, the helicopter began to yaw to the right.
The pilot stated that he hover taxied through his "rotor wash," and the helicopter encountered "loss of tail rotor effectiveness."
He increased collective in an attempt to takeoff, and the helicopter made "two quick revolutions."
The pilot stated that he elected to land the helicopter instead of continuing with the takeoff due to power lines and rising terrain.
The pilot initiated an autorotation, and the helicopter touched down on the soft ground while still rotating, collapsing the left landing skid.
Subsequently, the tail rotor and main rotor blades struck the ground.
The helicopter came to rest leaning toward its left side.
Examination of the helicopter by the FAA inspector revealed that the tail rotor drive shaft was twisted and separated about 6 inches forward of the tail rotor gearbox.
The tailboom was bent and one tail rotor blade was found separated.
Control continuity was confirmed from the anti- torque pedals to the tail rotor pitch change links.
All five main rotor blades were damaged.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Commercial Age: 50, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
