National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Logan, UT
Accident Number: DEN01LA061
Date & Time: 03/03/2001, 1245 MST
Registration: N152RC
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis This was the student pilot's first solo flight.
The first two landings on runway 35 had been accomplished without incident.
The approach for a third landing had to be abandoned because there was an airplane still on the runway.
The next approach resulted in a normal landing but during the rollout, the airplane raised up on its left main landing wheel.
"I couldn't control the plane," the pilot wrote.
The airplane veered "very hard" to the left into a snow bank.
Winds recorded 6 minutes after the accident were from 240 degrees at 6 knots.
This would present the pilot with slightly less than a 6 knot left crosswind component and a 2 knot tailwind component.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOWBANK Factual Information On March 3, 2001, approximately 1245 mountain standard time, N152RC, a Cessna 152, owned and operated by Utah State University, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain during landing on runway 30 at Logan-Cache Airport, Logan, Utah.
The student pilot, the only occupant aboard, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the instructional flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated at Logan at 1230.
This was the student pilot's first solo flight.
He said that the first two landings had been accomplished without incident.
His approach for the third landing was abandoned because there was an airplane still on the runway.
The next approach resulted in a normal landing but during the rollout, the airplane raised up on its left main landing wheel.
"I couldn't control the plane," the pilot wrote.
The airplane veered "very hard" to the left into a snow bank.
Winds recorded 6 minutes after the accident were from 240 degrees at 6 knots.
This would present the pilot with slightly less than a 6 knot LEFT crosswind component and a 2 knot tailwind component.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 19, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
