Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lake Havasu, AZ
Accident Number:
WPR11LA245
Date & Time:
06/02/2011, 1300 MST 
Registration:
N712MK
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-46-310P
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot said that he was descending into the traffic pattern after canceling his instrument 
flight rules clearance and that he lowered the landing gear; however, there was no response. At 
that point, he reset the landing gear circuit breaker and tried again to no avail. He then used 
the emergency checklist and attempted to drop the gear. Again there was no response. He 
continued to repeat all procedures for about the next 1 1/2 hours until the airplane was at 
minimum fuel and he was forced to land with the landing gear retracted. Prior to landing, he 
secured all items in the cabin, feathered the propeller, and shut down the engine and all 
electrical and fuel controls. The airplane touched down mid-field and slid about 1,200 feet. 
During the postaccident examination, the airplane was placed on jacks and supplied electrical 
power. Both the normal and emergency extension landing gear systems did not work. The 
examination revealed that a faulty low hydraulic pressure switch prevented the normal gear 
extension system from operating properly. The examination also revealed that the emergency 
gear release valve™s control arm was misrigged and would only move 1/4 inch instead of the 
approximately 2 inches of movement that was required. The misrigged control arm would not 
allow the system to port hydraulic fluid from the gear-down line to the gear-up line, which is 
required for the fluid to return to the reservoir and to allow gravity to extend the gear.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the low pressure switch in the normal landing gear system, which prevented 
normal operation of that system, and the misrigging of the emergency extension gear release 
valve, which prevented the system from being depressurized to allow for the freefall of the gear.
Findings
Aircraft
Landing gear actuator - Malfunction (Cause)
Personnel issues
Maintenance - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR11LA245
Factual Information
On June 2, 2011, about 1300 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-46-310P, N712MK, 
experienced a landing gear extension system failure during approach to the Lake Havasu City 
Airport, Lake Havasu City, Arizona. The airplane was substantially damaged as it slid to a stop 
on the runway. Neither the airline transport pilot nor passenger was injured. The airplane was 
registered to Sea Air Holdings, LLC. The personal flight was operated under the provisions of 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an 
instrument flight plan was filed. The flight originated from Portland, Oregon, about 0830.
The pilot said that he was descending into the traffic pattern after canceling his IFR clearance 
and he attempted to lower the landing gear. There was no response. At that point he reset the 
landing gear circuit breaker and tried again to no avail. He then went to the emergency check 
list and attempted to drop the gear. Again there was no response.  He continued to repeat all 
procedures for approximately the next 1 1/2 hours until he was at minimum fuel and was 
forced to land gear up. Prior to landing he located his passenger in the right rear seat, secured 
all items in the cabin, feathered and shut down the  engine, and all electrical and fuel controls. 
The aircraft touched down at mid field and slid about 1200 feet. 
Examination of the airframe revealed that a lower fuselage bulkhead was ground down. 
A Federal Aviaiton Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector examined the airplane's 
landing gear system following recovery from the runway.  The aircraft was placed on jacks and 
electrical power was supplied to the airplane.  Both the normal and emergency extension 
landing gear systems did not work.  The landing gear was lowered by bleeding pressure out of 
gear up line fitting on the nose gear sequence valve.  The Emergency Gear Release valve, P/N 
85124-02, was manually operated at the valve.  Its control arm would only move 1/4-inch 
instead of the approximately 2 inches of movement it should have.  It would not port fluid from 
the gear down line to the gear up line, which is its required function to allow hydraulic fluid to 
return through the up line to the reservoir and allowing gravity to extend the gear.
The cause of the failure of the normal gear extension system was traced to a faulty low pressure 
switch.
History of Flight
Approach
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power) (Defining event)
Landing-flare/touchdown
Abnormal runway contact
Page 3 of 5WPR11LA245
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N712MK
Model/Series:
PA-46-310P 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
4608032
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/08/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
2747 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A SERIES
Registered Owner:
SEA AIR HOLDINGS LLC
Rated Power:
500 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5WPR11LA245
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
HII, 783 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
135°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Portland, OR (PDX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Lake Havasu, AZ (HII)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0830 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Lake Havasu City (HII)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
783 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
32
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
8001 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
34.571111, -114.358333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Wayne R Pollack
Adopted Date:
01/15/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Douglas G Anderson; Federal Aviation Administratin; Scottsdale, AZ
Publish Date:
01/15/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=79291
Page 5 of 5WPR11LA245
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
