Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Pine Bluffs, WY
Accident Number:
WPR11LA253
Date & Time:
06/02/2011, 0855 MDT 
Registration:
N9496G
Aircraft:
CESSNA A188B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The newly hired commercial pilot intended to conduct a solo practice flight in the piston-
engine, agricultural-agent-dispensing airplane. It was the first flight of the day for the pilot and 
airplane, and his first flight in this particular airplane. Because the airport elevation was about 
5,100 feet above mean sea level, the pilot leaned the fuel-air mixture, then conducted an engine 
run-up. The pilot reported that the run-up was normal and that he set flaps at 5 degrees. The 
target climb speed was 80 mph. The initial portion of the takeoff roll was normal but then 
seemed to continue for an ﬁabnormal length of runway.ﬂ The pilot did not abort the takeoff 
because, by the time he recognized that the airplane was not performing adequately, he 
believed that there was insufficient runway remaining to stop. The airplane lifted off, but then 
the engine seemed to experience a partial loss of power, and the pilot was unable to fly the 
airplane out of ground effect after it crossed the departure end of the runway. The pilot 
jettisoned the payload and conducted a precautionary landing in a field off the end of the 
runway to avoid a collision with power lines. Review of maintenance records found that the 
engine exceeded the recommended time between overhaul by 470 hours. However, 
examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal evidence of any preimpact mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. The appearance of the 
engine spark plugs was consistent with the engine being regularly operated with a fuel-air 
mixture that was leaner than normal, and the possibility that the pilot improperly leaned the 
engine for the takeoff could not be ruled out. The takeoff performance data in the airplane 
manufacturer's operating manual was insufficient to determine the expected performance for 
the airplane™s reported configuration and ambient conditions. The available performance data 
suggested that the airplane should have been able to climb out of ground effect and that the 
target climb speed used by the pilot might have been too high; however, the available 
information was inconclusive with regard to both these issues.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power during takeoff for reasons that could not be determined because 
postaccident examination did not reveal any mechanical malfunctions or failures that would 
Page 2 of 8WPR11LA253
have precluded normal operation.
Findings
Aircraft
Scheduled maint checks - Not serviced/maintained
Mixture control - Incorrect use/operation
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Not specified
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 8WPR11LA253
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On June 2, 2011, about 0855 mountain daylight time, a Cessna A188B, N9496G, was 
substantially damaged during a precautionary landing shortly after takeoff from Pine Bluffs 
Municipal Airport (82V), Pine Bluffs, Wyoming. The commercial pilot was not injured. The 
aerial application flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 137. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. 
The operator, Circle-S Aviation, was based in Pine Bluffs, and reported the event to the NTSB 
on June 7, 2011.  
According to the pilot, he reported that the engine run-up was normal, and he then initiated 
the takeoff on runway 26. The initial portion of the takeoff roll seemed normal, but the roll 
then "seemed to continue for an abnormal length." The pilot reported that he did not abort the 
takeoff because by the time he recognized that the airplane did not seem to be performing 
correctly, there was insufficient runway remaining to stop safely. The airplane lifted off, but 
then the engine seemed to experience a partial loss of power, and the pilot was unable to climb 
the airplane out of ground effect as it crossed the departure end of the runway. At that point, 
the pilot jettisoned the payload of 40 gallons of water, in order to clear the power lines ahead. 
The airplane still would not climb, so the pilot elected to conduct an off-airport landing, in 
order to preclude striking the power lines. The airplane touched down in soft terrain, struck a 
ditch, and was substantially damaged.  
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records indicated that the pilot held a commercial pilot 
certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating. The pilot reported a total flight 
experience of 972 hours, including 4 hours in the accident airplane make and model.  His most 
recent FAA second-class medical certificate was issued in April 2011, and his most recent flight 
review was completed in March 2011. 
The pilot was recently hired by the operator, and the accident flight was his first flight in the 
accident airplane. His previous time in type was acquired in the operator's other C-188, and 
some of those flights were supervised checkouts. All the previous flights were from the same 
airport and same runway direction as the accident flight. The pilot stated that on those 
previous flights, the airplane "always climbed away nicely;" he had no problems breaking 
ground or maintaining the target climb speed while simultaneously gaining altitude.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
According to FAA information, the restricted category airplane was manufactured in 1974, and 
was first registered to the operator in 2010. It was equipped with a Teledyne Continental 
Motors (TCM) IO-520 series engine, which was rated for 300 hp takeoff power for 5 minutes. 
The airplane was equipped with a liquid dispersal system, and a constant-speed propeller. 
According to information provided by the operator and pilot, the takeoff weight for the 
accident flight was about 3,083 lbs, and the airplane weight and balance was within the FAA-
approved envelope. Maximum certificated gross weight was 3,300 lbs in the normal category, 
and 4,200 lbs in the restricted category.
Page 4 of 8WPR11LA253
The most recent annual inspection was completed in May 2011, when the airframe had a total 
time in service (TT) of about 6,590 hours, and the engine had a TT of about 1,670 hours. 
According to TCM Service Information Letter (SIL) 98-9A "TIME BETWEEN OVERHAUL 
PERIODS," the recommended time between overhaul (TBO) for the IO-520-D engine was 
1,700 hours or 12 years, whichever occurred first.  The SIL contained the following additional 
guidance: "For aircraft used in aerial spraying, overhaul the engine after the accumulation of 
1200 hours or twelve (12) years whichever occurs first."
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
The pilot reported that weather conditions included winds from 190 degrees at 11 knots with 
gusts to 15 knots; visibility 10 miles, clear skies; temperature of 19 degrees C; dew point 0 
degrees C; and an altimeter setting of 30.16 inches of mercury. Use of these wind speed values 
for a runway 26 takeoff resulted in headwind component values of 4 to 5 knots, and crosswind 
component values of 10 to 14 knots.
AIRPORT INFORMATION 
FAA information indicated that 82V was at an elevation of 5,152 feet above mean sea level, and 
that the paved runway measured 5,336 feet long and 75 feet wide. Based on the reported 
ambient conditions, the density altitude was calculated to be 6,607 feet, and the pressure 
altitude was calculated to be approximately 4,900 feet. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The airplane came to rest upright in a flat, soft field, about 1 mile west of the departure runway. 
The right main landing gear fracture-separated from the fuselage, the propeller tips were bent, 
the cowling was wrinkled, and the right wing sustained substantial damage. There was no fire.
The airplane was recovered to a secure facility, where it was examined by one of the facility's 
technicians. No evidence of any preimpact mechanical malfunctions that would have precluded 
normal operation was noted. Examination of the engine spark plugs revealed that their 
appearance was consistent with the engine being regularly operated with a fuel-air mixture that 
was more lean than normal. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Pilot's Flight Procedures 
The pilot reported that the flight was to be a practice flight with two objectives; to get the feel of 
the airplane when the cargo/load was jettisoned, and to practice operations at a higher 
elevation airport. He reported that the only load was 40 gallons of water in the hopper tank, 
which had a capacity of 280 gallons.
The accident flight was the first flight of the day for both the pilot and airplane. The pilot 
reported that during taxi out, he thought he heard an unusual "clicking" noise emanating from 
the engine.  He opted to continue with the run-up and flight, and attributed the noise to his 
Page 5 of 8WPR11LA253
heightened awareness based on a previous magneto problem with the airplane. 
Due to the elevation of 82V, the pilot leaned the engine for the run-up and subsequent 
departure. He leaned the engine at 1,700 rpm, and ran the engine to 2,000 rpm to confirm that 
it would operate at a higher rpm in that leaned configuration. The pilot reported that he set the 
flaps to 5 degrees for takeoff, in accordance with the guidance in the airplane, and had a target 
climb speed of 80 mph.
Cessna Flight Procedures
The checklist section of the Cessna operating manual "Normal Procedures" for the "Restricted 
Category Take-Off (Dispersal Equipment Installed)" recommended a flap setting of "5 to 10" 
degrees, and the recommended climb speed was 80 to 90 mph. However, the "Performance" 
section of the manual provided a climb speed of 67 mph for 10 degrees flaps with dispersal 
equipment installed, and did not contain any guidance or performance data for the 5 degree 
flap configuration. 
Derived Performance Estimates
The most complete takeoff performance data, in terms of parametric variables, was provided 
for airplanes that were not equipped with dispersal equipment, and was only available for the 
20-degree flap setting configuration. Limited takeoff performance data for airplanes equipped 
with dispersal equipment was available, and specified the use of 10 degrees of flaps. Since the 
pilot reported that he used 5 degrees of flaps for the takeoff, predicted values for takeoff 
performance could not be determined. 
The available performance data was utilized to determine estimated takeoff and climb 
performance for the presented configurations, in order to provide some indication of expected 
performance for the actual accident flight configuration and conditions. Predicted performance 
for an airplane not equipped with dispersal equipment, and using a takeoff flap setting of 20 
degrees, yielded a takeoff distance over a 50-foot obstacle of 1,124 feet, and a climb rate of 
about 695 feet per minute (fpm) at a climb speed of 67 mph. Predicted performance for an 
airplane equipped with dispersal equipment, using a takeoff flap setting of 10 degrees, but 
without altitude or wind corrections, yielded a takeoff distance over a 50-foot obstacle of 1,000 
feet. The available data specified a climb speed of 67 mph, but did not enable a determination 
of corresponding climb rate. Predicted performance for an airplane equipped with dispersal 
equipment, using a takeoff flap setting of 20 degrees, but at a weight of 3,300 lbs, yielded a 
climb rate of about 345 fpm, and a climb speed of 77 mph. The available data did not enable a 
determination of corresponding takeoff distances.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Off-field or emergency landing
Page 6 of 8WPR11LA253
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/09/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/31/2011
Flight Time:
972 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4 hours (Total, this make and model), 932 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 43 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 28 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N9496G
Model/Series:
A188B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
18801501T
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/10/2011, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
24 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6594 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520
Registered Owner:
Circle-S Aviation
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
Circle-S Aviation
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Page 7 of 8WPR11LA253
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
82V, 5152 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0840 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 15 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
190°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.16 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Pine Bluff, WY (82V)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Pine Bluff, WY (82V)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0855 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Pine Bluffs Municipal (82V)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
5152 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
26
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5336 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.153333, -104.130278 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael C Huhn
Adopted Date:
07/18/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Mike Maglione; FAA-FSDO; Casper, WY
Publish Date:
07/18/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=79328
Page 8 of 8WPR11LA253
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
