Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Elberta, AL
Accident Number:
ATL04LA105
Date & Time:
05/01/2004, 1730 CDT 
Registration:
N5099D
Aircraft:
Cessna 182A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to the pilot, after the four parachute jumpers exited the airplane, and as he 
maneuvered the airplane for a landing, the engine lost power. Initial efforts by the pilot to 
restore full power were unsuccessful, however as the pilot continued, the engine regained 
partial power. The pilot entered a straight approach for runway 18, While on short final to land 
on runway 18, the pilot thought he was too high and to fast to land and he initiated a go 
around.  During the go around, the airplane lost engine power. The pilot elected to land on 
another part of the same field.  The aircraft touched down approximately 840 feet west of the 
approach end of runway 36 on a heading of 270 degrees, heading towards a paved road, power 
lines and a tree line.  The pilot stated that after touchdown, the airplane engine began to 
develop power.  The pilot decided to abort the landing to avoid hitting the road and the trees.  
During the aborted landing, the airplane flew under the power lines, crossed the paved road 
but, the right main gear collided with the ground and the airplane nosed over approximately 
220 feet west of Baldwin County Road in a wheat field. The pilot stated that he had 
"insufficient speed to continue take-off."  Prior to the flight, the pilot reported that he refueled 
the airplane to a total of 25 gallons of fuel.  Examination of airplane revealed the wings were 
bent at the outboard leading edge, damage to the right spar and main wheel strut, the propeller 
was bent rearward at both tips with curved signatures, the firewall was bent near bottom and 
the right gear was detached.  Examination of the flight control system revealed no mechanical 
malfunctions.  An engine test run was also performed.  After removing the main fuel line from 
the firewall, a piece of foreign material was found.  The main fuel line was shook and the 
foreign material escaped out the end of the line allowing fuel to flow freely.  The foreign 
material was searched for in the belly of the airplane but was not found.  The main fuel line was 
reassembled to the firewall and fuel selector valve and fuel to the engine was verified.  The 
engine ran normal to 1800 rpm and a magneto check was performed with a 100 rpm drop 
noted.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power due to a foreign substance blockage of the fuel line which resulted in 
Page 2 of 6ATL04LA105
fuel starvation, and the pilot's failure to maintain terrain clearance during an aborted landing.
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: DESCENT
Findings
1. FLUID,FUEL - FLOW RESTRICTED
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE - BLOCKED(PARTIAL)
3. FUEL SYSTEM,LINE - FOREIGN MATERIAL/SUBSTANCE
4. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED
Findings
5. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
6. (C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. MANEUVER TO AVOID OBSTRUCTIONS - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED
Page 3 of 6ATL04LA105
Factual Information
On May 1, 2004, at 1730 central daylight time a Cessna 182A, N5099D, registered to and 
operated by Emerald Coast Sky Diving Center, collided with the ground in a field near Elberta, 
Alabama. The flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight 
plan filed. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The private pilot received minor injuries 
and the airplane was substantially damaged. The local flight departed Horak Airport, Elberta, 
Alabama, on May 1, 2004, at 1650.
The pilot had just let four parachute jumpers out and was on his recovery flight back to Horak 
Airport.  The pilot stated the airplane had partial power loss while descending through 6000 
feet, approximately four miles north of Horak Airport.  The pilot checked the mixture, fuel 
selector and applied carburetor heat and the engine regained power.  The pilot entered a 
straight in approach for runway 18 at Horak.  On arrival, the pilot was over the approach end of 
the runway at approximately 300 feet above ground level, at 100 knots and in the clean 
configuration.  The pilot thought he was "too high and to fast" to land and he initiated a go 
around.  
As the pilot turned the airplane to the left to enter a right downwind for runway 36 the airplane 
lost engine power.  The pilot elected to land on another part of the same field.  The aircraft 
touched down approximately 840 feet west of the approach end of runway 36 on a heading of 
270 degrees, heading towards a paved road, power lines and a tree line.  The pilot stated that 
after touchdown, the airplane engine began to develop power.  At this time the pilot decided to 
attempt a second go around to avoid hitting the road and the trees.  During the second go 
around, the airplane flew under the power lines, crossed the paved road but, the right main 
gear collided with the ground and the airplane nosed over approximately 220 feet west of 
Baldwin County Road in a wheat field.  The pilot stated that he had "insufficient speed to 
continue take-off."
Prior to the flight, the pilot reported that he refueled the airplane to a total of 25 gallons of fuel. 
The pilot used a homemade graduated measuring stick that measured fuel at 5-gallon 
increments.  After refueling, the pilot stated that the right tank had a total of 15 gallons of fuel 
and the left tank had a total of 10 gallons of fuel.  According to the type certificate data sheet for 
the Cessna 182A, the fuel capacity is 65 gallons; 3 gallons of fuel are unusable.
Examination of airplane revealed the wings were bent at the outboard leading edge, damage to 
the right spar and main wheel strut, the propeller was bent rearward at both tips with curved 
signatures, the firewall was bent near bottom and right gear was detached.  Examination of the 
flight control system revealed no mechanical malfunctions.  An engine test run was also 
performed.  The damage propeller was removed and a test club was installed.  The cowling was 
removed to visually inspect the engine before the test run was actually performed.  Ten gallons 
of fuel was placed in the left fuel tank and the firewall fuel strainer was checked for fuel, but no 
fuel was found.  The fuel strainer was then disassembled and checked for obstructions and 
none were found.  The main fuel line from the fuel selector valve to the firewall was loosened 
and no fuel was found there.  After removing the main fuel line from the firewall, a piece of 
foreign material was found.  The main fuel line was shook and the foreign material escaped out 
the end of the line allowing fuel to flow freely.  The foreign material was searched for in the 
belly of the airplane but was not found.  The main fuel line was reassembled to the firewall and 
fuel selector valve and fuel to the engine was verified.  The engine ran normal to 1800 rpm and 
Page 4 of 6ATL04LA105
a magneto check was performed with a 100 rpm drop noted.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/17/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/30/2002
Flight Time:
1020 hours (Total, all aircraft), 574 hours (Total, this make and model), 13 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N5099D
Model/Series:
182A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
51199
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/20/2003, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
58.2 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5337.7 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-470-L
Registered Owner:
Emerald Coast Sky Diving 
Center
Rated Power:
235 hp
Operator:
Emerald Coast Sky Diving 
Center
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ATL04LA105
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
NPA, 30 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1755 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
140°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Broken / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
6 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 18000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
140°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.9 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Elberta, AL (7AL9)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Elberta, AL (7AL9)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1650 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Horak (7AL9)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
110 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2500 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Go Around
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
30.468611, -87.541389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Phillip Powell
Adopted Date:
07/07/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Edward Blount; Birmingham FSDO-09; Birmingham, AL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ATL04LA105
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
