Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Phoenix, AZ
Accident Number:
WPR12FA191
Date & Time:
05/02/2012, 1140 MST 
Registration:
N380TL
Aircraft:
HUGHES 269C
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business
Analysis 
When the pilot was about 2 minutes from his destination at an altitude of about 500 feet above 
ground level, he sensed a vibration through the back of his seat and in the anti-torque pedals. 
The vibration was followed by a right yaw that the pilot could not correct with a pedal input. As 
the pilot attempted to maintain level flight, he heard a "metallic clunking" behind him. He 
looked back and saw what he described as the tail rotor losing rotor speed. The pilot 
maintained forward flight by countering the right yaw with left cyclic input while he located a 
cul-de-sac in a residential neighborhood in which to land. The pilot entered an autorotation, 
and during the descent, the helicopter impacted the roof of a house and an adjacent brick wall. 
Witnesses reported that the helicopter didn't ﬁsound right,ﬂ that the engine was sputtering, and 
that the engine power appeared to be increasing and decreasing. The helicopter was observed 
rocking and teetering before nose-diving toward the ground. After the helicopter impacted the 
ground, the engine continued to run, and the tail rotor continued to spin. 
A postaccident investigation revealed that the main transmission pinion had fractured and 
separated through the threads that retained the aft pinion nut. Because the aft pinion nut 
maintained the position of the splined sleeve that drove the tail rotor drive shaft, the 
separation of the pinion allowed the sleeve to wobble as it turned and to move aft, partially 
disengaging its external splines from the internal splines in the tail rotor drive shaft. The 
sleeve™s splines began to grind against the drive shaft™s splines, and the resulting material loss 
on the splines reduced the engagement between the parts to the point where a loss of tail rotor 
drive occurred. It is likely that enough residual contact between the damaged splines remained 
to keep the tail rotor spinning (as observed after impact) but was not sufficient to deliver power 
to the tail rotor.
Examination of the pinion fracture surfaces determined that the pinion failure was due to a 
fatigue crack that initiated in a thread root and propagated through about 75 percent of the 
pinion™s cross-section before the remaining material succumbed to overstress conditions. No 
indication of material deficiencies, such as inclusions, voids, or pits, were found at the crack 
initiation site. According to the helicopter™s maintenance records, the pinion had been in 
service for 1,584.4 hours, and on the day before the accident, a 100-hour inspection had been 
Page 2 of 10WPR12FA191
performed in accordance with the helicopter manufacturer™s instructions. These instructions 
included a procedure for checking the torque of the aft pinion nut, and a co-owner of the 
helicopter reported that he observed the mechanic perform the torque check.  It is likely that 
the fatigue crack was not large enough to be detected during the inspection and then 
propagated to the point of failure during the accident flight. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of tail rotor drive due to a fatigue failure of the main transmission pinion, which resulted 
in a loss of directional control during cruise flight. 
Findings
Aircraft
Main rotor drive - Not specified (Cause)
Directional control - Attain/maintain not possible (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 10WPR12FA191
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 2, 2012, about 1140 mountain standard time, a Hughes 269C helicopter, N350TL, 
sustained substantial damage after colliding with a residential home near Phoenix, Arizona. 
The helicopter was owned and operated by Canyon State Aero of Mesa, Arizona. The certified 
commercial pilot sustained serious injuries, and the passenger sustained minor injuries. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The reported photo flight was 
being operated in accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, and a flight plan was 
not filed. The local flight departed Deer Valley Airport (DVT), Phoenix, Arizona, about 1115.
In a telephone conversation with the pilot, as well as in a statement submitted to the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot reported that after 
picking up his passenger/photographer, he departed DVT for the construction site the 
photographer had been hired to photograph. The pilot stated that after taking off he proceeded 
southwest toward the construction site about 500 feet above ground level (agl) and at an 
airspeed of between 70 to 75 knots. The pilot stated that about 2 minutes prior to reaching the 
construction site he detected a vibration in the back of his seat, as well as in the anti-torque 
pedals. This was followed immediately by a right yaw that was not correctable with pedal input. 
The pilot opined that he attempted to maintain level flight, then heard a "metallic clunking" 
sound behind him. He then looked over his left shoulder and thought he observed the tail rotor 
slowing down. He said he was still maintaining forward flight at about 70 knots and was 
maintaining his forward track by countering the yaw with left cyclic input. The pilot stated that 
he picked out a residential area with a cul-de-sac street, and elected to autorotate to the street. 
He reported that he lowered collective, rolled off the throttle to the idle detent, and made a 
slight right turn toward the cul-de-sac, maintaining about 55 knots during the autorotation. 
The helicopter initially impacted the roof of a house and a brick wall that separated the house 
from the adjoining residence. He said the helicopter came to rest in the backyard of the 
adjacent house in a slightly nose down, upright attitude. The pilot reported that the main and 
tail rotor blades were intact, and that in his view this was a mechanical failure rather than a 
loss of tail rotor effectiveness event. He also stated that [during the descent] the helicopter did 
not rotate about its vertical axis, that it did not spin, and that it was gusty with respect to the 
winds.
Local law enforcement provided the IIC with statements of 3 witnesses who observed the 
accident.
Witness #1, who was located at his residence about 1 block north of the accident site, reported 
that he heard the helicopter overhead, and that it "didn't sound right." The witness stated that 
the engine was sputtering and "sounded wrong," and as he watched it, it was "rocking" and 
"teetering." The witness added that it then lost altitude and nose-dived toward the ground 
south of his location.
Witness #2 reported that he was in an alley south of the street where the helicopter crash 
landed, and when he [first] heard the helicopter "it did not sound right." The witness stated 
that the engine was "sputtering", the rpms were increasing and decreasing, and that the main 
rotor blade was also increasing and decreasing in speed. The witness opined that the helicopter 
made a U-turn overhead while losing altitude, and that he lost sight of it due to trees and 
houses in the area. He then proceeded to the accident site and began turning all switches which 
Page 4 of 10WPR12FA191
were labeled ON and OFF to the OFF position, but the engine kept running. He also stated that 
the tail rotor blades were moving very fast.
Witness #3, who was a co-worker of witness #2 and at the same relative location during the 
initial sighting of the helicopter, reported that he noticed the helicopter turning around and 
going lower, and that the engine didn't sound right, like it was just barely idling. He stated that 
the helicopter continued to lose altitude, and it became apparent that it was either going to 
land or crash. The witness added that after arriving at the accident site the engine continued to 
run for some time. He added that the tail rotor blades were spinning rapidly.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 40, possessed a commercial pilot certificate for rotorcraft-helicopter, and ratings 
for instrument helicopter and helicopter instructor. The pilot completed his most recent flight 
review on March 29, 2012. He was issued a second-class Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) airman medical certificate without waivers or limitations dated December 31, 2011.
The pilot reported a total flight time of 1,460 hours, all in helicopters, with 1,030 hours in make 
and model, 1,410 hours as pilot in command, and 980 hours as pilot in command in make and 
model. Additionally, the pilot reported having given 950 hours of dual instruction, with 800 
hours of dual instruction given in the accident make and model helicopter. The pilot revealed 
that he had flown a total of 90 hours, 30 hours, and 1 hour in the preceding 90 days, 30 days, 
and 24 hours respectively. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident helicopter was a Hughes Model 269C, serial number 0694C, manufactured in 
1978. Its most current airworthiness certificate was issued on April 1, 2009. At the time of the 
accident the helicopter had accumulated about 1,584 hours total airframe time, with a Hobbs 
Meter time of 899 hours. The most recent periodic 100-hour/annual inspection was performed 
on May 1, 2012. The previous periodic inspection encompassed 25-50-100-200-400 hour 
inspections, which were completed on March 29, 2012, at a total airframe time of 1,481.4 
hours, with a Hobbs Meter time of 796.4 hours. The maintenance records revealed that the last 
annual inspection was completed on May 6, 2011, at a total airframe time of 981.6 hours.
It was revealed during the investigation that during the periodic inspection conducted on May 
1, 2012, which was the day prior to the accident, that a 25-50-100 hour inspection had been 
performed in accordance with the manufacturer's Helicopter Maintenance Instructions (HMI), 
which included the procedure for checking the proper torque of the aft pinion nut. The co-
owner of Canyon State Aero reported to the IIC that he had personally observed the mechanic 
performed the torque check of the aft pinion nut. The aircraft maintenance logbook revealed 
no entry for this specific check, nor was one required under Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) 
Part 91. Additionally, and while checklist sheets are available to follow and track such checks, 
they are not required to be completed or maintained under FAR Part 91. 
A maintenance logbook entry dated March 9, 2012 at 1,481.4 hours (100 hours prior to the 
accident) revealed that a replacement H-frame was installed in conjunction with a 100/400-
hour inspection. A Sikorsky engineer reported that as a result of this inspection the pinion 
splines would have been exposed and that a torque check of the aft pinion nut would have been 
required.
METEROROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Page 5 of 10WPR12FA191
At 1151, the weather reporting facility at the Phoenix-Sky Harbor International Airport (PHX), 
Phoenix, Arizona, located about 4 nm south of the accident site, reported wind 140 degrees at 9 
knots, visibility 10 miles, few clouds at 20,000 feet, scattered clouds at 25,000 feet, 
temperature 31 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 1 degree C, and an altimeter setting of 29.83 
inches of mercury.
At 1153, the weather reporting facility at the Deer Valley Airport (DVT), Phoenix, Arizona, 
located about 11 nm north of the accident site, reported wind 170 degrees at 8 knots, gusts to 
20 knots, variable 130 degrees to 200 degrees, 10 miles visibility, sky clear, temperature 28 
degrees C, dew point -2 degrees C, and an altimeter of 29.85 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
A damage assessment of the helicopter was conducted at the operator's facility on May 24, 
2012.
The airframe remained generally intact. The steel main frame tubes were broken, distorted and 
bent in various locations. The aft cabin wall was distorted aft on the left side. The main rotor 
mast support tube on the left side of the aircraft exhibited a mid-span compression fold. The 
aft support tube fractured and was separated at the mast and the tailboom support fitting.
The right landing gear was observed entirely separated from the helicopter. The left side 
landing gear dampers remained attached to the aircraft, and the strut was attached to the skid 
tube. Both landing gear skid tubes were fractured at the forward strut attach points. The 
forward cross beam was fractured near its mid-point, while the aft cross beam was intact but 
bent down near the right side cluster fitting. 
The tailboom was intact but observed separated at the forward bulkhead by a compression 
fracture. The tailboom tube appeared straight, with minor denting on the top near the forward 
end. The horizontal stabilizer was intact and remained attached, with minor denting noted. 
The vertical fin was crushed from contact to the bottom and was bent to the right. The left side 
support strut was intact with the right side support strut separated forward of mid-span by a 
folding fracture. Both support tubes exhibited scratches and markings on the bottom, 
consistent with asphalt shingle material.
Impact damage was consistent with a high vertical velocity wings-level, nose-low impact 
attitude with the roof of the house, followed by a nose over into the yard and impact with the 
wall.
All 3 main rotor blades remained attached to the main rotor head and basically intact.
The green dot tail rotor blade was fractured at the outer end of the hub spline. The blade was 
retained by the tail rotor strap pack and remained connected to the pitch change link. There 
were fractures and distortion of the fiberglass airfoil inboard of the leading edge abrasion strip, 
the spar was bent from impact forces on the outboard side, and the aft portion of the tip cap 
was missing.
The blue dot tail rotor blade was observed intact from the root to the tipcap; the tipcap was 
intact. There was an area of damage to the airfoil near the inboard end of the abrasion strip. 
The pitch change link remained attached and appeared straight.
The main rotor head (MRH) was intact and attached to the main drive shaft. 
The tail rotor hub (TRH)/tail rotor assembly remained attached to the tail rotor gearbox (TGB) 
Page 6 of 10WPR12FA191
output shaft. Both pitch change links were observed intact. The swashplate rotated freely and 
moved in and out on the shaft when activated by the control rod and bellcrank.
The tail rotor gearbox (TGB) remained on the tail boom adapter. The tail rotor drive shaft was 
rotated, and resulted in rotation of the tail rotor head. This indicated that continuity existed 
from the drive shaft fracture at the MGB to the TGB output. The chip detector was not 
examined.
The tail rotor drive shaft (TRDS) was fractured about 6 inches behind the main gear box 
(MGB) attach spline; a minor torsional indication was observed. The TRDS was bent at the 
forward tail boom bulkhead with minor indications of rotation. The forward portion of the 
TRDS was extracted with no tools required and included the aft pinion nut, a portion of the 
pinion, and the driving spline. 
The TRDS appeared intact and straight, back to the TGB attach spline. The aft bump stop was 
damaged and compressed from impact with the 269A6029 retention nut. Minor wear was 
observed on the aluminum bumper and the nut.
The main gearbox remained attached to the airframe. When the gearbox input was rotated the 
MR drive and rotor head turned appropriately. The upper pulley overrunning clutch rotated 
and engaged appropriately when turned by hand. The input pinion was observed to have been 
fractured and separated through the threads of the aft thread area. The fractured pinion 
remained in the aft pinion nut and was secured by a cotter pin. The phenolic spacer was not 
secured by the cotter pin, was present but out of position, and observed pressed into the 
pinion's hollow interior just forward of the fracture. The 269A5430 driving spline moved aft in 
the TRDS far enough to disengage from the internal splines of the TRDS. 
The engine was intact and observed to have sustained minimal damage due to impact forces. 
The engine mounts and engine basket tubing remained attached, however, some visible 
damage was observed. The lower section of the engine, inclusive of the intake and exhaust 
manifolds, fuel servo control, throttle linkage, impeller assembly, impeller shroud, and the 
Bendix gear and housing, experienced minimal visual damage as a result of impact forces to 
the undercarriage of the helicopter. 
A Lycoming Engines representative was present during the examination. Only an external 
examination of the engine was performed. Due to local law enforcement personnel reporting 
that the engine remained running at the accident, and secured only after first responders had 
arrived, a more detailed examination of the engine was not performed by the Lycoming 
representative.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Examination of components parts
Under the supervision of the IIC, the following components were shipped to the NTSB 
Materials Laboratory in Washington, D.C., for examination and analysis by a materials 
research engineer: the main transmission pinion, the aft pinion nut, a section of the tail rotor 
drive shaft, the driving spline, the phenolic plug, and the forward bump stop. 
Driving Spline and Section of Tail Rotor Drive Shaft
The engineer reported fretting wear scars and material removal were observed on the outer 
teeth of the driving spline, along with chatter and circumferential gouging on the outer forward 
Page 7 of 10WPR12FA191
surface. The chatter marks were located where a roller bearing is normally in contact with the 
driving spline. The engineer's report revealed that the splines exhibited some loss of material; 
the amount varied from negligible to almost 50 percent of the cross-sectional area, and the 
largest difference in loss was 180 degrees apart. In contrast, the interior splines of the part 
were relatively undamaged, and exhibited no appreciable loss of material. Some rubbing was 
observed on the forward interior of the part mirroring the exterior shape of the pinion.
The engineer further reported that the angle of material removed on the drive spline outer 
splines mirrored that of the wear and material loss on the mating interior splines of the 
forward sections of the tail rotor drive shaft. The damage on the interior splines was rotational 
in nature, but was not as severe as on the driving spline; the material loss was confined to an 
approximately 90 degree area. The engineer also noted that the forward faces of the splines 
exhibited some smearing and material loss in a counterclockwise direction, forward looking 
aft.
Main Transmission Pinion and Aft Pinion Nut
The material research engineer reported that approximately 0.3 inches of the aft portion of the 
main transmission pinion fractured transversely while fastened inside the aft pinion nut, with 
the cotter pin still in place.
According to the engineer the exterior of the pinion possesses a series of splines that contact 
the interior splines of the drive spline. The aft 2 inches of the exterior faces of the splines 
exhibited a shiny luster indicative of the outer surface having been worn off. The drive faces of 
the exterior pinion splines showed fretting wear scars and material loss. Upwards of 0.015 
inches of material had been removed on the aft most 0.5 inches of the splines on the contact 
surfaces. Chatter marks were visible on the pinion exterior just forward of where the splines 
taper off. 
The engineer further reported that an examination of the mating fracture surfaces of the pinion 
revealed a small jog present on the fracture, indicative of torsional failure. The fracture surface 
was flat, relatively smooth, and perpendicular to the long axis of the part. The surface exhibited 
fine crack arrest and ratchet marks indicative of progressive cracking. He stated that a closer 
examination using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) revealed an oxidized surface with a 
pattern consistent with underlying fatigue striations. 
The engineer reported that the pinion fracture surface displayed a variety of ratchet marks, 
indicative of multiple fatigue crack initiations. The fatigue crack initiated at a thread root, 
consistent with the area of highest stress concentration on the part. No material deficiencies 
such as inclusions, pits, or voids were found at the crack initiation site. 
The engineer opined that the features of the fracture surface suggest that after initiation, the 
fatigue crack progressed rotationally, while other cracks initiated ahead of the crack on the 
outer surface of the pinion in the thread root. Once the crack grew to sufficient size, the 
remaining cross-section succumbed to overstress. Approximately 0.25 inches of the fracture 
surface exhibited dimple rupture, indicative of overstress. No indications of other failure 
mechanisms, such as intergranular cracking, were observed. 
The forward faces of the pinion threads were relatively undamaged and showed no indications 
of contact wear with the adjacent nut. The aft faces of the threads displayed rotational wear to 
approximately half of the depth of the thread root. The aft thread tips showed indications of 
fretting wear and minor material loss. No indication of mechanical damage or contact was 
Page 8 of 10WPR12FA191
found in the valleys of the pinion threads. (Refer to the Material Laboratory Factual Report No. 
13-023, which is appended to the docket.)
During the investigation a Sikorsky accident investigator for light helicopters reported that an 
improper assembly of parts was observed on the accident helicopter. The investigator revealed 
that the accident helicopter was not in compliance with the maintenance manual instructions 
in three areas: the phenolic pinion plug 269A5441 was not properly installed, the split bushing 
269A5595-001 was missing, and an incorrect longer 269A6030 BSC Spline Adapter was 
installed on the tail transmission. 
Examination of Global Positioning equipment
Under the supervision of the NTSB IIC, the aircraft's Lowrance AIRMAP 2000C Global 
Positioning System unit was shipped to the NTSB Vehicle Recorder Laboratory in Washington, 
D.C., for examination and analysis.
The specialist concluded that the recorded points did not conclusively capture the accident 
flight. As such, it was determined that the information on the device was not pertinent to the 
investigation. (Refer to the Vehicle Specialist's Factual Report, which is appended to the 
docket.)
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power) (Defining event)
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight
Autorotation
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
40
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/31/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/29/2012
Flight Time:
1460 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1030 hours (Total, this make and model), 1410 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 90 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 9 of 10WPR12FA191
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
HUGHES
Registration:
N380TL
Model/Series:
269C UNDESIGNAT
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
680694
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2050 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1582 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
HIO-360-DIA
Registered Owner:
Canyon State Aero
Rated Power:
190 hp
Operator:
Canyon State Aero
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PHX, 1135 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
190°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.83 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Phoenix, AZ (DVT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Phoenix, AZ (DVT)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1115 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
33.500278, -112.041944 (est)
Page 10 of 10
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Little
Adopted Date:
01/13/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Jack T Ogle; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Mark Platt; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Steven Gleason; Sikorsky Aircraft Corportation; Horseheads, NY
Adroam Booth; The Boeing Company; Mesa, AZ
Jan Sandberg; Canyon State Aero LLC; Mesa, AZ
Publish Date:
06/02/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=83539
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
