National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: E Cameron 190, GM
Accident Number: FTW02LA228
Date & Time: 08/01/2002, 1540 CDT
Registration: N25GH
Aircraft: Bell 206L-1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The helicopter was en route to a gas production platform in the Gulf of Mexico when the helicopter's engine steadily lost power and the 2,500-hour commercial pilot initiated an autorotation to the water.
During touch down, a main rotor blade struck the tail boom, separating a section of the tail rotor drive shaft and damaging both vertical winglets.
No engine discrepancies or anomalies were noted with the engine during the investigation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
AUTOROTATION - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER 4.
ROTOR SYSTEM,MAIN ROTOR BLADE - BLADE STRIKE Factual Information On August 1, 2002, at 1540 central daylight time, a Bell 206L-1 helicopter, N25GH, was substantially damaged during a forced landing to the water following a loss of engine power near East Cameron 190, Gulf of Mexico.
The helicopter was registered to Go Helicopters Inc. and operated by Go Helitrans of Manvel, Texas.
The commercial pilot and three passengers were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 on-demand air taxi flight.
The flight originated at West Cameron 237, Gulf of Mexico, at 1530, and was en route to Vermillon 410, Gulf of Mexico.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB form 6120.1/2), the operator reported that en route to Vermillon 410, an offs-shore platform, while at 1,500 feet msl, the helicopter's engine steadily lost power until the 2,500-hour pilot initiated an autorotation.
During the touch down on the water, a main rotor blade struck the tail boom separating a section of the tail rotor drive shaft, and damaging both vertical winglets.
The pilot and passengers exited the helicopter and was picked up by a crew boat.
The helicopter was loaded onto a barge and transported to shore, then to the operator's location in Manvel, Texas.
The helicopter's engine had accumulated a total time of 17,982.4 hours, with 4.4 hours since the last 100-hour inspection that was performed on July 30, 2002.
Examination of the fuel system, by FAA inspectors, revealed some debris in the main fuel tanks and discolored fuel in the line that goes to the fuel filter.
Clear fuel was found in the line that goes from the fuel filter to the fuel control.
The fuel control and power turbine governor were removed for further examination.
On September 18, 2002, at the manufacturer's facilities in South Bend, Indiana, the fuel control and power turbine governor were tested for run-as-received (RAR), as requested by the NTSB IIC.
Three representatives from Honeywell and an Air Safety Inspector from the FAA's South Bend FSDO witnessed the examination.
Based on the testing, Honeywell found no anomalies that would result in a loss of power, flameout, or sudden overspeed condition.
No other engine discrepancies or anomalies were noted with the engine or airframe during the investigation.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Helicopter Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
