National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fort Yukon, AK
Accident Number: ANC02LA089
Date & Time: 08/01/2002, 1630 AKD
Registration: N50718
Aircraft: Helio H-295
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was landing on a remote gravel strip when the right main landing gear tire/wheel separated from the airplane.
He said the right main landing gear leg then dug into the ground, and the fuselage buckled at the landing gear attachment point.
The pilot said he examined the right main landing gear axle, and found what he believes was a pre-existing crack where the axle failed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the axle shaft, which resulted in the separation of the right main tire/wheel from the airplane on landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,AXLE - FAILURE,TOTAL 2.
LANDING GEAR,WHEEL - SEPARATION Factual Information On August 1, 2002, about 1630 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Helio H-295 airplane, N50718, sustained substantial damage when the right main landing gear axle failed during landing at a remote unimproved airstrip, about 124 miles northwest of Fort Yukon, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated by Circle Air of Central, Alaska, as a visual flight rules (VFR) business flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, at the time of the accident.
The solo commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company VFR flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated at a remote airstrip along Your Creek, about 40 miles north of the accident site.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on August 2, the pilot said as the airplane touched down, the right main wheel/tire separated from the landing gear.
The right main landing gear leg then dug into the ground, and bent rearward.
He said the fuselage structure and skin were damaged at the right main landing gear attachment point.
He further stated that when he retrieved the wheel/tire, he noted that the axle was broken.
The pilot said prior to the accident there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane, but when he examined the broken axle he said he believed the failure was due to an "old crack."
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
