National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ozawkie, KS
Accident Number: CHI02LA226
Date & Time: 08/01/2002, 1300 CDT
Registration: N1029G
Aircraft: Giroux Air Cam
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The amateur built airplane collided with trees during the climb phase of an aborted landing.
The pilot reported that while on short final the airplane seemed to be traveling faster than normal although the airspeed indicator was indicating a normal approach speed of about 45 mph.
He stated the airplane floated during the landing.
He reported that he applied the brakes when the main gear touched down, but the airplane still seemed to be going too fast.
He stated that he decided to go around when he reached a point approximately two-thirds the way down the 650 foot long landing area.
The pilot reported he added full power, but was unable to gain sufficient altitude to clear trees at the end of the landing area.
The airplane contacted the trees at an estimated altitude of about 20 feet.
The pilot reported the landing area was a combination of a gravel driveway and grass area.
He stated the normal landing distance for the airplane is about 250 feet.
The normal takeoff distance with two adults and at gross weight is about 160 feet.
The landing was being made to the west and the pilot reported the local winds were from the west southwest at 5 to 8 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's delay in aborting the landing.
A contributing factor was the excessive airspeed.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
(F) AIRSPEED - EXCESSIVE 3.
The private pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The Title 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The flight originated from Topeka, Kansas, at 1030.
The pilot reported that while on short final the airplane seemed to be traveling faster than normal.
He stated that the airspeed indicator was indicating about 45 mph which is a normal approach speed.
He stated the airplane floated during the landing.
He reported that he applied the brakes when the main gear touched down, but the airplane still seemed to be going too fast.
He stated that he decided to go around when he reached a point approximately two- thirds the way down the 650 foot long landing area.
The pilot reported he added full power, but was unable to gain sufficient altitude to clear trees at the end of the landing area.
The airplane contacted the trees at an estimated altitude of about 20 feet.
The pilot reported the landing area was a combination of a gravel driveway and grass area.
He stated the normal landing distance for the airplane is about 250 feet.
The normal takeoff distance with two adults and at gross weight is about 160 feet.
The landing was being made to the west and the pilot reported the local winds were from the west southwest at 5 to 8 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 44, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
