National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fairbanks, AK
Accident Number: ANC02LA088
Date & Time: 08/01/2002, 1600 AKD
Registration: N53828
Aircraft: Bellanca 8GCBC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that during the landing roll on a remote gravel airstrip, he was unable to maintain directional control, and decided to abort the landing.
Shortly after applying full power and becoming airborne, he made a left turn to avoid a cabin, and the main landing gear encountered willows, pulling the airplane further to the left.
The pilot said he elected to crash the airplane between two trees instead of attempting to turn away or climb over them.
He subsequently reduced power and hit the trees.
The airplane received substantial damage to the wings, fuselage and empennage.
The pilot said there were no preimpact mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during the landing roll, which precipitated an aborted landing, and subsequent collision with trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On August 1, 2002, about 1600 Alaska daylight time, a tundra-tire equipped Bellanca 8GCBC airplane, N53828, sustained substantial damage during an aborted landing when it collided with terrain at a remote gravel airstrip 45 miles north-northwest of Fairbanks, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The certificated private pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Fairbanks International Airport, Fairbanks, about 1430.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board, the pilot reported that the airplane had just touched down on the Beaver Creek airstrip when the nose of the airplane went to the right, and then pulled hard to the left.
He elected to abort the landing, and soon after becoming airborne, made a left turn to avoid a cabin at the end of the airstrip.
During the left turn the airplane's landing gear collided with willows, which pulled the airplane further to the left.
The airplane then bounced in a gravel stream bed, but kept flying.
The pilot said he elected to aim between two trees and make a controlled crash at low speed instead of attempting to turn away from the trees or attempt to climb over them.
He subsequently reduced power and collided with the trees, resulting in substantial damage to the wings, fuselage and empennage.
The pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
