National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Burnsville, NC
Accident Number: ATL02LA148
Date & Time: 08/01/2002, 1346 EDT
Registration: N2008X
Aircraft: Cessna 182H
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane touched down approximately 1,875 feet beyond the approach end of the 2,875- foot long runway surface.
The airplane rolled off the departure end of the runway, down an embankment, and onto a dirt road where it came to rest inverted.
No mechanical problems were reported with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot misjudged distance and speed, and did not attain the proper touchdown point during landing, resulting in an overrun of the runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) DISTANCE/SPEED - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DROP-OFF/DESCENDING EMBANKMENT Factual Information On August 1, 2002, at 1346 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 182H, N2008X, registered to two private owners, ran off the departure end of runway 32 and collided with the ground at the Mountain Air Country Club Airport in Burnsville, North Carolina.
The personal flight was operated by the private pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The private pilot and two passengers were not injured.
A third passenger received minor injuries.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The flight departed Sevierville, Tennessee, at an undetermined time, an August 1, 2002..
According to witnesses at the airport, the pilot attempted two approaches to land before the accident landing.
Witnesses further reported that during the accident approach the airplane touched down approximately 1,875 feet beyond the approach end of the 2,875-foot long runway surface.
The airplane rolled off the departure end of the runway, down an embankment and onto a dirt road where it came to rest inverted Intermittent skid marks were visible on the runway surface beginning at the touchdown point and continuing approximately 800 feet.
Continuous skid marks were visible on the remaining 200 feet of runway surface.
Skid marks were noted through the grass where the airplane rolled down the embankment before coming to rest on the dirt road.
No mechanical problems were reported with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 47, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Unknown Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
