National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ft. Lauderdale, FL
Accident Number: ATL02LA149
Date & Time: 08/01/2002, 1347 EDT
Registration: N957T
Aircraft: Piper PA-32R-301
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the private pilot, as he applied braking action during rollout, the airplane began to veer left.
Although he added right rudder to correct the problem, he was not able to stop the airplane from veering to the left.
The right main landing gear collapsed and the airplane spun around approximately 180 degrees, coming to rest on the runway surface.
Examination of the airplane revealed a significant amount of side load had occurred, and both the left and right main landing gears collapsed to the left.
The right wing was damaged when the landing gear collapsed.
There were several tire marks on the runway that terminated at the point where the airplane rested.
The pilot did not report a mechanical problem with the airplane prior to and during the accident sequence of events.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Pilot in command failed to maintain directional control of the airplane during the landing roll that resulted in a ground loop and the overload failure of the right main landing gear.
Findings Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - OVERLOAD 3.
The personal flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with an instrument flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane was substantially damaged, and the private pilot and passenger were not injured.
The flight departed Naples, Florida, at 1300 on August 1, 2001.
According to the private pilot, as he applied braking action during rollout after landing the airplane began to veer left.
Although the pilot added right rudder to correct the problem, he was not able to stop the airplane from veering to the left.
The right main landing gear collapsed and the airplane spun around approximately 180 degrees, coming to rest on the runway surface with a heading of 130 degrees.
Examination of the airplane revealed a significant amount of side load had occurred, and both the left and right main landing gear collapsed to the left as a result.
The right wing was damaged when the landing gear collapsed.
There were several tire marks on the runway that terminated at the point where the airplane rested.
The pilot did not report a mechanical problem with the airplane prior to and during the accident sequence of events.
The recorded winds were variable at three knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 30 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 418 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: IO-540 Registered Owner: B & B Contracting Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
