The pilot said he was in a left turning descent from approximately 1,000 feet agl to 
approximately 700 feet agl when the airplane's left wing dropped.  The pilot said, "I applied 
right stick, and simultaneously the airplane entered a spin.  I pushed the stick immediately 
forward and applied right rudder - waiting for the aircraft to recover.  The aircraft recovered 
approximately 35 feet from the ground, below a tree line that was quickly approaching.  There 
was an area of open (unobstructed) ground to my left and I elected to land there.  During the 
landing one of the landing gear collapsed and I slid to a stop short of the trees."  The pilot said 
a fire occurred in the engine nacelle area.  "My extinguisher was not adequate to extinguish the 
fire and eventually the entire fabric A/C (aircraft) was consumed."  The pilot provided the 
following safety recommendation:  "Maintain adequate airspeed at all times when airborne."
The pilot not maintaining adequate airspeed while maneuvering in the turn.  Factors relating 
to this accident were the low airspeed, the inadvertent stall, and the low altitude.
On October 1, 2001, at 1800 central daylight time, an Aeronca 7AC, N1746E, piloted by a 
private pilot was destroyed when it impacted terrain 6 miles east of Erhard, Minnesota.  A post 
crash fire ensued.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 
personal flight was being operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.  
The pilot and passenger on board reported no injuries.  The local flight originated near Pelican 
Rapids, Minnesota, at 1730.
In his written statement, the pilot said he was in a left turning descent from approximately 
1,000 feet agl to approximately 700 feet agl when the airplane's left wing dropped.  The pilot 
said, "I applied right stick, and simultaneously the airplane entered a spin.  I pushed the stick 
immediately forward and applied right rudder - waiting for the aircraft to recover.  The aircraft 
recovered approximately 35 feet from the ground, below a tree line that was quickly 
approaching.  There was an area of open (unobstructed) ground to my left and I elected to land 
there.  During the landing one of the landing gear collapsed and I slid to a stop short of the 
trees."  The pilot said a fire occurred in the engine nacelle area.  "My extinguisher was not 
adequate to extinguish the fire and eventually the entire fabric A/C (aircraft) was consumed."  
Also in his written statement, the pilot provided the following safety recommendation:  
"Maintain adequate airspeed at all times when airborne." 
