The student pilot/builder of the glider made five successful tow releases and landings from a 
paved runway, and was making his first tow release from grass.  The driver towed the glider to 
the starting point, the student pilot got onboard, and he and another individual installed the 
canopy.  The student pilot/builder checked the security of the canopy with a "push-up" on it, 
then began the glider tow.   At liftoff, about 38 knots, the glider hit a clump of grass, and the 
canopy departed the airframe.  The student pilot raised his left arm to protect his face, and 
thought he must have pulled back on the control stick as he avoided the canopy.  The glider 
stalled about 10 feet in the air, then hit the ground.  The student pilot/builder had difficulty 
latching the canopy prior to previous tows, and felt that the latching mechanism may have been 
twisted.
An improperly secured canopy latch, which resulted in canopy separation during liftoff and the 
pilot's subsequent loss of control.  A factor was the improper installation of the latch.
On October 2, 2001, about 1100 eastern daylight time, a homebuilt Woodstock I glider, 
N21468, received minor damage when the canopy came off during a ground tow release at 
Greene County Airport (WAY), Waynesburg, Pennsylvania.  The certificated student pilot was 
seriously injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and 
no flight plan was on file for the local personal flight, which was conducted under 14 CFR Part 
91.
According to the student pilot, who was also the builder of the glider, the accident tow release 
was the fifth of six that were planned for the day.  The purposes of the tow releases were to 
check the glider before a long test flight and to accustom the student pilot to the glider's flight 
characteristics. 
According to the driver of the tow vehicle, the student pilot/builder had made the earlier 
successful tow releases and landings from a paved runway, and was making his first tow release 
from grass.  The driver towed the glider to the starting point, the student pilot boarded it, and 
he and another individual installed the canopy.
The student pilot/builder reported that he checked the security of the canopy with a "push-up" 
on it, then began the glider tow.  Glider liftoff occurred about 38 knots.  At liftoff, the glider hit 
a clump of grass, and the canopy departed the airframe.  The student pilot/builder raised his 
left arm to protect his face, and pulled back on the control stick as he avoided the canopy.  The 
glider stalled about 10 feet in the air and hit the ground.  The student pilot/builder suffered a 
compression fracture of the second lumbar vertebrae.
The student pilot/builder later stated that he had had trouble latching the canopy prior to 
previous tows, and felt that although he pushed up on it to check it, the latching mechanism 
was probably twisted.
