The pilot stated that during the touch-and-go landing, as he applied power, and reached for the 
flap control to take off, the left wing lifted, then dropped, and the aircraft went suddenly to the 
left, into the grass. He said he reduced power and tried to steer the aircraft toward the taxiway, 
but it collided with a ditch, incurring substantial damage.
the pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the aircraft while attempting to take off 
after executing a touch-and-go landing, in gusty wind conditions, which resulted in a ground 
swerve, and the aircraft exiting the runway, and incurring substantial damage when it collided 
with a ditch.
On October 1, 2001, about 1520 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172R, N851CP, 
registered to Nathaniel Aviation Inc., and operated by Eagle Aviation Academy,  as a Title 14 
CFR Part 91 personal flight, veered off the runway during a touch-and-go landing at Wauchula, 
Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The private-
rated pilot, sole occupant of the aircraft, was not injured. The aircraft incurred substantial 
damage. The flight originated from Sarasota, Florida, the same day, about 1500.
The pilot stated that he was performing touch-and-go landings on runway 36 at 
Wauchula Airport, and the wind was coming from about 310 degrees, at about 10 to 12 knots, 
with some gusts. The pilot further stated that during the touch-and-go landing the aircraft 
touched down about 100 to 150 feet down the runway, and as he applied power, and reached 
for the flap control to take off, the left wing lifted, then dropped, and the aircraft went suddenly 
to the left, into the grass. The pilot said he reduced power, and tried to steer the aircraft toward 
the taxiway, but it collided with a ditch. According to the pilot, when the aircraft collided with 
the ditch the nose wheel caught, and the aircraft stopped immediately.
An FAA inspector who conducted the postaccident examination, stated that the left wing 
tip, nose landing gear, firewall  and the propeller had all received damage as a result of the 
accident.
