The pilot reported that he was flying in cruise configuration at 300 feet AGL when the aircraft 
collided with the terrain. He reported that a communication radio was making wind noise, and 
he was attempting to adjust it at the time of the accident. The pilot reported that he could not 
remember the details surrounding the accident sequence. There was no report of mechanical 
malfunction or failure at the time of the accident.
The pilot's failure to maintain an altitude clear of terrain.  A factor was intentional low altitude 
flight.
On October 1, 2001, about 1700 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 172, N3910F, was destroyed 
when it collided with terrain near Lindsay, Montana.  The airplane was owned by the pilot, and 
was being operated as a personal/pleasure flight under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, 
when the accident occurred.  The private pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, received 
serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a visual flight rules (VFR) 
flight plan was filed and activated for the cross-country flight.  The flight originated from 
Glendive, Montana (GDV), approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.  The pilot's 
planned destination was Helena, (HLN), Montana.  
During a telephone interview with a NTSB investigator on October 1st, the pilot reported that 
he was adjusting the airplane's radio while in a cruise configuration at an altitude of 300 feet 
above ground level (AGL). The pilot reported in a written statement that the communications 
radio on the copilot side was making noise due to airflow from the vent, and he was attempting 
to adjust its position just prior to the accident. He reported that he remembered "pulling up" 
just before the airplane collided with terrain.  The pilot stated that he was unable to recall any 
of the detailed events leading up to the accident. 
The pilot reported in a written statement that prior to the flight, he amended the flight plan 
cruise altitude from 6500 feet to 4500 feet. The pilot reported on the Pilot/Operator Aircraft 
Accident Report Form no mechanical malfunction or failure at the time of the accident. 
The automated weather observation at Glendive, Montana (GDV), at 1655 reported winds from 
160 degrees at 6 knots, 10 statute miles visibility, and clear skies. Glendive is approximately 25 
nautical miles west of the accident site.
