While en route to refuel, the pilot experienced a loss of engine power and impacted trees 
during the ensuing forced landing.  The pilot said he departed when the airplane's fuel quantity 
gauges indicated that the right fuel tank was empty, and the left tank was "close to 1/2," which 
should have allow him to reach his destination; however, due to "heading winds" and the use of 
a "higher rpm," the airplane "ran out of fuel."  The airplane experienced a loss of engine power 
and impacted trees during the ensuing forced landing.  Examination of the airplane did not 
reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.  Both fuel tanks remained intact and there was 
no evidence of a fuel spill.  Approximately 1/2 gallon of fuel was observed in the airplane's fuel 
system.  Additionally, the fuel line which connected from the airframe fuel filter to the 
carburetor was removed and contained "a few drops" of fuel.
The pilot's inadequate preflight planning, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to fuel 
exhaustion.
On October 2, 2001, about 1400 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-12, N2528M, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing near Ashland, Maine.  The certificated 
commercial pilot sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan had been filed for the flight destined for the Shin Pond Seaplane Base (85B), Patten, 
Maine.  The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot said the airplane's fuel tanks were "topped off" on September 
29, 2001, at 85B, before a flight to "Fish River Lake, Moose Point Lodge."  The following day, 
the pilot flew to East Grand Lake, Orient, Maine, and then returned to Fish River Lake.  The 
morning of the accident, the pilot conducted a 1 hour local fight, and then departed Fish River 
Lake with the intention of refueling at 8B5.  The pilot stated that the airplane's fuel quantity 
gauges indicated that the right fuel tank was empty, and the left tank was "close to 1/2;" which 
should have allowed him to reach his destination; however, due to "heading winds" and the use 
of a "higher rpm," the airplane "ran out of fuel."  The airplane experienced a loss of engine 
power and impacted trees during the ensuing forced landing.  
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector did not reveal any 
pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.  Both fuel tanks remained intact and there was no 
evidence of a fuel spill.  Approximately 1/2 gallon of fuel was observed in the airplane's fuel 
system.  Additionally, the fuel line which connected from the airframe fuel filter to the 
carburetor was removed and contained "a few drops" of fuel.
