Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Chugiak, AK
Accident Number:
ANC09FA003
Date & Time:
10/03/2008, 1500 AKD 
Registration:
N7511J
Aircraft:
ANTONOVICH ANTON B 
CHALLENGER II
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The non-certificated pilot departed on a Title 14, CFR Part 91, local area personal flight in an 
experimental light sport homebuilt airplane. A witness reported seeing the airplane flying 
about 100 feet above trees before the engine noise increased, and the nose pitched down. The 
airplane subsequently descended nose first into dense woods. The pilot™s flight instructor 
reported to the NTSB that he had given the pilot 19.2 hours of flight instruction, but the pilot 
had not progressed to a point where he could endorse him for a solo flight. He said that the 
pilot routinely struggled with pitch control during takeoff, landing, or when engine power was 
increased or decreased. Examination of the airplane did not disclose any preimpact mechanical 
malfunction. Given the lack of mechanical deficiencies with the airplane's engine or flight 
controls, in conjunction with the witness and the flight instructor™s statements, it is likely the 
pilot failed to adequately maintain control of the airplane while maneuvering.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s failure to maintain control of the airplane while maneuvering, resulting in an in-
flight collision with trees. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's lack of experience.
Findings
Aircraft
Pitch control - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Total experience - Pilot (Factor)
Environmental issues
Tree(s) - Not specified
Page 2 of 6ANC09FA003
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 3, 2008, about 1500 Alaska daylight time, an experimental light sport (E-LSA) 
homebuilt Challenger II airplane, N7511J, sustained substantial damage when it collided with 
tree-covered terrain following a loss of control while maneuvering, about 5 miles northeast of 
Chugiak, Alaska. The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight 
under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, when the accident 
occurred. The non-certificated pilot died at the scene. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local area flight. Witnesses reported that the 
accident airplane departed from the Birchwood Airport, Chugiak, about 1455.  
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on October 7, a helicopter pilot that was inbound to the Birchwood 
Airport reported that he saw the accident airplane's departure from Runway 19L. He said that 
just after the accident airplane became airborne, it began to "porpoise" which continued during 
climb. The helicopter pilot said that just after takeoff, the airplane turned left, while still very 
low, and flew over an area of hangars and buildings on the northeast side of the airport. In a 
report to the NTSB, the helicopter pilot wrote, in part: "At one time we thought he was going to 
hit one of the buildings due to a steep dive. We continued our approach and the aircraft was 
last observed heading northbound."     
Witnesses reported to responding emergency crews that just before the accident they saw the 
airplane flying northbound, about 100 feet above the trees. The witness said that as it 
continued northbound, the engine noise increased, and the nose pitched down. The witness 
said that the airplane's nose continued to pitch down until the airplane descended nose first 
into dense woods. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot did not hold an FAA pilot or medical certificate, nor was he required to while 
operating an E-LSA airplane as a student pilot. 
No personal flight records were located for the pilot, and the aeronautical experience listed on 
page 3 of this report was obtained from the pilot™s flight instructor.  
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on October 7, the flight instructor that had 
been providing primary flight instruction to the accident pilot reported that he had been flying 
with the pilot from November 11, 2006, until June 15, 2008. The flight instructor also noted 
that he had originally built the accident airplane from a kit, and as part of the sale agreement 
between himself and the accident pilot, he would teach the pilot how to fly the airplane. 
According to the flight instructor, the pilot had received 19.2 hours of flight instruction in 
Challenger II airplanes, but he had not progressed to a point where he could endorse the pilot 
for a solo flight. He added that the pilot frequently struggled with pitch control of the 
Challenger II airplane during takeoff, landing, or when engine power was increased or 
decreased. The flight instructor also noted that the flight characteristics of a Challenger II 
airplane with one occupant, compared to two occupants, are very different.     
The flight instructor told the NTSB IIC that he had refused to fly with the pilot in the accident 
airplane until after the regularly scheduled annual inspection was completed on the airframe 
Page 3 of 6ANC09FA003
and engine, which was due July 31, 2008. The flight instructor said he was unaware if the 
accident pilot had ever complied with the scheduled annual inspection, but he assumed not, 
since the pilot had not called to schedule more flight training in his airplane.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was built by the original owner from a kit, and was issued an FAA experimental 
airworthiness certificate with experimental limitations on July 15, 2007. 
The airplane had an aluminum tube frame that formed the fuselage structure. The nose of the 
airplane was formed by a fiberglass nose cone. The fuselage, rudder, and horizontal stabilizer 
were enclosed by Ceconite-covered fabric. The wings had aluminum tube frames with loose-
fitting, canvas-like fabric material. The airplane was designed with two tandem seats in the 
cockpit, with the pilot™s seat in front.   
The airplane was equipped with an aft-mounted, pusher, Rotex 503, 52 horsepower engine.        
No maintenance records or construction build records were located for the airplane. No weight 
and balance data for the airplane was located. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest weather reporting facility was the Birchwood Airport, about 5 miles southwest of 
the accident site. At 1456, an aviation routine weather report (METAR) was reporting, in part: 
Wind 260 degrees at 3 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, few at 3,000 
feet, 3,700 feet scattered, 4,800 feet broken; temperature, 43 degrees F; dew point, 30 degrees 
F; altimeter, 29.35 inHg.
COMMUNICATIONS
The airplane was not equipped with a radio. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The National Transportation Safety Board IIC, and an FAA airworthiness inspector from the 
Anchorage Flight Standards District Office, Anchorage, Alaska, examined the wreckage at the 
accident site on October 3. 
All of the airplane's major components were found at the main wreckage site. A path of 
wreckage debris, from an area of broken trees to the wreckage point of rest, was on a magnetic 
heading of approximately 190 degrees. (All heading/bearings noted in this report are oriented 
toward magnetic north.)
The airplane™s fuselage was discovered inverted, and the fiberglass nose section was crushed 
and buckled inward. The primary crush zones extended from the fiberglass nose cone back to 
about the aft passenger seat area, which encompassed the pilot's cockpit area. The cockpit area 
was obliterated by impact damage. The instrument panel was crushed and twisted under the 
fuselage.
The wings remained attached to the fuselage, and both were extensively distorted. A portion of 
the airplane™s right wing and right aileron was suspended from a tree, adjacent to the main 
wreckage site.  
Due to impact damage, continuity of the flight control cables and push-pull tubes could not be 
established.
Page 4 of 6ANC09FA003
The propeller hub assembly remained connected to the engine crankshaft. Both wooden 
propeller blades were broken about mid-span, and each had leading edge gouging. 
There were no preaccident mechanical problems discovered with the airplane's engine or flight 
controls during the NTSB IIC's on-scene wreckage examination.   
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted under the authority of the Alaska State 
Medical Examiner, 4500 South Boniface Parkway, Anchorage, Alaska, on October 5, 2008. The 
cause of death for the pilot was attributed to blunt force, traumatic injuries.
The FAA's Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI) did a toxicological examination on November 4, 
2008, and was negative for alcohol or drugs. 
WRECKAGE RELEASE
The Safety Board released the wreckage, at the accident site, to the owner's representatives on 
October 3, 2008.  The Safety Board retained no parts or components.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
None
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
19 hours (Total, all aircraft), 19 hours (Total, this make and model), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all 
aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ANC09FA003
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ANTONOVICH ANTON B
Registration:
N7511J
Model/Series:
CHALLENGER II 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental Light Sport
Serial Number:
CH2-0703-R-2342
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotex
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
502
Registered Owner:
ROILAND RICHARD H
Rated Power:
52 hp
Operator:
ROILAND RICHARD H
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PABV, 83 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
240 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1456 ADT
Direction from Accident Site:
5°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 4800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.35 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Birchwood, AK (BVC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Birchwood, AK (BVC)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1455 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
61.400000, -149.513889 (est)
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Clinton O Johnson
Adopted Date:
09/30/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Jeffery A Miller; Federal Aviation Administration (Airworthiness); Anchorage, AK
Publish Date:
09/30/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
