Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Santa Clarita, CA
Accident Number:
WPR09LA226
Date & Time:
05/01/2009, 1515 PDT 
Registration:
N67FF
Aircraft:
MD HELICOPTER 369FF
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he was maneuvering the helicopter about 10 feet above a reservoir in an 
attempt to use its rotor wash to propel an object to the shore. During this maneuver, the 
helicopter's long-line and attached grappling hook were submerged in the water. With the 
helicopter moving at low speed about 10 feet from the shoreline, the grappling hook became 
temporarily ensnared on an underwater obstruction and the helicopter made a rapid and 
violent turn. The pilot initiated emergency procedures and maneuvered the helicopter toward 
the shore. It touched down on uneven terrain with the left skid on dry land and the right skid in 
the water. Examination of the helicopter revealed that there was a torsional fracture and 
separation of the tail rotor drive shaft as a result of the tail rotor blades contacting the water. 
No anomalies with the main rotor controls were found. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from the water while maneuvering at low altitude as a 
result of the helicopter's grappling hook temporarily becoming ensnared with an underwater 
obstruction.
Findings
Aircraft
Tail rotor drive shaft - Damaged/degraded
Altitude - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Water - Not specified
Page 2 of 5WPR09LA226
Factual Information
On May 1, 2009, about 1515 Pacific daylight time, a McDonnell Douglas Helicopter (MDHI) 
369FF, N67FF, made a hard landing during an emergency landing near Santa Clarita, 
California.  Summit Helicopters was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 133.  The certificated commercial pilot was not injured; the 
helicopter sustained substantial damage to the tail boom.  The local external load flight 
departed a helipad at Bouquet Canyon, near Santa Clarita. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector interviewed the pilot, who stated that he 
had been transporting a work crew. After dropping the crew off, it was discovered that one of 
them had dropped a lunch pail into Bouquet Reservoir. The helicopter had a 40-foot external 
long-line with a four-pronged grappling hook attached to the cargo hook. The pilot attempted 
to use the grappling hook to snag the lunch pail, but was unsuccessful.
The pilot went down low, about 10 feet above the reservoir surface, and tried to use the main 
rotor blade wash to push the floating lunch pail toward the shore. He did not disconnect the 
long line and grappling hook; the grappling hook was submerged below the reservoir surface. 
While side slipping toward the shore, the pilot felt a short vibration in the rudder pedals, and a 
loss of tail rotor authority. The helicopter turned twice before the throttle was reduced, and the 
rotations stopped. An auto rotation landing was performed on the shore line. 
The pilot submitted a written statement. He said that the helicopter was about 10 feet from the 
shoreline when the helicopter made a rapid and violent turn, which the pilot attributed to a 
loss of tail rotor thrust. He initiated emergency procedures by twisting the throttle to ground 
idle. He was facing the shore when the turning stopped. He maneuvered the helicopter toward 
the shore, and landed in an upright position on uneven terrain with the left skid on dry land 
and the right skid in the water. He immediately shut the helicopter down. The tail boom was 
twisted and bent down.
An MD Helicopters, Inc., investigator examined the wreckage under the supervision of the FAA 
inspector. He noted skin wrinkling on all five main rotor blades, and no evidence of main rotor 
blade contact with the ground, fuselage, or tail boom. He verified control continuity for all 
main rotor controls. Both tail rotor blades were bent and damaged. He could not establish 
continuity from the main rotor transmission to the tail rotor, and discovered a torsional 
fracture of the tail rotor drive shaft.
Metallurgical examination of the tail rotor drive shaft determined that the fracture mode was 
torsional overload, and it met hardness and conductivity specifications. Both of the tail rotor 
blades appeared to have made contact with another surface. However, it could not be 
determined what made contact with the tail rotor blades or when in the accident sequence the 
contact occurred.
Page 3 of 5WPR09LA226
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)  (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/08/2008
Flight Time:
14450 hours (Total, all aircraft), 6000 hours (Total, this make and model), 13800 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 180 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MD HELICOPTER
Registration:
N67FF
Model/Series:
369FF 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0067FF
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/28/2009, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
1645 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
C30
Registered Owner:
SUMMIT HELICOPTER INC
Rated Power:
650 hp
Operator:
SUMMIT HELICOPTER INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Page 4 of 5WPR09LA226
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KBUR
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1553 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 4500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Santa Clarita, CA 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Santa Clarita, CA 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
34.466667, -118.633333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard D Plagens
Adopted Date:
03/16/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Frank Motter; Federal Aviation Administration; Van Nuys, CA
John Hobby; MD Helicopters, Inc.; Mesa, AZ
Publish Date:
03/16/2011
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5WPR09LA226
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
