National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Oakland, CA
Accident Number: WPR09LA071
Date & Time: 01/03/2009, 1445 PST
Registration: N226PF
Aircraft: PZL PZL-104 35A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Fuel exhaustion
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that during a local personal flight, the engine lost power as a result of fuel exhaustion.
During the forced landing, he maneuvered to avoid power lines and subsequently impacted trees.
The pilot related that he thought he had enough fuel for a short local flight.
Post accident, the pilot stated that he did not realize he had flown the airplane for more than 4 hours since it had been refueled.
The airplane's fuel endurance is about 4 hours.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion as a result of the pilot™s inadequate preflight planning.
Findings Aircraft Fuel - Fluid level (Cause) Personnel issues Fuel planning - Pilot (Cause) Factual Information HISTORY OF FLIGHT On January 3, 2009, about 1445 Pacific standard time, an experimental PZL, PZL-104-35A, Wilga, N226PF, impacted trees following a loss of engine power in Redwood Regional Park, Oakland, California.
The owner/pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
The commercial pilot sustained minor injuries; the airplane sustained substantial damage by impact forces.
The local personal flight departed Oakland about 1435.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot reported that while maneuvering, the engine "ran out of gas just passed the western arm of the San Leondro Reservoir."
He attempted a restart without success.
During the descent, he saw power lines in front of him and he turned the airplane to the north.
The airplane subsequently impacted trees.
The pilot extricated himself from the wreckage and obtained transportation to a local hospital for treatment of his injuries.
The pilot thought he departed Oakland Airport with enough fuel for the local flight based on the readings of the two fuel gauges.
On January 12, 2009, the pilot contacted the National Transportation Safety Board investigator in-charge (IIC) and related that he had researched the amount of flight time he had on the accident airplane since refueling it.
The airplane was refueled on October 18, 2008, to maximum capacity.
The pilot reported that he had flown a total of 4.1 hours since refueling.
The airplane's fuel endurance was a little more than 4 hours.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
