The purpose of the flight was to break in the engine and to evaluate the systems and flight 
characteristics of the newly-constructed, experimental amateur-built airplane. During the 
flight, the private pilot observed an elevated cylinder head temperature, which he controlled 
with airspeed, altitude, fuel mixture and engine power settings. The pilot returned to the 
airport, and, in the traffic pattern, the engine began to run rough, followed by a total loss of 
power. The pilot subsequently landed in an open field about 150 feet short of the runway 
threshold. A postaccident examination of the fuel system and a test run of the engine revealed 
no mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. The reason for the 
reported loss of engine power was not determined.
A total loss of engine power for undetermined reasons, because postaccident examination of 
the engine and fuel system did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation.
On January 2, 2016, about 1530 Pacific standard time, an experimental amateur-built Kai 
Engstad RV-8A airplane, N958RV, was substantially damaged following a loss of engine power 
and subsequent forced landing at McNary Field (SLE), Salem, Oregon. The pilot, who was also 
the builder/owner of the airplane, was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the local flight, which was operated in accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Part 91, and a flight plan was not filed. The flight had departed SLE about 1500.
In a report submitted to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the pilot reported that the flight was in conjunction with Phase 1 of the test period 
for the experimental airplane, with the goals of the flight focused on breaking in the engine and 
an evaluation of the systems/flight characteristics. The pilot stated that subsequent to the 
preflight being performed, a short ground run was accomplished, with no issues noted. In 
flight, the pilot reported that there was an issue with an elevated cylinder head temperature, 
which he controlled with airspeed, altitude, mixture, and power settings. The pilot opined that 
upon his return to the departure airport, and with clearance by air traffic control to enter a 
right base leg for runway 34, he requested a left 360 degree turn from the controller, due to 
conflicting traffic. The controller then advised the pilot to extend his right downwind leg, and 
that he would call his base leg. The pilot reported that upon his return to the airport the engine 
began to run rough and power was lost. An attempt to restart the engine was successful, 
however, a short time later he again experienced a loss of power. The pilot subsequently landed 
in a field short of the runway, which resulted in substantial damage to the airplane.
On January 14, 2016, the initial phase of the postaccident examination of the airframe and 
engine was overseen by a Federal Aviation Administration aviation safety inspector at the 
pilot/owner's hangar, located at SLE. As a result of his examination, the inspector reported 
that he observed bends in the firewall that affected the alignment of the engine mount. The 
nose landing gear was bent aft but remained connected to the forward fuselage area. Both 
propeller blades were impact damaged. Additionally, fuel (100LL) recovered from both the left 
and right fuel tanks was clear, with no contaminants observed. The fuel selector was in the left 
tank position. The fuel bust pump was observed to operate normally, with proper fuel pressure 
noted. The electric boost pump operated normally, and an inspection of the fuel vent lines 
revealed no obstructions. After a fuel line was disconnected from the engine, a check of the fuel 
again revealed no contaminants. All remaining fuel lines were left connected in place. All 
linkages to the throttle body were intact, with no anomalies observed. The inspector's 
examination of the fuel system revealed no anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation. The inspector further reported that both magnetos were of the electronic ignition 
type. Photographs provided by the inspector to the NTSB IIC of the airframe revealed no 
damage, with the exception of the damage previously reported. The inspector subsequently 
supervised the removal and shipment of the engine to Aero Sport Power, Kamloops, British 
Columbia, Canada.
On April 14, 2016, under the supervision of the NTSB IIC, the airplane's engine was examined 
at the facilities of Aero Sport Power, Kamloops, British Columbia, Canada. Aero Sport Power 
provided three aircraft technicians to perform the examination, which culminated with the 
following findings:
The engine was removed from the as arrived crate and secured onto a test stand. Some slight 
scrape marks were observed on the #2 and #4 valve covers, a small dent on one of the pushrod 
tubes, and one cross threaded valve cover screw. The starter also has some clearance 
modifications. The engine crankshaft was rotated and turned freely without interruption. A 
static timing check on the "P" mags was performed, with timing confirmed set at zero degrees, 
which was correct for this engine model. The engine was then installed on the test stand, 
accompanied by a test propeller being installed. The original 6 ½ quarts of engine oil was 
retained in the engine for the engine run. The original oil filter was removed from the engine 
and cut open. No foreign material was observed in the paper filtration cartridge. A new oil filter 
was then installed on the engine. The original oil temperature probe was removed due to 
incompatible wiring for the Aero Sport Power test stand; a substitute test probe was installed. 
A "cold" leak down test was performed on the cylinders prior to the initial startup, with leak 
downs recorded as good - #1 75.6/80; #2 76/80; #3 75/80; #4 75/80. The top spark plugs 
were removed, followed by the engine oil system being prelubed by rotating the engine with the 
starter motor until oil pressure was observed on the oil pressure gauges installed in the test 
stand. The top spark plugs were then reinstalled as per the "P" mag directions; as two plugs 
lead were missing, two substitute test leads were used, and wired with the test wiring harness. 
The test stand was then repositioned to an on-airport test area where the engine was started 
without interruption. The engine was then run for about 30 minutes at various rpm ranges, 
with no interruptions notes. The engine was examined for oil leak subsequent to the test run 
having been completed, with no oil leaks observed. A "hot" leak down test was performed and 
recorded as good - #1 77/80; #2 78/80; #3 78/80; #4 78/80. The oil filter was removed and 
cut open, with no foreign material observed. The engine run revealed that the engine ran as 
designed and was in good operating condition, with no anomalies noted that would preclude 
normal operation. (Refer to the Aero Sport Power Engine Inspection Report, Section 6, which 
is appended to the docket for this report.)
Subsequent to the examination of the engine at the facilities of Aero Sport Power, the propeller 
governor was removed from the engine and retained by the NTSB IIC. On July 19, 2016, the 
governor was shipped to the facilities of MT-Propeller, located in DeLand, Florida, for 
examination. On August 4, 2016, under the supervision of an FAA aviation safety inspector, the 
governor was inspected by an MT-Propeller technician. The technician reported that the 
governor was not damaged, that the drive shaft could be rotated freely by hand, and that the 
control arm was observed to move freely from high rpm to low rpm stops. The technician 
further reported that after flushing the governor with parts cleaner, it was installed on a test 
bench. After reaching operating temperature, a bench check was performed. All parameters 
were found to be within manufacturer's specifications. No anomalies with the governor were 
revealed that would have precluded normal operation. (Refer to the MT-Propeller governor 
examination report, which is appended to the docket for this report.)
The examination of the airplane's engine and associated components failed to reveal what 
precipitated the reported loss of engine power.
