The noninstrument-rated pilot planned to conduct a cross-country flight. Before departure on 
the second leg of the flight, the pilot obtained a weather briefing, which noted areas of 
instrument flight rules (IFR) conditions along his route of flight, including his destination 
airport. During the briefing, the pilot indicated that his vehicle and work was at his destination. 
The briefer and pilot discussed flying visual flight rules (VFR) over the cloud layer and possible 
alternate destination airports. The briefer suggested maintaining VFR flight and making an 
intermediary stop to again check the weather. The pilot elected to fly direct to his destination. 
During the flight, the pilot flew above the cloud layer and received VFR flight-following from 
ATC. The controller advised him that his preferred destination airport was currently under IFR 
conditions, but another airport was reporting VFR. The pilot elected to continue to the 
alternate destination airport. The pilot notified the controller he did not have visual contact 
with the ground and continued his descent. Shortly thereafter, the controller lost radar and 
radio communication with the pilot. About the time of the accident, a person in the area 
reported the weather conditions as, "clouds on the ground," with low ceilings, and freezing fog 
and added that the visibility had changed from about 6 miles to less than ¼ mile in seconds. 
The airplane wreckage was located about 8 miles from the airport. Examination of the 
wreckage did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operations. A review 
of the pilot's logbook revealed he had a total of about 111 flight hours. The accident is consistent 
with controlled flight into terrain in instrument meteorological conditions as the pilot 
continued the descent without the ground in sight.
The noninstrument-rated pilot's improper decision to continue visual flight into instrument 
meteorological conditions, which resulted in a collision with terrain.
