The airline transport pilot was conducting a scheduled passenger flight in an area of remote, 
snow-covered, mountainous terrain with seven passengers on board. The pilot reported that, 
after receiving a weather briefing, he chose to conduct the flight under visual flight rules (VFR). 
While en route about 10,000 ft mean sea level (msl), the visibility began "getting fuzzy." The 
pilot then descended the airplane to 2,500 ft msl (500 ft above ground level) to fly along a 
river. When the airplane was about 10 miles southwest of the airport, he climbed the airplane 
to about 3,000 ft msl in order to conduct a straight-in approach to the runway. He added that 
the visibility was again a little "fuzzy" due to snow and clouds, and that he never saw the 
airport. The pilot also noted that the flat light conditions limited his ability to determine his 
distance from the surrounding mountainous, snow-covered terrain. Shortly after climbing to 
3,000 ft msl, the airplane collided with the rising terrain about 6 miles southwest of the 
airport. Another pilot, who had just departed from the airport, confirmed that flat light and 
low-visibility conditions existed in the area at the time of the accident. Further, camera images 
of the weather conditions recorded at the airport showed that, although conditions were 
marginal VFR at the surface at the time of the accident, there was mountain obscuration and 
reduced visibility due to light snow and clouds along the accident flight path and that the worst 
conditions were located along and near the higher terrain. 
The pilot reported no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that 
would have precluded normal operation. It is likely that that the pilot encountered flat light 
and low-visibility conditions as he neared the airport at 3,000 ft msl while operating under 
VFR and that he did not see the rising, snow-covered mountainous terrain and subsequently 
failed to maintain clearance from it.
The pilot's continued flight into deteriorating, flat light weather conditions, which resulted in 
impact with mountainous, snow-covered terrain. 
