Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
BOYNTON BEACH, FL
Accident Number:
MIA96LA074
Date & Time:
02/02/1996, 1715 EST 
Registration:
N77YK
Aircraft:
Yakovlev YAK-52
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness stated that the airplane was observed on a low pass down the runway at about 900 to 
1,000 feet. The pilot then made three barrel rolls and lost altitude on all three rolls. The pilot 
remained in a closed traffic pattern and made a second pass down the runway at about 100 to 
200 feet. The airplane was observed to enter a pull-up and a barrel roll to the left. According to 
information from witness reports, when the airplane was at the 90-degree point, it entered a 
descent and crashed into the ground. Examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of a 
precrash failure or malfunction. The pilot had limited experience performing aerobatic flight, 
and he had only about 6 hours of flight time in this make and model of airplane. A colleague 
observed that when the pilot performed barrel roll maneuvers on previous flights, the airplane 
was 'dishing out and losing . . . altitude on a regular basis.'  The colleague said that he had 
'informed' the pilot that he should obtain some dual instruction. A toxicology test of the pilot's 
blood showed an alcohol level of 0.10%. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Pilot impairment of judgment and performance due to alcohol, his resultant improper 
planning/decision, and his failure to maintain sufficient altitude above the terrain while 
performing an aerobatic maneuver.  Factors relating to the accident were: the pilot's lack of 
experience in the make and model of airplane, and his lack of experience in the type of 
operation (aerobatic flight). 
Page 2 of 6MIA96LA074
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) IMPAIRMENT(ALCOHOL) - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. AEROBATICS - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) ALTITUDE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OPERATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6MIA96LA074
Factual Information
 On February 2, 1996, about 1715 eastern standard time, a Yakoblev 52 experimental airplane, 
N77YK, registered to a private owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed 
while maneuvering in the vicinity of Boynton Beach, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane was destroyed. The private pilot was fatally 
injured. The flight originated from Willis Gliderport, Boynton Beach, Florida, about 30 
minutes before the accident.
     A witness stated neighbors observed the airplane make a low pass down runway 27 at about 
900 to 1,000 feet. The airplane made three barrel rolls and lost altitude on all three rolls. The 
airplane remained in closed traffic and made a second pass down the runway at about 120 
mph, and at about 100 to 200 feet. The airplane was observed to initiate a pull up and did a 
barrel roll to the left. When the airplane was 90 degrees off heading, it was observed to enter a 
vertical nose down descent and collide with the ground.
     On scene examination of the crash site conducted by the FAA revealed the airplane collided 
with the ground in a near vertical nose down attitude. The engine and composite propeller 
blades were buried below the ground. Both the left and right wing were displaced aft and 
sustained compression along the leading edge of both wings. The left and right fuel cells were 
ruptured. The fire department stated fuel was present at the crash site.
     Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assembly and accessories revealed no 
evidence of a precrash failure or malfunction. All components necessary for flight were present 
at the crash site. Continuity of the flight control system was confirmed for pitch, roll, and yaw.
     The next of kin could not locate the airplane log books.
     Post-mortem examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. James A. Benz, Palm Beach 
County Medical Examiner's Office, Palm Beach, Florida, on February 2, 1996. The cause of 
death was multiple blunt traumatic injuries. Post-mortem toxicology studies of specimens from 
the pilot was performed by the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Laboratory. These studies were 
positive for alcohol, 0.10 percent (blood) weight /volume, and 0.92 percent (gastric fluid) 
weight /volume. A comprehensive drug screen  by fluorescence polarization immunoassay and 
gas liquid chromatography revealed no drugs were detected.
Page 4 of 6MIA96LA074
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Engineer; Private
Age:
58, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/10/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
8000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 6 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Yakovlev
Registration:
N77YK
Model/Series:
YAK-52 YAK-52
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
822604
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2844 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Voronezh
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
M-14P
Registered Owner:
ZOLY SOMMER
Rated Power:
360 hp
Operator:
ZOLY SOMMER
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA96LA074
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PBI, 19 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1953 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
330°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2300 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (1X4)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1645 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
CARROL     A SMITH
Adopted Date:
03/25/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
TERRY S HURST; FT. LAUDERDALE, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA96LA074
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
