The airplane experienced separation of the right nose landing gear (NLG)wheel assembly as it 
exited runway after landing. Metallurgical examination revealed that the NLG axle fractured in 
a transverse plane, and that the failure of the axle was due to intergranular cracking that acted 
as stress concentrators from which fatigue cracks emanated. The fracture of the right side 
inboard journal on the NLG inner cylinder assembly was most likely due to the failure of a 
prior tapered roller bearing. Eventually the size of the fatigue crack and the forces generated 
during landing were sufficient to drive the crack in overstress, leading to fracture of the 
inboard journal. The change in ownership of the plane and the monthly swapping of bearings 
and wheels make it difficult to determine when the bearing failure occurred or why.
The right nose landing gear axle's failure from intergranular and fatigue cracking due to an 
earlier bearing failure.
On October 1, 2008 at about about 1055 cdt a Southwest Airlines B-737  experienced 
separation of the right nose landing gear wheel assembly as it exited runway 31C after landing 
at the Midway Airport, Chicago, IL.  The captain reported he felt a bump, but then everything 
seemed fine and he taxied to the gate.  Another pilot reported FOD near the runway, which 
turned out to be the wheel assembly.  There were no injuries to the 128 passengers or 5 crew. A 
FAA-FSDO inspector was on-scene.  He reported that the axle appeared to have failed.  There 
was no other damage to the airplane.  The nose gear was installed in 2001, and was scheduled 
to be removed in 2010.  It had accumulated 13,719 cycles at the time of the event. Preliminary 
visual examinations indicated the presence of a fatigue crack emanating from the 
exterior/chromed portion of the axle.
The fractured nose landing gear inner cylinder assembly, inboard roller bearing, and wheel 
were received by the NTSB Materials Laboratory. The axle fractured in a transverse plane 
through the right side inboard journal. The cage on the roller bearing was deformed. There was 
no visible damage to the inner race or the rollers and the rollers could be spun by hand. There 
were no visible signs of damage to the outer races on either side of the wheel. Deformation was 
observed along the edge where a c-clip retains a rubber seal. The edge was deformed radially 
outward and the edge had a scalloped appearance similar to the size and spacing of the tapered 
bearing rollers. 
The inboard section of the fractured axle was cut from the rest of the inner cylinder. The 
spacer flange was removed, revealing accumulated dirt and grease. 
The fracture surface was consistent with formation of a fatigue crack followed by fast 
fracture. A fatigue crack was observed at the bottom of the axle. Chevron marks consistent with 
crack propagation under loading were observed traversing around the forward and aft sections 
of the axle meeting at the top. Crack arrest marks were visible consistent with multiple 
intermittent loading cycles. Ratchet marks consistent with multiple crack initiation sites were 
observed. A brown/blue subsurface layer was visible on the fracture surface just below the 
chrome plating. This subsurface layer was observed around the entire perimeter of the axle. 
The morphology of the subsurface layer was consistent with intergranular fracture when 
viewed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). A micrograph of the fracture surface in the 
vicinity of the fatigue region shown that underneath the chrome layer was a region with a 
faceted fracture surface that extended approximately 0.3 mm into the axle cross section. The 
appearance of the surface was consistent with intergranular fracture. Beneath the intergranular 
zone, the fracture surface transitioned into the fatigue region at the bottom of the axle. The 
intergranular zone was observed along the forward, aft, and top regions of the axle.
The chrome plated journal showed signs of burnishing around the entire circumference 
of the journal and was most pronounced at the bottom of the axle. Burnishing marks could be 
seen running circumferentially around the journal. Cracks through the chrome layer were 
visible by the unaided eye in the burnished regions. 
A longitudinal section was excised from the journal and a metallurgical cross section 
was prepared. In the vicinity of the fracture surface, cracks were observed in the chrome that 
extended between 0.2 mm and 0.8 mm into the low alloy steel substrate. The nital etch also 
revealed a thin white layer just below the chrome that was 0.02 mm deep.  
The extent of untempered martensite formation on the inboard journal was revealed by 
removal of the chrome followed by macroetching of the exposed low alloy steel surfaces. The 
chrome was electrochemically removed and the exposed low alloy steel surfaces were etched.
A 0.5 inch wide white etched band was observed on the outboard end of the journal on 
the aft section. The white etched band was consistent with the appearance of untempered 
martensite in macroetched low alloy steels. Dark gray etched bands were observed on either 
side of the white etched band consistent with the appearance of overtempered martensite in 
low alloy steels. The region furthest inboard on the journal covered by the bearing spacer had a 
medium gray appearance consistent with tempered martensite. Circumferential wear marks 
were observed in the chrome layer as indicated. The boundaries of the wear marks did not 
correlate with the boundaries of the etched layers. The white band observed on the aft section 
of the journal extended to the top section of the journal and the width increased to 0.67 inch as 
shown in figure 11. It then gave way to a dark gray etched region as the band extended around 
to the forward section of the journal as shown. 
Discussion
The fracture of the right side inboard journal on the nose landing gear inner cylinder assembly 
was most likely due to the failure of a prior tapered roller bearing. This failure set into motion a 
series of processes that ultimately led to fatigue fracture of the inboard journal. The change in 
ownership of the plane and the monthly swapping of bearings and wheels make it difficult to 
determine when the bearing failure occurred or why. The cracks in this instance were visible to 
the unaided eye with adequate illumination.
Based on the results of the examination, the sequence of events leading to the fatigue 
fracture is: When the bearing failed, the inner race would have started spinning on the chrome 
plated journal. The heat generated by this friction would have been sufficient to heat the 
chrome and a shallow depth of the underlying low alloy steel substrate. Some regions were 
heated above the temperature at which a phase transformation from tempered martensite to 
austenite occurred . Subsequent rapid cooling promoted the formation of untempered 
martensite which etched white. Other regions were heated only to temperatures above 
approximately 600 °F, resulting in overtempered martensite which etched to a darker shade of 
gray.  
The rapid heating and cooling, phase changes, and mechanical stresses induced a 
network of cracks that telegraphed through the chrome layer. It is possible that moisture 
subsequently worked its way into the cracks resulting in stress corrosion/hydrogen cracking, 
which produced the 0.2 mm to 0.8 mm deep intergranular fracture regions observed in the 
longitudinal cross section and scanning electron microscope (SEM). 
The intergranular cracks acted as stress concentrators from which fatigue cracks 
emanated and ultimately combined to form the single thumbnail-shaped fatigue crack. 
Eventually the size of the fatigue crack and the forces generated during landing were sufficient 
to drive the crack in overstress leading to fracture of the inboard journal. 
There was no evidence of manufacturing defects contributing to the fracture. The 
inboard and outboard journal diameters were within the specified tolerance band. If grinding 
burns had occurred during manufacturing, the burn would have appeared over the entire width 
of the journal. However the burn mark was localized to the portion of the journal underneath 
the bearing.
History of Flight
Taxi-from runway
Aircraft structural failure
Landing gear collapse (Defining event)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BOEING
Registration:
N551WN
Model/Series:
737 -76Q
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
30280
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
145
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Continuous Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
154000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
3 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
21206 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CFM
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
CFM56-7B22
Registered Owner:
Wells Fargo
Rated Power:
Operator:
Southwest Airlines, Co.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Southwest Airlines
Operator Designator Code:
SWAA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Kansas City, MO (MCI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Chicago, IL (MDW)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0943 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Chicago Midway (MDW)
Runway Surface Type:
Concrete
Airport Elevation:
620 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
31C
IFR Approach:
Unknown
Runway Length/Width:
6522 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
5 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
128 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
133 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Deepak Joshi
Adopted Date:
03/23/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Publish Date:
03/23/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
