The non-certificated pilot departed on a Title 14, CFR Part 91, local area personal flight in an 
experimental light sport homebuilt airplane. A witness reported seeing the airplane flying 
about 100 feet above trees before the engine noise increased, and the nose pitched down. The 
airplane subsequently descended nose first into dense woods. The pilot™s flight instructor 
reported to the NTSB that he had given the pilot 19.2 hours of flight instruction, but the pilot 
had not progressed to a point where he could endorse him for a solo flight. He said that the 
pilot routinely struggled with pitch control during takeoff, landing, or when engine power was 
increased or decreased. Examination of the airplane did not disclose any preimpact mechanical 
malfunction. Given the lack of mechanical deficiencies with the airplane's engine or flight 
controls, in conjunction with the witness and the flight instructor™s statements, it is likely the 
pilot failed to adequately maintain control of the airplane while maneuvering.
The pilot™s failure to maintain control of the airplane while maneuvering, resulting in an in-
flight collision with trees. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's lack of experience.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 3, 2008, about 1500 Alaska daylight time, an experimental light sport (E-LSA) 
homebuilt Challenger II airplane, N7511J, sustained substantial damage when it collided with 
tree-covered terrain following a loss of control while maneuvering, about 5 miles northeast of 
Chugiak, Alaska. The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight 
under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, when the accident 
occurred. The non-certificated pilot died at the scene. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local area flight. Witnesses reported that the 
accident airplane departed from the Birchwood Airport, Chugiak, about 1455.  
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on October 7, a helicopter pilot that was inbound to the Birchwood 
Airport reported that he saw the accident airplane's departure from Runway 19L. He said that 
just after the accident airplane became airborne, it began to "porpoise" which continued during 
climb. The helicopter pilot said that just after takeoff, the airplane turned left, while still very 
low, and flew over an area of hangars and buildings on the northeast side of the airport. In a 
report to the NTSB, the helicopter pilot wrote, in part: "At one time we thought he was going to 
hit one of the buildings due to a steep dive. We continued our approach and the aircraft was 
last observed heading northbound."     
Witnesses reported to responding emergency crews that just before the accident they saw the 
airplane flying northbound, about 100 feet above the trees. The witness said that as it 
continued northbound, the engine noise increased, and the nose pitched down. The witness 
said that the airplane's nose continued to pitch down until the airplane descended nose first 
into dense woods. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot did not hold an FAA pilot or medical certificate, nor was he required to while 
operating an E-LSA airplane as a student pilot. 
No personal flight records were located for the pilot, and the aeronautical experience listed on 
page 3 of this report was obtained from the pilot™s flight instructor.  
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on October 7, the flight instructor that had 
been providing primary flight instruction to the accident pilot reported that he had been flying 
with the pilot from November 11, 2006, until June 15, 2008. The flight instructor also noted 
that he had originally built the accident airplane from a kit, and as part of the sale agreement 
between himself and the accident pilot, he would teach the pilot how to fly the airplane. 
According to the flight instructor, the pilot had received 19.2 hours of flight instruction in 
Challenger II airplanes, but he had not progressed to a point where he could endorse the pilot 
for a solo flight. He added that the pilot frequently struggled with pitch control of the 
Challenger II airplane during takeoff, landing, or when engine power was increased or 
decreased. The flight instructor also noted that the flight characteristics of a Challenger II 
airplane with one occupant, compared to two occupants, are very different.     
The flight instructor told the NTSB IIC that he had refused to fly with the pilot in the accident 
airplane until after the regularly scheduled annual inspection was completed on the airframe 
and engine, which was due July 31, 2008. The flight instructor said he was unaware if the 
accident pilot had ever complied with the scheduled annual inspection, but he assumed not, 
since the pilot had not called to schedule more flight training in his airplane.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was built by the original owner from a kit, and was issued an FAA experimental 
airworthiness certificate with experimental limitations on July 15, 2007. 
The airplane had an aluminum tube frame that formed the fuselage structure. The nose of the 
airplane was formed by a fiberglass nose cone. The fuselage, rudder, and horizontal stabilizer 
were enclosed by Ceconite-covered fabric. The wings had aluminum tube frames with loose-
fitting, canvas-like fabric material. The airplane was designed with two tandem seats in the 
cockpit, with the pilot™s seat in front.   
The airplane was equipped with an aft-mounted, pusher, Rotex 503, 52 horsepower engine.        
No maintenance records or construction build records were located for the airplane. No weight 
and balance data for the airplane was located. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest weather reporting facility was the Birchwood Airport, about 5 miles southwest of 
the accident site. At 1456, an aviation routine weather report (METAR) was reporting, in part: 
Wind 260 degrees at 3 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, few at 3,000 
feet, 3,700 feet scattered, 4,800 feet broken; temperature, 43 degrees F; dew point, 30 degrees 
F; altimeter, 29.35 inHg.
COMMUNICATIONS
The airplane was not equipped with a radio. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The National Transportation Safety Board IIC, and an FAA airworthiness inspector from the 
Anchorage Flight Standards District Office, Anchorage, Alaska, examined the wreckage at the 
accident site on October 3. 
All of the airplane's major components were found at the main wreckage site. A path of 
wreckage debris, from an area of broken trees to the wreckage point of rest, was on a magnetic 
heading of approximately 190 degrees. (All heading/bearings noted in this report are oriented 
toward magnetic north.)
The airplane™s fuselage was discovered inverted, and the fiberglass nose section was crushed 
and buckled inward. The primary crush zones extended from the fiberglass nose cone back to 
about the aft passenger seat area, which encompassed the pilot's cockpit area. The cockpit area 
was obliterated by impact damage. The instrument panel was crushed and twisted under the 
fuselage.
The wings remained attached to the fuselage, and both were extensively distorted. A portion of 
the airplane™s right wing and right aileron was suspended from a tree, adjacent to the main 
wreckage site.  
Due to impact damage, continuity of the flight control cables and push-pull tubes could not be 
established.
The propeller hub assembly remained connected to the engine crankshaft. Both wooden 
propeller blades were broken about mid-span, and each had leading edge gouging. 
There were no preaccident mechanical problems discovered with the airplane's engine or flight 
controls during the NTSB IIC's on-scene wreckage examination.   
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted under the authority of the Alaska State 
Medical Examiner, 4500 South Boniface Parkway, Anchorage, Alaska, on October 5, 2008. The 
cause of death for the pilot was attributed to blunt force, traumatic injuries.
The FAA's Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI) did a toxicological examination on November 4, 
2008, and was negative for alcohol or drugs. 
WRECKAGE RELEASE
The Safety Board released the wreckage, at the accident site, to the owner's representatives on 
October 3, 2008.  The Safety Board retained no parts or components.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
