The pilot reported that he lowered the landing gear and observed gear-down indications before 
touchdown; however, the landing gear collapsed during the landing. A postaccident 
examination of the airplane revealed that all three landing gear had collapsed; no anomalies in 
the extension/retraction linkage were found. 
The airplane owner reported that, during recovery of the airplane, he had adjusted the nose 
landing gear actuating rod for the nose gear to fully seat on the stop flats. Additionally, the 
landing gear had been serviced during the most recent annual inspection, which was about 24 
flight hours before the accident. Although it is possible that the landing gear was not properly 
adjusted after the maintenance work, several flights had been conducted in the interim without 
any reported issues related to the landing gear system.
Postaccident examinations revealed that the nose landing gear down lock switch was 
improperly mounted upside down and that the limit switch was stuck in the closed position. 
The inoperative nose landing gear switch would have provided a gear down/locked indication 
to the pilot regardless of the nose landing gear condition. It is possible that the nose landing 
gear did not fully extend and lock down before landing due to either the inoperative limit 
switch or a slight misrigging of the system. However, because the landing gear was operated by 
the transmission jackscrew, it is unlikely that an issue with the nose landing gear would have 
caused a collapse of the main landing gear if the main landing gear was fully extended and 
locked in the down position. The reason for the landing gear collapse could not be determined.
The collapse of the landing gear during landing for reasons that could not be determined 
during postaccident examinations.
On January 3, 2014, about 1515 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-24-250, N6767P, 
sustained substantial damage when the landing gear collapsed during landing at the Grant 
County Airport (SVC), Silver City, New Mexico. The pilot was not injured. The aircraft was 
registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was 
not operated on a flight plan. The flight originated from the Deming Municipal Airport (DMN), 
Deming, New Mexico, about 1430.
The pilot reported that he lowered the landing gear on downwind and observed a gear down 
indication before touchdown. He noted that the approach was normal; however, the landing 
gear collapsed during the landing rollout.
A postaccident examination was conducted by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector after recovery of the airplane. All three landing gear had collapsed. Damage included 
bent and buckled fuselage frames. The examination did not reveal any anomalies in the 
extension/retraction linkage. However, it was noted that the nose landing gear down lock 
switch was improperly mounted upside-down and was not making contact with the striker 
plate. Further examination revealed that the limit switch plunger was stuck in the closed 
position.
The airplane owner informed the assigned FAA inspector that after the accident, he adjusted 
the nose landing gear actuating rod in order for the nose landing gear to fully seat on the stop 
flats. A mechanic noted that there may have been damage to one of the frames, causing the 
nose landing gear to become out of rig. However, the FAA inspector reported that there 
appeared to be no movement of the landing gear transmission mounting at the time of the 
postaccident examination.
Maintenance records indicated that the landing gear had been serviced during the most recent 
annual inspection. This included repair of the gear motor transmission, a rebuild of all three 
landing gear struts, and replacement of the bungee cords. The maintenance work and 
inspection was completed on April 11, 2013, at a recording tachometer time of 2,862 hours. The 
tachometer indicated 2,886 hours at the time of the accident.
The landing gear retraction mechanism included push-pull cables to each main gear and a 
push-pull tube to the nose gear. The transmission motor installed below the cabin floor drove 
the transmission screw (jackscrew), which in turn actuated the push-pull cables and push-pull 
tube to extend or retract the landing gear. Limit switches installed on each gear assembly 
would stop the transmission motor when the landing gear was fully extended or retracted. 
These switches also operated indicator lights in the cabin. A safety switch was located on the 
left main gear assembly in order to prevent the gear from retracting while the airplane was on 
the ground.
