The pilot reported that, while in cruise flight, the airplane experienced a total loss of engine 
power about 8 miles from the intended destination. The pilot was unable to restart the engine, 
and he subsequently ditched the airplane in a lake. A postaccident examination of the engine 
did not reveal any mechanical anomalies that would have prevented normal operation. No fuel 
was found in the fuel system during the postaccident examination; however, the airplane had 
been submerged for nearly 1 week before it was recovered from the lake.
Postaccident performance calculations indicated that it is likely that the engine lost power due 
to fuel exhaustion during the accident flight. Although the pilot reported that he had completed 
preflight planning calculations (the actual paperwork was lost during the accident), the 
investigation determined that the wind aloft values that the pilot likely used in his preflight 
planning calculations were significantly different from the actual wind aloft values. As a result, 
the airplane's actual ground speed was significantly less than what the pilot would have 
anticipated. The pilot also reported that he completed the accident flight at less than 65-
percent engine power, which would have increased the length of the flight and the amount of 
fuel used during it when compared to higher engine power settings; the available cruise 
performance charts lacked true airspeed and engine speed data for operating below 65-percent 
engine power. Therefore, the pilot could not have estimated the total flight time and fuel 
required for the accident flight with a high level of accuracy. Additionally, the pilot reported 
that the mixture control cable had fractured during a previous flight and, to continue his cross-
country trip, he safety-wired the carburetor mixture control arm in the full-rich position. As a 
result, the pilot was unable to properly lean the fuel mixture during the accident flight; 
however, it is unknown to what extent the pilot planned for this condition. Further, the pilot 
made an unplanned stop at an airport located along his planned route of flight. The additional 
fuel consumed during this unplanned stop (taxi, engine run-up, takeoff, and climb to cruise 
altitude) would have further reduced the amount of fuel available to complete the accident 
flight.
The pilot's improper flight planning, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due to fuel 
exhaustion.
On January 3, 2014, at 1949 central standard time, a Piper model PA-22-108 airplane, 
N4505Z, was substantially damaged during a forced landing near Forsyth, Missouri. The pilot 
and passenger were not injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot, 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, without a flight plan. Night 
visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country flight, which departed Sullivan 
Regional Airport (UUV), Sullivan, Missouri, at 1700 and was en route to M. Graham Clark 
Downtown Airport (PLK), Branson, Missouri.
The pilot reported that the mixture control cable had fractured during a previous flight, and to 
continue on his cross-country trip he safety-wired the carburetor mixture control arm in the 
full-rich position. Fueling records, obtained from the airport management at UUV, indicated 
that the airplane had been fueled with 11.49 gallons of Avgas at 1630. The pilot stated that he 
flew at a cruise altitude between 2,500 and 3,000 feet mean sea level (msl) to the intended 
destination. However, while en route, he decided to make an unplanned stop at Ava Bill Martin 
Memorial Airport (AVO) to use the restroom facility. The pilot estimated that the duration of 
the ground stop was 15-30 minutes before the flight had departed again for PLK.
The pilot reported that while in cruise flight about 8 miles northeast of PLK, between 2,500 
and 3,000 feet msl, the airplane suddenly experienced a total loss of engine power and the 
propeller began to windmill. The engine did not restart after he verified that the magneto 
switch and fuel selector were both on. He stated that his attention was then focused on finding 
a suitable area to perform a forced landing. The nearby roads contained curves and the 
surrounding terrain was hilly, so he decided to ditch the airplane in Bull Shoals Lake, located 
near Forsyth, Missouri. After landing in the lake, he and his passenger were able to swim to the 
shoreline where they were treated by first responders for symptoms of hypothermia. The pilot 
and his passenger were not physically injured during the accident. The airplane sunk following 
the ditching and remained submerged for nearly one week before it was recovered. Upon 
recovery from the lake, the airplane exhibited substantial damage to the engine firewall.
A postaccident examination of the wreckage established that there were no mechanical 
discontinuities within the engine drivetrain, valve train, or the accessory section. All four 
cylinders produced compression/suction while the engine crankshaft was rotated. The mixture 
control cable was found broken, and the carburetor mixture control arm was found safety-
wired in the full-rich position. Both magneto assemblies exhibited water contamination and 
were allowed to air dry over a period of two days. After being air dried, both magnetos provided 
spark through each ignition lead wire to its respective spark plug. No fuel was located in the 
airplane fuel system; however, the airplane had been submerged in water for nearly one week.
A direct flight from UUV to PLK is 158.6 statute miles on a 226 degree true course. The pilot 
reported that the airplane typically achieved a cruise speed between 105-115 miles per hour 
(mph) while at a cruise altitude of 2,500-3,000 feet msl. Without any wind considerations, the 
non-stop direct flight between UUV and PLK would have taken between 1 hour 23 minutes and 
1 hour 31 minutes, at 115 mph and 105 mph respectively. However, upper atmosphere wind 
modeling suggested that the wind aloft averaged 45 mph from 195 degrees at the cruise 
altitudes used during the accident flight.
According to the Piper PA-22-108 Owner's Handbook performance charts, at 3,000 feet msl 
and 75-percent engine power, the fuel consumption rate would be 7.8 gallons per hour (full-
rich mixture) at a true airspeed of 112 mph. At 3,000 feet and 65-percent engine power, the 
fuel consumption rate would be 7.2 gallons per hour (full-rich mixture) at a true airspeed of 
104 mph.
Performance calculations established that with the expected wind aloft, the non-stop direct 
flight, at 75-percent engine power, would have taken 2 hours and 14 minutes at a ground speed 
of 71 mph and used 17.4 gallons of fuel. That same flight, completed at 65-percent engine 
power, would have taken 2 hours and 31 minutes at a ground speed of 63 mph and used 18.125 
gallons of fuel.
The accident airplane was equipped with a single 18 gallon fuel tank, of which 16.875 gallons 
were considered usable. The airplane landing gear configuration had been modified from a 
tricycle assembly into a conventional tail wheel; however, there was no available flight data to 
indicate how the lack of a nose gear would affect the airplane's overall cruise performance.
The pilot reported that he had completed flight planning calculations before departing on the 
accident flight; however, the actual paperwork that he used was lost and/or destroyed during 
accident. The pilot stated that the upper wind models that he was provided during the accident 
investigation were significantly higher than what he remembered planning for. Additionally, 
the pilot reported that he completed the accident flight at an engine speed of 2,250 rpm, which 
according to available performance charts was less than 65-percent engine power. 
Furthermore, the available cruise performance charts lacked true airspeed and engine speed 
data below 65-percent engine power.
