The pilot stated that, while en route on the approximate 11-mile flight, the engine began to 
ﬁstumbleﬂ and run roughly. The pilot activated the fuel boost pump, but, shortly thereafter, the 
engine experienced a total loss of power. The pilot subsequently maneuvered the airplane 
toward the backyard of a residence. The airplane impacted trees and came to rest inverted, 
which resulted in substantial damage to the airplane. Postaccident examination of the airplane 
revealed that the right main fuel tank contained about 10.5 gallons of fuel. About 0.5 gallon of 
fuel was drained from the left main fuel tank. The auxiliary fuel tank contained no fuel, and the 
gascolator was absent of fuel. The engine-driven fuel pump line and return fuel line were 
absent of fuel. Postaccident examination of the engine revealed no anomalies. During a test 
run, the engine started on the first attempt, accelerated smoothly, and advanced through all 
power settings with no anomalies observed. Although the airplane™s fuel selector was found set 
to the right main tank position during postaccident examination, based on the lack of fuel in 
the fuel lines and gascolator, it is likely that it was set to the left main or the auxiliary fuel tank 
during the flight and moved to the right main tank position just before or after impact.
The pilot™s improper fuel management, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due to 
fuel starvation.
On January 1, 2014, about 1420 central standard time, a Bellanca 17-30A, N351AE, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power in 
Alabaster, Alabama. The private pilot sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the flight, which departed Bessemer 
Airport (EKY), Bessemer, Alabama, approximately 1405, and was destined for  Shelby County 
Municipal Airport (EET), Alabaster, Alabama. The personal flight was conducted under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The pilot departed on the approximate 11-mile flight between EKY and EET, and climbed to a 
cruise altitude of 2,600 feet. He stated that while enroute, the engine began to "stumble" and 
run rough. The pilot responded by activating the fuel boost pump; however, the engine 
continued to run rough, and subsequently experienced a total loss of power. The pilot stated he 
did not have time to attempt to restart the engine, and he maneuvered the airplane toward a 
row of trees in the backyard of a residence. The airplane impacted the trees and came to rest 
inverted, resulting in substantial damage.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector who 
responded to the scene revealed that the airplane's fuel selector was set to the right wing tank 
position, and that the right wing tank contained an undetermined amount of fuel. A sample 
taken from the tank was absent of contamination. 
The airplane was removed from the site for further examination. About .5 gallons of fuel was 
drained from the left main fuel tank, and about 10.5 gallons were drained from the right main 
fuel tank. The auxiliary fuel tank contained no fuel, and the gascolator was absent of fuel. The 
engine-driven fuel pump line and return fuel line were absent of fuel. The engine was removed 
from the airplane and sent to the manufacturer's facility for examination. 
The pilot reported to the FAA that he departed from EKY with 19.5 gallons of fuel, but 
indicated on the NTSB Accident Report Form that the airplane contained 13 gallons of fuel at 
the time of departure. The pilot did not state which fuel tank was selected at the time of 
departure, nor did he state whether he attempted to switch the fuel selector to another tank 
upon experiencing the engine roughness. 
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land. He 
reported 656 total hours of flight time, of which 120 hours were in the accident airplane make 
and model. His most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued in February 2013. 
The airplane was manufactured in 1973, and was equipped with a Continental Motors Inc., IO-
520 series 285-hp reciprocating engine. The airplane's most recent annual inspection was 
completed on June 3, 2013 at a total airframe time of 2,234.6 hours. Maintenance records 
indicated that the engine was rebuilt at the manufacturer's facility in April 1994 at a total 
airframe time of 1,955.1 hours. Maintenance logs also indicated that the #5 cylinder was 
replaced on November 25, 2013, at a time since engine overhaul of 304.3 hours. 
The 1453 weather observation at EET, located about 4 miles southeast of the accident site, 
included variable wind at 5 knots, 10 miles visibility, a broken cloud layer at 3,800 feet, an 
overcast cloud layer at 6,00 feet, temperature 10 degrees C, dew point 4 degrees C, and an 
altimeter setting of 30.18 inches of mercury. 
Examination of the engine at the manufacturer's facility revealed impact damage to the #5 
cylinder cooling fins, as well as the fuel injection line. The #5 top sparkplug and ignition lead 
were replaced to facilitate a test run of the engine. Borescope inspection of each of the 
cylinders, including their pistons, exhaust valves, and intake valves revealed normal operating 
signatures. The engine started on the first attempt, accelerated smoothly, and advanced 
through all power settings with no anomalies observed. Several rapid advancements of the 
throttle from the idle to full power settings also revealed no anomalies.
According to the manufacturer's pilot operating handbook, at a cruise altitude of 2,500 feet in 
standard atmospheric conditions, the airplane consumed between 10 and 16 gallons of fuel per 
hour, depending on the engine power setting.
