The pilot reported that both fuel tanks were full when the flight departed. About 30 minutes 
into the flight, a GPS alarm alerted the pilot to switch fuel tanks, so he switched the fuel tank 
selector. He then proceeded north to return to the departure airport. About 51 minutes into the 
flight, while about 2,200 ft above the ground, the engine rpm began to decrease. The pilot 
attempted to restore power by repositioning the fuel selector, turning on the auxiliary fuel 
pump, pushing the throttle, and verifying that the mixture control was full rich; however, none 
of these actions restored engine power. The pilot declared an emergency to the tower air traffic 
controller, who then provided a vector to a nearby airport. The pilot was unable to visually 
locate the airport and recognized that he would be unable to land there, so he maneuvered for a 
forced landing on an expressway. The onboard camera showed the propeller stop while the 
airplane was on approach and the pilot turn off the fuel selector. The pilot subsequently landed 
the airplane hard on the expressway, which caused substantial damage to the airplane. 
Following recovery of the airplane, 45 gallons of uncontaminated fuel was drained from both 
fuel tanks; however, fuel system components in the engine compartment contained minimal 
fuel, consistent with fuel starvation. Although the airplane was equipped with an engine 
monitor that records and retains engine parameters, it did not record fuel flow. However, the 
engine monitor did record a sudden and equal decrease in the exhaust gas temperature and 
cylinder head temperature for all of the cylinders, consistent with the loss of engine power 
described by the pilot. Although the reason for the loss of engine power was likely due to fuel 
starvation, the reason for the fuel starvation could not be determined by either an examination 
of the fuel supply system or a postaccident test run of the engine.
The total loss of engine power due to fuel starvation for reasons that could not be determined 
during postaccident engine examination or testing.
On January 4, 2014, about 1519 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-180, N9409J, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing on an expressway in Bronx, New York. The 
private pilot and two passengers were not injured. The airplane was registered to and operated 
by a private individual, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, 
as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan 
was filed; VFR flight following was obtained. The flight originated from Danbury Municipal 
Airport, Danbury, CT, about 1426.
Earlier that day the pilot taxied to the run-up area for an intended sightseeing flight but during 
engine run-up he noticed a vibration and secured the engine. The airplane was towed to the 
ramp where a mechanic noted ice coming out of the propeller spinner during hand rotation of 
the propeller. No maintenance was done to the engine, and after it was started, the vibration 
level was later reported to be normal.
The pilot contacted local control of Danbury ATCT and obtained taxi clearance, taxied to the 
approach end of runway 26, and was then cleared for takeoff.
The flight departed with full fuel tanks but the pilot could not recall what fuel tank was selected 
for takeoff. After takeoff while in contact with several Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
air traffic control (ATC) facilities, the flight proceeded to the Statute of Liberty National 
Monument, where GPS and radar data indicates he orbited 1.5 times. The pilot later stated that 
about 30 minutes into the flight, or after orbiting the Statue of Liberty, an alarm of his GPS 
went off alerting him to switch tanks, which he did. At 1510, while in contact with Newark air 
traffic control tower, the pilot informed the controller that he was departing the Statue of 
Liberty and ATC communications were transferred to LaGuardia ATCT. The pilot established 
contact with that facility at 1513:37, and was instructed to maintain 2,000 feet.
The flight proceeded north above the Hudson River, and the pilot stated he first noticed a loss 
of engine power when the flight was near mid-town Manhattan. Radar data indicates the 
airplane was flying about 2,200 feet at that time. As a result he turned on the auxiliary fuel 
pump, and switched to the previous tank, but those actions did not restore engine power. He 
also verified that the mixture control was full rich, and pushed the throttle in but those actions 
also did not restore engine power. He reported he did not apply carburetor heat. He began 
descending at best glide airspeed and at 1517:46, while at approximately 1,700 feet mean sea 
level (msl), he informed the controller, "tower tower zero nine Juliet we are losing engine 
power." The controller asked the pilot if he was declaring an emergency and he replied 
affirmative. The controller asked the pilot if he wanted LaGuardia Airport and the pilot 
questioned whether he could make it. The controller provided a vector, but the pilot later 
stated that he was unable to visually locate the runway and knew that he was too far away. He 
asked the controller for other options and was provided information regarding a park. The pilot 
stated that while at 1,000 feet, he noted that 2 of the 3 lanes of the Major Deegan Expressway 
were closed so he opted to land on it. He maintained best glide speed, and cracked the cabin 
entry door in anticipation of the forced landing. He actually extended the glide due to cars on 
the expressway, and while descending banked to avoid street light poles. He touched down 
between 40 and 45 miles-per-hour with no flaps extended, in what he said was, "hard but not 
really hard." After touchdown he felt the landing gear slowly collapse reporting that it felt like it 
was skidding on metal. After coming to rest, he turned off the magneto switch, fuel selector, 
and master switch and all occupants exited the airplane. He also stated that the propeller 
stopped in-flight, and reported it took about 6 minutes for nearby road workers to respond to 
the accident site.
Several FAA inspectors responded to the accident site and it was reported that approximately 
45 gallons of fuel were drained from the airplane's fuel tanks; no contaminants were noted. The 
airplane was trailered to a nearby facility where the wings were removed, and the on-board JPI 
EDM-700 and Garmin GPSmap 696 receiver with ADS-B antenna were removed and sent to 
the NTSB Vehicle Recorder Division located in Washington, DC. The airplane was then 
transported to another facility for long-term storage.
Following recovery of the airplane to the long-term storage facility, inspection of the fuel 
strainer revealed only a small amount of fuel. The fuel line between the engine-driven fuel 
pump and the carburetor was disconnected at the carburetor end; no fuel was found. The 
carburetor bowl was drained and found to contain about 3.5 ounces of fuel. Inspection of the 
fuel supply system revealed no obstructions from either wing root to the fuel strainer when the 
fuel selector was positioned to each respective side; the fuel selector was found to operate 
normally. Inspection of the engine revealed no evidence of leakage from any of the fuel or oil 
lines; the oil dipstick indicated the presence of oil. The propeller was pulled through several 
times with cylinder compressions noted with a "snapping" of the impulse coupling of the 
magnetos. The fuselage with attached engine and propeller was positioned on a trailer for an 
attempted engine run and an alternate fuel supply was plumbed to the left wing root area. The 
master switch and auxiliary fuel pump were turned on and the fuel pump made cyclical 
thumping noises until it became primed. The starter was energized and the engine turned over 
but did not start. The engine was primed, and started briefly and then quit. The engine was 
primed again and the engine started without hesitation. The engine throttle was then opened to 
almost full and the engine responded; however, the tachometer reading was not confirmed. 
The engine was subsequently cycled through high and low power settings several times over 
several minutes with the engine operating smoothly. Safety concerns from a damaged engine 
mount precluded continued engine operation at a high power setting; the engine run was 
terminated. After engine shut down, there were no leaks or any other anomalies noted. There 
were no discrepancies with the engine that would preclude normal operation.
Read-out of the JPI EDM 700 which recorded data every 6 seconds associated with the 
accident flight revealed it contained 897 records over a span of about 1 hour 4 minutes and 41 
seconds. The JPI recorded exhaust gas temperature (EGT) and cylinder heat temperature 
(CHT) for each of the cylinders, as well as battery voltage. Approximate correlation of the JPI 
records with GPS data was performed, and review of the data from the JPI EDM 700 revealed 
normal engine parameters of all cylinders for EGT and CHT from the first record at 
approximately 1415:06, until 1516:47. At 1516:47, the values for all cylinders for EGT and CHT 
begin to decrease equally.
The pilot provided the NTSB a flash drive containing a 23 minute 56 second video with audio 
of a portion of the accident flight. The video was recorded from a camera mounted inside the 
cockpit, and the field of view was predominantly outside the windshield; however, portions of 
the instrument panel were recorded including the center communication radios and a portion 
of the tachometer from 0 to 1000 RPM. Audio from the powerplant system was recorded 
throughout most of the video. Conversation in the cockpit became audible following a decrease 
in engine power. The video began with the aircraft heading southbound on the Hudson River 
corridor near the southern end of Manhattan Island. The airplane orbited 1.5 times around the 
Statue of Liberty, and about this time, or at 1507:01, and adjustment of engine power was 
audible. The airplane then began returning northbound and was uneventful until 
approximately 1516:42, where a small drop off in engine power was audible. During this time 
the RPM needle began to waver corresponding with fluctuating engine noise until about 1517: 
14, when the RPM needle settle at about 500 RPM. Concurrently, shaking and vibration of the 
aircraft were observed. At 1517:33, a mayday call was heard from the cockpit followed by 
successive transmissions to air traffic control. At about 1518:05, the aircraft began to turn right 
over the Bronx. At about 1519:23, movement of the propeller ceased and the tachometer 
dropped to zero. At 1519:29, a passenger began to brace and the aircraft touched down 
approximately 5 seconds later. At 1519:40, the airplane came to rest. A copy of the Image 
Recorder Factual Report and Transcript is contained in the NTSB public docket.
A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin 
(SAIB) CE-09-35, which pertains to carburetor icing, revealed that based on the ambient 
temperature and dew point, 25 and 3 degrees Fahrenheit respectively, the conditions were 
outside icing at glide and cruise power.
