Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
GREER, SC
Accident Number:
ATL96FA114
Date & Time:
08/02/1996, 1915 EDT 
Registration:
N4813F
Aircraft:
Cessna TU206A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The flight was at 8000 feet, in cruise flight, when the pilot reported a total loss of engine power 
and smoke in the cockpit. Air Traffic Control gave the pilot vectors to Sloan Airport, a small, 
private airstrip, north of Greer. The pilot was unable to locate the single east-west grass strip 
and attempted an emergency landing in a pasture approximately 0.7 nautical miles (nm) north 
of Sloan. The airplane struck a tree bordering the pasture and struck terrain beyond the tree, 
coming to rest inverted. The engine was examined and revealed that the number 3 piston had 
maximum mechanical damage and the least heat damage. The number 3 piston pin was found 
wedged in the left crankcase half, jammed against the number 2 main bearing support. The 
metallurgists report indicated that the number 3 piston had deteriorated in flight for 
undetermined reasons. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The disintegration of the number 3 piston, and the pilot's inadequate selection of terrain for 
the landing. 
Page 2 of 8ATL96FA114
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,PISTON - DISINTEGRATED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. (C) EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
4. STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
5. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 8ATL96FA114
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 2, 1996, at 1915 eastern daylight time, a Cessna TU206A, N4813F, was 
substantially damaged following a collision with trees and the terrain during a forced landing 
attempt near Greer, South Carolina. The private pilot was fatally injured in the accident. The 
personal flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91. Visual 
meteorological conditions existed at the time of the accident. The flight departed Charlotte, 
North Carolina about 1830, and was operating on an instrument flight rules flight plan to 
Dayton, Tennessee at the time of the accident.
Personnel at the Federal Aviation Administration Air Traffic Control Center in Greer, 
South Carolina reported that the pilot reported that the airplane engine had lost power, and he 
was getting smoke in the airplane. The air traffic controller attempted to give the pilot radar 
vectors to the nearest airport, which was a private grass airstrip approximately 5 miles from the 
pilots position. The radar controller stated that the last altitude readout from the airplane was 
about 800 feet above ground level, at a point about 1/2 mile west of the airfield. 
Witnesses in the area of the accident reported that the aircraft engine sounded as if it 
were making surging sounds and saw smoke exiting the airplane. The aircraft wings appeared 
to rock back and forth from side to side just prior to the crash, and the aircraft nose appeared 
to drop to a near vertical attitude just prior to impact. The airplane came to rest inverted.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was certificated as an instrument rated private pilot. He had approximately 
580 total flight hours, the most recent in the Cessna TU206A. The record of the pilot's flight 
time is incomplete due to the fact that the investigator was only given one log book and only 
total flight time was forwarded. The other log book was requested but not received from the 
estate. There are no reports of previous incidents or accidents involving the pilot.
The pilot applied and received a third class medical certificate on December 22, 1993. 
He reported, in the Medical History section, that he was medically discharged from the military 
and was admitted to the hospital, both which he previously reported. This application does not 
indicate the reasons for either condition. The pilot applied and received a third class medical 
on December 21, 1995. The Medical History section indicated the two previously reported 
conditions and a third condition, labeled, Other illness, disability or surgery, which he 
indicated was previously reported. Additionally, he reported hip surgery performed on April 
24, 1995.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Cessna TU206B is a six seat, single engine airplane. According to the engine log of 
N4813F, on February 14, 1995, new standard pistons and rings were installed, from Superior 
Air Parts. A maintenance operations check was performed on the engine and the airplane was 
returned to service. An annual inspection was performed on  December 7, 1995.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. Additional 
meteorological information may be obtained in this report on page 4 under section titled 
Page 4 of 8ATL96FA114
Weather Information.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was found 1/2 mile northwest of Sloan Airport. A crater was identified, 
about 3 feet by 1 foot, with the nose gear located near it, along with several tree branches. The 
airplane was found approximately 15 feet northeast of the crater, upside-down, with the nose 
pointing in a southerly direction. There was no evidence of a fire in the wreckage or around the 
site.
The spinner was found crumpled, at the tip and sides, with the three propeller blades 
still attached.  One of the blades had scratch marks on the cambered side, parallel with the 
twist of the blade. Another blade was bent close to the hub and then again near the tip, creating 
an "S" curvature. The third blade was bent slightly aft.  The engine 
was exposed when found at the accident site. Examination of the engine revealed a hole in the 
crankcase, between the number 2 and 4 cylinders, which measured about 1 inch in diameter. 
There was another hole between the number 1 and 3 cylinders, just above the engine data plate. 
A third hole was observed between the number 3 and 5 cylinders, smaller than the two 
previously mentioned. There was oil distributed throughout the engine cowling, and oil 
running down the left side of the aircraft fuselage. The number 2 cylinder through bolt, at the 
10 o'clock position was pushed out from the cylinder base. The nut was missing from the 
number 3 cylinder at the 10 o'clock position.
The seats were found intact with their respective seat belts and harnesses. The 
instrument panel was damaged, with several instruments broken off the panel and obscured by 
the wreckage. See Supplement B for configurations.
The left wing leading edge was buckled rearward. The left flap extension was about 40 
degrees as measured with a bubble protractor. The right wing leading edge was crushed aft 
from the tip to 1/3 from the wing strut. The right wing flap could not be measured because it 
had been moved to access the cabin door.
The fuselage appeared to have little damage. The tail was bent just forward of the 
vertical and horizontal stabilizers. The vertical stabilizer, forward of the rudder, was buckled on 
both sides, at the top. The rudder was not damaged. The horizontal stabilizer was not damaged.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On August 6, 1996, a toxicological examination of the pilot was conducted at the FAA 
Toxicological Research Laboratory. The toxicological examination revealed bupropion detected 
in the blood and urine, and 139.900 ug/ml, ug/g of Salicylate detected in the urine. Bupropion 
can be detected in the blood and urine for up to five weeks after use. The examination did not 
reveal ethanol. Bupropion and aspirin tablets were found in the pilot's pocket and bupropion, 
Tylenol Sinus, aspirin, and Marezine tablets were found in the wreckage.
Bupropion is a prescription medication used for the treatment of depression or 
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). According to the Physician's Desk Reference, 
some significant side effects include restlessness, agitation, insomnia, and a small risk of 
seizures, particularly at high doses. It also states that this drug may impair one's ability to 
perform tasks requiring judgment or motor skills, and therefore, individuals should refrain 
from driving an automobile or operating complex, hazardous machinery until reasonably 
certain that the medication does not adversely affect their performance. Conditions for which 
Page 5 of 8ATL96FA114
this medication is prescribed, depression or ADHD, are known to adversely affect performance, 
particularly in stressful environments.
The pilot was being treated for depression since late in 1992. In January of 1994, he was 
placed on bupropion. The pilot requested to be taken off of the medication in March of 1995. In 
October of 1995, his doctor stated that he had relapsed episidle depression, and put him back 
on bupropion. On the pilot's medical certificate application, December 22, 1993, he stated that 
he was not currently on any medication and did not report that he was diagnosed with 
depression. The same applies for his application for medical certificate on December 21, 1995. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The engine was visually checked at the accident site, revealing 3 holes in the engine case. 
The engine was sent to Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) for further examination. According 
to TCM, the oil sump was removed and various metallic debris was found, consisting of pieces 
of piston and rings, connecting rod and cap pieces, rod bolt and rod nut pieces, bearing from 
number 3 connecting rod, burned pieces of bearing, 2 pieces of the starter adapter spring and a 
piece of starter adapter drum. The color on the sump interior was darker than normal. The oil 
pump showed signs of heavy scratching and exhibited hard particle passage.
Examination of the pistons revealed heavy scoring and transfer of piston material to the 
cylinder walls of the number 1 piston. Damage and breakage was observed of the number 3 and 
4 pistons. The crowns of the number 3 and 4 pistons exhibited valve strikes. Crankcase main 
bearings showed signs of lubrication distress on the number 1, 2, and 3 main bearings. The 
number 3 piston pin was found wedged in the left crankcase half, jammed against the number 
2 main bearing support. The number 3 piston pin had collapsed and ruptured the oil galleries 
in the crankcase.
The connecting rods from the number 1, 2, 5, and 6 cylinders were removed and the 
bearings revealed signs of lubrication distress. The number 2, 4, and 5 bearings appeared 
"wiped" and suffered from oil starvation. The number 3 connecting rod was found in the oil 
sump.
The Metallurgist's Factual Report discussed the damaged components of the cylinders, 
in severity order, with the number 3 cylinder having the most extensive damage. The number 3 
piston exhibited the maximum mechanical damage. The number 3 connecting rod and bearing 
exhibited the least amount of heat damage and heat discoloration. The P/N SA646303 piston 
normally has a cavity, or empty space, in the area around each of the piston caps. This cavity is 
enclosed by the cylinder barrel. Examination of the reconstructed pieces of the number 3 
piston exhibited long-term rubbing, or polishing, damage around the perimeter of the piston 
pin cavity as well as the bottom skirt on the opposite side of the piston, creating a mirror-like 
surface. This polishing covered the entire width of the side wall between the scraper ring 
groove and the skirt bottom directly in line with the connecting rod cap. The fractures of the 
number 3 piston progressed through the piston pin boss, opening the cavities on both sides of 
the piston. Examination of the number 3 piston indicated very heavy peening damage to the 
cavity around the piston pin on one side of the piston wall. The cavity on the opposite side did 
not exhibit this peening damage. The area where the piston cap was placed did not exhibit this 
peening damage, demonstrating that, the cap was in place when the peening occurred. The oil 
scraper ring was broken apart and the oil control ring and the compression ring were found 
intact and in their respective grooves. The peened surface was examined with a scanning 
Page 6 of 8ATL96FA114
electron microscope (SEM). X-ray energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) of the peened surface 
revealed the presence of a small amount of iron, substantially above the amount expected for 
the overall alloy. A closer examination of the surface showed that the iron was concentrated in 
particles that appeared to have been smeared onto the surface as the peening damage was 
created. For additional information, refer to the Metallurgist's Factual Report.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The aircraft wreckage was released to the owner's insurance adjuster: Harry 
Brooks Carson-Brooks, Inc. PO Box 888525 Atlanta, GA 
30356
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/21/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
579 hours (Total, all aircraft), 75 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N4813F
Model/Series:
TU206A TU206A
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
U206-0513
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/07/1995, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
GTSIO-520-C
Registered Owner:
CHARLES E. HOLMES
Rated Power:
340 hp
Operator:
CHARLES E. HOLMES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8ATL96FA114
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GSP, 964 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1936 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
2 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 4300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
CHARLOTTE, NC (CLT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
DAYTON, TN (2A0)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1830 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
SLOAN AIRPORT (UNK)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
PRESTON    E HICKS
Adopted Date:
03/31/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
WILLIAM   NEELEY; COLUMBIA, SC
KAREN C WALSH; ATLANTA, GA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8ATL96FA114
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
