This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Fall City, WA
Accident Number: WPR16LA003
Date & Time: 10/02/2015, 1835 PDT
Registration: N206HL
Aircraft: CESSNA TU206G
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On October 2, 2015, about 1835 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna TU206G, N206HL, impacted 
terrain for unknown reasons about 1 mile from the Fall City Airport (1WA6), Fall City, 
Washington. Global Ventures, Inc., owned the airplane, which the pilot operated under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulation Part 91. The pilot, the sole occupant, was seriously 
injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the flight that departed an unknown location. The pilot was destined for 1WA6.
According to first responders, the airplane had come to rest behind the Fall City Beach Grill. 
The wings had been extensively damaged and the left fuel tank had ruptured.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector responded to the accident site. He stated 
that the engine mounts and engine separated from the firewall and the nose landing gear fork 
had sheared.
The airplane was recovered for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CESSNA
Registration: N206HL
Model/Series: TU206G
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: GLOBAL VENTURES INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Observation Time: 
Distance from Accident Site:
Temperature/Dew Point: 
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: / ,
Lowest Ceiling: 
Visibility:
Altimeter Setting:
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Departure Point: 
Destination: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Serious
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude: 47.559444, -121.863611 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Tealeye Cornejo
Additional Participating Persons:
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
