The glider club was launching gliders via a mechanical ground winch. On the first launch 
attempt, the glider overflew the tow cable and it automatically disconnected when the glider 
was low to the ground. The glider was able to make a safe landing on the runway. The pilot was 
overheard saying that the first launch failed because he should have initiated the climb sooner. 
On the second attempt, the glider once again overran the tow cable. Before the tow cable 
released, the pilot lowered the nose to pick up the slack in the cable and he instructed the 
winch operator to go faster. These two steps appeared to have corrected the problem, and the 
pilot initiated a climb. Shortly after, the glider began to overfly the cable again and it 
disconnected. The glider entered free flight just above stall speed about 75 feet above the 
runway. A witness saw the glider nose over and thought the pilot was going to land. Instead, 
the glider descended rapidly and drifted to the left toward a taxiway. The witness saw the wings 
of the glider rock back and forth before it impacted the ground hard. Examination of the glider 
and release hook revealed no mechanical anomalies. The ground winch's engine was reportedly 
running rough and most likely was unable to produce enough speed to launch the glider.
The pilot‚s failure to maintain glider control while attempting to take off using a ground winch, 
which resulted in an inadvertent stall low to the ground. Contributing to the accident was the 
ground winch, which was unable to produce enough speed for a successful glider launch.
On September 1, 2012, about 1100 mountain daylight time, N5489X, a Burkhart Grob G103 
Twin II glider, sustained substantial damage when it  landed hard during an attempted takeoff 
using a ground winch at the Horizon Airport (T27) near El Paso, Texas. The commercial pilot 
was fatally injured. The glider was registered to and operated by the El Paso Soaring Society 
Incorporated, El Paso, Texas. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed for the local flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The El Paso Soaring Society was using the ground winch to launch gliders because their tow 
airplane was down for maintenance. The winch was set up on the overrun area on the east side 
of Runway 08. 
According to a witness, a week before the accident, he attended a class on how to launch a 
glider using the ground winch. The class was given by the pilot and the person who operated 
the winch on the day of the accident. The witness said the class was taught from both a pilot 
and winch-operating perspective.
The following weekend, the witness returned to the airport to assist with the glider launches. 
He said that on the first launch attempt, he  ran alongside the glider's wing until it got 
airborne. When the glider was approximately 15 feet above the ground, it overran the winch 
cable and the center of gravity (CG) hook automatically disconnected. The glider landed 
straight ahead without incident.
While ground-towing the glider back to the takeoff area, the witness heard the pilot telling the 
winch operator to do the same exact thing with the winch as he did on the first attempt. The 
pilot felt the first launch had failed because he didn't initiate a climb soon enough.
During the second attempt, the witness said the glider once again overflew the winch cable. He 
said, "According to the class [the pilot] gave the previous week, he performed the correct 
procedure - he lowered the nose to let the slack out of the cable. As this happened, he also came 
on the radio and directed the winch to go "faster". Then, once it started pulling him again, he 
raised the nose up as he was supposed to do in order to initiate a climb. After he did this, the 
cable once again seemed to develop some slack and the glider out ran it." The witness said the 
cable disconnected and the glider was in free-flight approximately 75 feet above the ground 
and appeared to be traveling just above stall speed. He then saw the glider nose over as if the 
pilot was preparing to land. But the glider began to sink rapidly as it drifted to the left toward 
the taxiway. The witness then saw the wings of the glider rock back and forth before it hit the 
ground "very hard."
According to an inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the glider came to 
rest just north of the taxiway. The area was damaged and the tail had separated from the 
airframe. Examination of the CG hook revealed no mechanical deficiencies and functioned 
normally when tested. The inspector also said the ground winch utilized a 350-cubic-inch 
Chevrolet engine with a two-speed automatic transmission. Club members reported the winch 
had only been used about 9 times in the last 4 years. The pilot's son, who was standing behind 
the winch on both launch attempts, said the winch engine sounded as if it was producing a high 
RPM, but was running rough. 
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land and glider. He also 
had a certified flight instructor certificate for gliders. The pilot's last FAA Third Class medical 
was issued on December 28, 2011. At that time, he reported a total of 1,500 flight hours.
Weather at El Paso International Airport (ELP), El Paso, Texas, approximately 9 miles 
northwest of T27, at 1051, was reported as wind from 150 degrees at 4 knots, visibility 10 miles, 
clear skies, temperature 30 degrees Celsius, dewpoint 6 degrees Celsius, and a barometric 
pressure setting of 30.16 inches Hg.
