The 4,500-hour pilot reported that he during takeoff initial climb, the airplane experienced a 
loss of engine power at at an altitude of approximately 200 feet above ground level.  The pilot 
immediately initiated a forced landing to a field, while verifying the fuel pump was on and the 
mixture was rich.  The pilot stated that he "thought the left fuel tank was full" of fuel prior to 
departure.  Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector 
revealed there was no visible fuel was found in the left main fuel tank, but fuel was observed in 
the right main fuel tank, left and right auxiliary fuel tanks.  During the recovery process, the 
recovery crew drained approximately four tablespoons of fuel from the left wing.
The loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.  Contributing factors were the pilot's 
inadequate preflight planning/preparation, and the lack of suitable terrain for the forced 
landing.
On December 1, 2004, approximately 1420 central standard time, a Piper PA-24-250 single-
engine airplane, N7706P, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power during takeoff initial climb from the Pecan Plantation Airport (0TX1), near 
Granbury, Texas.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was seriously injured.  
The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 business 
flight.  The cross-country flight was originating at the time of the accident and was destined for 
the Grayson County Airport (GYI), near Sherman, Texas.
The 4,500-hour pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 
6120.1/2) that he departed from Runway 18 with the left main fuel tank selected.  At an altitude 
of approximately 200 feet above ground level, the engine "lost power."  The pilot immediately 
verified that the electric fuel pump was turned on and mixture was set to rich.  The pilot then 
switched to the right main fuel tank before switching back to the left main fuel tank.  The pilot 
initiated a forced landing to a field approximately 1/2 mile south of the airport within a 
residential area.  During the descent, the airplane struck trees approximately 35 feet in height 
before impacting terrain.  The airplane came to rest in the upright position approximately 180 
degrees from the original direction of travel.
The pilot further reported that earlier in the morning, he had requested that the local Fixed 
Base Operator (FBO) at GYI pull the airplane out of the hangar and top off with 100 Low Lead 
aviation fuel.  Upon arriving at GYI, the pilot had realized the airplane had not been refueled.  
The pilot stated that he was running late and elected to have the FBO only fill the left and right 
auxiliary fuel tanks.  After refueling, he noted that the right main fuel tank and left and right 
auxiliary fuel tanks were full and there were "only a few gallons" in the left wing fuel tank.  
After departure from GYI, the pilot stated he selected the right auxiliary fuel tank for the flight, 
and then selected the left main fuel tank prior to landing at 0TX1.  
The pilot added that this was the first time he had ever refueled the airplane without topping 
off both main wing tanks, and subconsciously thought the left main fuel tank was full prior to 
departure.  
Examination of the airplane by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
the outboard portion of the right wing was crushed upwards and aft.  The trailing edge of the 
left wing was wrinkled near the wing root.  The fuselage was wrinkled aft of the baggage 
compartment to the empennage.  The landing gear was observed in the retracted position.  The 
Lycoming O-540-A1D5 engine remained attached to its mounts, and the firewall was bent.  
Two of the three propeller blades were crushed aft.  One propeller blade was free of damage.  
No visible fuel was found in the left main fuel tank, but fuel was observed in the right main fuel 
tank and left and right auxiliary fuel tanks.  During the aircraft recovery, the recovery company 
reported they had drained approximately four tablespoons of fuel out of the left fuel tank.
