The pilot elected to land on a paved road after circling three times to "check for obstacles and 
hazards." The pilot noted the power lines and "planned [his] final approach well above the 
power lines." During the final approach, the pilot lost sight of the power lines "due to the early 
morning sun." The main landing gear impacted one of the lines. Subsequently, the airplane 
impacted in a nose down attitude causing substantial damage.
the pilot's failure to maintain clearance from the power lines. Contributing factors include the 
power lines, the sun glare, the pilot's reduced visual lookout, the pilot™s improper in-flight 
planning and decision making and the pilot's failure to perform a go-around procedure after 
losing sight of the power lines.
On December 1, 2004, at 0740 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-18-150, N734, operated by 
the United States Department of Agriculture, sustained substantial damage when it impacted a 
power line while landing on Delaware Basin Road, 20 nautical miles west of Jal, New Mexico. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The business flight was 
being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan. The 
commercial pilot reported no injuries. The cross-country flight originated from Roswell, New 
Mexico, at approximately 0635.
According to the accident report submitted by the pilot, he was en route to Brininstool Ranch 
to pick up a United States Department of Agriculture specialist. The ranch roads normally used 
for landing were muddy and lined with high vegetation. The pilot elected to land on Delaware 
Basin Road after circling the road three times to "check for obstacles and hazards." The pilot 
noted the power lines and "planned [his] final approach well above the power lines." During 
the final approach, the pilot lost sight of the power lines "due to the early morning sun." The 
main landing gear impacted one of the lines. Subsequently, the airplane impacted the ground 
in a nose down attitude, damaging the propeller and collapsing the main landing gear. The 
airplane came to a rest on the west side of the road. Both wing struts were bent aft 
longitudinally and the firewall was crushed and wrinkled. A postaccident examination of the 
airplane's systems, conducted by the FAA, revealed no anomalies.
