The 4,000-hour pilot reported that during cruise flight, the engine lost power.  While 
descending, the pilot further stated that he disengaged the autopilot, advanced the mixture to 
full, cycled the fuel pump, and switched from the left to the right fuel tank, and "the engine 
momentarily gained power for a few minutes."  Subsequently, the engine lost power again and 
the pilot elected to land on a gravel road.  During the landing roll, the left main wheel 
separated, and the left main landing gear collapsed as the airplane came to rest in an upright 
position.  Prior to the recovery of the airplane, the Federal Aviation Administration inspector 
was able to start the engine using the right fuel tank.  The engine ran for approximately 10 
minutes with no abnormalities noted before the inspector shut the engine down using the 
mixture control.  During the recovery process, the inspector noted that approximately one 
gallon of fuel was drained from the left wing fuel tank and approximately 35 gallons of fuel 
were drained from the right wing fuel tank.  As stated in the FAA approved pilot's operating 
handbook, the unusable fuel quantity for both fuel tanks is one gallon.
The pilot's mismanagement of the fuel by his failure to adequately set the fuel selector position 
which resulted in fuel exhaustion and the loss of engine power.
On December 1, 2004, approximately 1350 central standard time, a Cessna P210N single-
engine airplane, N6300P, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss 
of engine power near Pawhuska, Oklahoma.  The airline transport rated pilot, sole occupant of 
the airplane, was not injured.  The airplane was registered to Larson Implement, Inc., of Leeds, 
North Dakota, and operated by Silver Wings Aviation, Inc., of Santa Monica, California.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 positioning flight.  The cross-country flight originated from the Salina 
Municipal Airport (SLN), near Salina, Kansas, at 1300, destined for Tulsa, Oklahoma.  
 
The 4,000-hour pilot reported in the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB 
Form 6120.1/2) that after departure from SLN during the climb to his intended cruising 
altitude, the engine began to "run rough."  As the engine continued to run rough, the pilot 
leaned the engine mixture while checking the cylinder head temperature, and "the engine 
seemed to smooth out."  
 
During cruise flight at an altitude of 7,500 feet mean sea level (msl), the pilot stated that "the 
engine failed," and he immediately disengaged the autopilot, advanced the mixture to full, 
cycled the fuel pump, and switched the fuel selector to the "fullest tank."  
 
Subsequently, the engine lost power again, and the pilot attempted to glide the airplane 
towards the Pawhuska Municipal Airport (H76).  After realizing he was unable to make it to the 
airport, the pilot elected to land on a gravel road.  During the landing roll, the left main wheel 
separated, and the left main landing gear collapsed as the airplane came to rest in an upright 
position.  
 
During a telephone interview with an NTSB representative, the pilot reported that after the loss 
of engine power, he switched from the left fuel tank to the right fuel tank and "the engine 
momentarily gained power for a few minutes."  
 
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who 
responded to the accident site, revealed that the left horizontal stabilizer was bent upward.  
Prior to the recovery of the airplane, the FAA inspector was able to start the engine using the 
right fuel tank.  The engine ran for approximately 10 minutes with no abnormalities noted 
before the inspector shut the engine down using the mixture control.  During the recovery 
process, the inspector noted that approximately one gallon of fuel was drained from the left 
wing fuel tank, and approximately 44 gallons of fuel were drained from the right wing fuel 
tank.
 
As stated in the FAA approved pilot's operating handbook, the unusable fuel quantity for both 
fuel tanks is one gallon.  A fuel receipt obtained from the Fixed Base Operator (FBO) at SLN 
indicated that the airplane was refueled with 34.5 gallons of 100 Low Lead aviation fuel prior 
to departure.
