The pilot stated that the preflight was normal, fuel was "clear", no water was present, and he 
had approximately 35 gallons of fuel in the fuel tanks. He taxied to runway 36 and did an 
engine run-up prior to takeoff. He noted that the fuel selector was on the right fuel tank. He 
departed on runway 36, and shortly after liftoff the airplane engine started to run "rough", the 
pilot then switched the fuel tank selector to the left tank, he could not remember if the fuel tank 
selector was on a detent or not. He made a 180-degree turn to return back to the field and 
crashed 116 feet west of the north end of runway 18. The pilot added, during that time with the 
engine problem, he placed his right hand on the yoke and with the left hand he reached for the 
fuel selector slapping it to the left tank position. In the process he was leaning into and pulling 
on the yoke. With FAA oversight, Lycoming and Piper conducted examination of the airplane 
and engine. The airplane's engine examination revealed no indication of pre-impact anomalies 
or failure. The fuel lines were examined and no indication of fuel contamination was present. 
Fuel was found in all fuel lines forward of the gascolator on the firewall. The fuel tank selector 
was found in the off position. The FAA inspector stated that the witnesses who assisted with 
the accident recovery did not change the fuel selector position.
A loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of the improper fuel selector position.
On December 02, 2004, about 1312 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-180, N7510W, 
registered to and operated by a private individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, had 
a loss of engine power during takeoff and impacted the ground at Peter Prince Field, Milton, 
Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The 
commercial-rated pilot received serious injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage. 
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that the preflight was normal, fuel was "clear", no water was present, and had 
approximately 35 gallons of fuel in the fuel tanks. He taxied to runway 36 and did an engine 
run-up prior to takeoff. He noted that the fuel selector was on the right fuel tank. He departed 
on runway 36, and shortly after liftoff the airplane engine started to run "rough", the pilot then 
switched the fuel tank selector to the left tank, he could not remember if the fuel tank selector 
was on a detent or not. He made a 180-degree turn to return back to the field and crashed west 
of the north end of runway 18. The pilot added, during that time with the engine problem, he 
placed his right hand on the yoke and with the left hand he reached for the fuel selector 
slapping it to the left tank position. In the process he was leaning into and pulling on the yoke.
A pilot witness stated, he observed the airplane when it departed runway 36. When the 
airplane was about 200 feet above the ground, it sounded like the engine was throttled back 
and shortly after the engine was absence of sound, but the propeller was still windmilling. The 
airplane made a 120-degree turn to the left with a 30-degree nose down and 30-degree left 
wing bank as it descended through 100 feet. The airplane impacted the ground left wing first, 
then the nose, and turned left about 90 degrees as it skidded a short distance. He ran toward 
the accident airplane. As he approached the airplane he saw the pilot was injured and heard 
the electrical fuel pump running. He managed to turn off the ignition as he was talking to the 
911 operator. He was concern due to the sound of the electrical fuel pump operating was still 
heard. Shortly after rescue personnel arrived.
An examination of the crash site, airplane, airplane's systems and airplane's engine was 
conducted by the responding FAA inspector with representatives of Textron Lycoming and 
New Piper Aircraft, Inc. The accident airplane impacted the grass overrun area; 100 feet short 
and 80 feet to the left of the runway centerline on a heading of 220 degree. The accident 
airplane slid about 90 feet before coming to a stop, at latitude 30 degrees, 38 .586 minutes 
north and longitude 86 degrees, 59.666 minutes west, upright on a heading of 090 degrees.
The fuselage sustained impact damage and the left front of the fuselage was buckled aft of the 
firewall. The left wing was partially separated from the fuselage at the wing root. The right wing 
remained attached to the fuselage. The stabilator had damage on the left side. The landing 
gears were separated from their respective attaching points. Continuity for the flight controls 
was established. A copious amount of fuel remained in both tanks. The fuel tank selector was 
found in the off position.  An operational test of the fuel selector was performed. No 
abnormalities were noted with the fuel selector.
Examination of the airplane's engine showed the fuel lines had no indication of contamination 
present. Fuel was found in all fuel lines forward of the gascolator on the firewall. The 
carburetor's fuel bowl had clean fuel present, the accelerator pump functioned, the internal 
passages and nozzle were clear, the screen was clean, and the needle value in normal 
unremarkable condition. Both magnetos produced sparks. The spark plugs had no damage and 
were observed to have service wear with normal gray color combustion deposit. The oil sump 
drain was broken and the oil drained onto the ground, quantity was not determined. The 
remaining engine's oil system was unremarkable.  The crankshaft was rotated by hand and 
continuity of crankshaft, camshaft, valve train, and accessory drives were noted. All four 
cylinders produced compression while the engine was rotated. The engine examination 
revealed no evidence of pre-impact failure.
Witnesses stated to the responding FAA inspector, the fuel mixture was found in the full 
position and no one that assisted in the accident recovery had contact with the fuel selector. 
