The purpose of the flight was to "check out" the airplane before delivering it to its new owner, 
and to provide the copilot with an indoctrination ride in the Cessna 414.  During the approach, 
the pilot provided guidance and corrections to the copilot.  The copilot flew the airplane to 
within 200 feet of the ground when the nose of the airplane yawed abruptly to the right.  The 
pilot took control of the airplane, and pushed the engine and propeller controls to the full 
forward position.  He placed the fuel pump switches to the "high" position, retracted the flaps, 
and attempted to retract the landing gear.  With full left rudder and full left aileron applied, he 
could neither maintain directional control nor stop a roll to the right.  The airplane struck the 
ground and continued into the parking area where it struck an airplane and a waste-oil tank.  
Examination of the airplane following the accident revealed that the landing gear was down 
and locked, and the propeller on the right engine was not feathered.  The emergency procedure 
for an engine inoperative go-around required landing gear retraction and a feathered propeller 
on the inoperative engine.  The pilot's handbook further stated, "Climb or continued level flight 
is improbable with the landing gear extended and the propeller windmilling."  After the 
accident, both pilots stated that they didn't notice a power loss on the right engine until the 
copilot surrendered the flight controls.  The right engine was removed and placed in a test cell.  
The engine started immediately on the first attempt and ran continuously without interruption.
The partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons, and the pilot's failure to maintain 
adequate airspeed (Vmc).
On December 2, 2004, at 1310 eastern standard time, a Cessna 414, N2EQ, was substantially 
damaged during collision with terrain and parked aircraft at the Dinwiddie County Airport 
(PTB), Petersburg, Virginia.  The certificated airline transport pilot, commercial rated copilot, 
and two passengers were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local 
corporate flight that originated at Dinwiddie County Airport, at 1255.  No flight plan was filed 
for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a telephone interview, the pilot explained that the primary purpose of the flight was to 
"check out" the airplane before delivering it to its new owner.  He further explained that the 
copilot was receiving an indoctrination ride in the Cessna 414, and that the pilot-rated 
passenger in the back was receiving an orientation flight.  The second passenger was a 
company mechanic.
After takeoff, the airplane climbed to 6,500 feet over the airport, and circled while the cabin 
pressurization and the autopilot were checked.  During the flight, and the subsequent 
approach, the copilot in the right seat was at the flight controls.
The pilot said he noticed that the propeller rpm was low on the right engine, and that he 
needed to add engine power to match propeller rpm with the left engine.  Once the propeller 
rpm was matched, a "four-inch split" in the manifold pressures was noted between the two 
engines.  During the flight, the nose of the airplane yawed to the right "a couple of times", but 
the pilot attributed that to wind.
The copilot intercepted the localizer course to land on runway 05, and flew the airplane to 
within 200 feet of the ground, when the nose of the airplane yawed abruptly to the right.  The 
pilot took control of the airplane, and pushed the engine and propeller controls to the full 
forward position.  He placed the fuel pump switches to the "high" position, retracted the flaps, 
and attempted to retract the landing gear.  With full left rudder and full left aileron applied, he 
could neither maintain directional control nor stop a roll to the right.
The airplane flew to the right of the runway, and crossed over a taxiway and a ditch.  At that 
point, the pilot reduced power and forced the airplane onto the ground.  The airplane struck 
the ground and continued into the parking area where it struck a parked Cessna 172 and a 
waste-oil tank.  The Cessna 172 ignited and was consumed by fire.  Another parked airplane 
suffered fire damage.
During a telephone interview, the copilot said that the pilot invited him along to get some 
familiarization with the Cessna 414 while the airplane was looked at prior to its transfer of 
ownership.  The mechanic and the flight instructor joined the discussion and then 
accompanied them on the flight.
The copilot said that the climb was uneventful, and after the airplane leveled around 6,000 
feet, he took the flight controls and the radios while the pilot checked various systems, to 
include the autopilot.  He added that the mechanic's headset did not work, and that the pilot 
removed his headset to converse with the mechanic.
During the approach, the pilot provided guidance and corrections to the copilot, until he 
announced that he was taking the controls.  The copilot said he was aware that he was applying 
significant left rudder pressure during the approach, but didn't notice a power loss on the right 
engine until he surrendered the flight controls.  
The pilot stated that he took the controls due to the un-stabilized nature of the approach, and 
was unaware of the power loss until the copilot surrendered the controls.
During a telephone interview, a witness on the ground said he watched the airplane in the 
traffic pattern, and throughout the approach.  The airplane appeared to be over the runway 
when it leveled off "about 10 feet" above the ground.  At that time, the airplane turned about 30 
degrees to the right, the engine noise increased, and then the airplane "shot" further to the 
right and collided with the Cessna 172.  According to the witness, "It looked like he had an 
engine failure."
The airplane was examined at the scene on December 2 and 3, 2004, by Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) aviation safety inspectors.  Control continuity was established from the 
cockpit to all of the flight control surfaces.  Control continuity was also established for the 
engine controls.  
The left main landing gear and the nose gear were separated from the airplane.  The gear 
handle was in the "down" position, and the right main landing gear was down and locked.  Fuel 
was drained from each tank. 
The propeller blades on the left engine displayed significant aft bending on two blades, and one 
blade was bent forward.  The blade tips were fractured and separated from each blade.
The propeller blades on the right engine showed some slight aft bending and tip damage.  The 
propeller blades were not in the feathered position.
The right engine was removed, and shipped to the Teledyne Continental engine factory for 
examination.  On March 22, 2005, the engine was removed from quarantine at the factory by 
an FAA aviation safety inspector.  The engine was examined, and it exhibited minimal impact 
damage.  Airframe-associated accessories were removed, a test propeller was attached, and the 
engine was placed in a test cell.
The engine started immediately on the first attempt.  The engine was then shut down due to an 
oil leak around a pushrod housing that was damaged by impact.  The housing was replaced, 
and the engine restarted immediately.
The engine was run continuously, and without interruption at gradually increased power 
settings.  At each graduation, the engine ran for 5 minutes before the power was increased.  
Ultimately, the engine ran at full rated power, without interruption.  Other than impact 
damage, there were no anomalies noted with the engine.
The pilot reported 3,000 total hours of flight experience, 130 hours of which were in the Cessna 
414.  The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate, with a rating for airplane multi-engine 
land, and a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land and 
instrument airplane.
The copilot reported approximately 5,600 hours of flight experience, 360 hours of which was in 
multi-engine airplanes, and no prior experience in the Cessna 414.  He held a commercial pilot 
certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land, multi-engine land, and instrument 
airplane.
The weather reported at Dinwiddie County Airport, at 1300, included clear skies and wind 
from 200 degrees at 6 knots.
According to the Cessna 414 Pilot's Operating Handbook, the procedure for "Engine 
Inoperative Go-Around" includes:
1.If absolutely necessary and speed is above 91 KIAS, increase engine speed to 2,700 RPM 
and apply full throttle.
2.Landing Gear - UP.
3.Wing flaps - UP if extended
4.Cowl Flap -OPEN
5.Climb at 105 knots (98 knots with obstacles directly ahead.
6.Trim Tabs - Adjust 5 degrees bank toward operative engine
The Handbook further stated, "Climb or continued level flight is improbable with the landing 
extended and the propeller windmilling."
