National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lake Dallas, TX
Accident Number: FTW04LA105
Date & Time: 05/02/2004, 1600 CDT
Registration: N60539
Aircraft: Cessna 150J
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis On the first takeoff, the 50-hour student pilot experienced a rough running engine and immediately returned to the airport.
After performing another engine run-up, including checking the magnetos, with no recollection of any abnormal conditions, the student pilot departed again.
On the second takeoff, the airplane experienced a loss of engine power.
The student pilot failed to maintain airspeed resulting in a stall, and the airplane came to rest in a vertical position among a group of trees.
Examination of the airplane, which had flown less than 40 hours in the last 10 years, did not revealed any anomalies, and the reason for the loss of engine power was undetermined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain proper airspeed for flight resulting in a stall/spin during the forced landing.
A contributing factors was the loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY Findings 2.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
STALL/SPIN - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On May 2, 2004, at 1600 central daylight time, a Cessna 150J single-engine airplane, N60539, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power during initial takeoff climb from the Lakeview Airport (30F), near Lake Dallas, Texas.
The student pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The airplane was registered to and operated by the student pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
During the initial takeoff from 30F, the 50-hour student pilot stated that the engine started running rough at 300 feet above the ground (agl), and he elected to return to the airport.
The student pilot landed on runway 36 to troubleshoot the problem.
At the north end of the runway, the student pilot performed another engine run-up, including checking the magnetos, but did not recall any abnormal conditions.
The student pilot then taxied down the length of the runway for another takeoff to the north on runway 36.
At an approximate altitude of 200 feet agl, the engine experienced "lost of power."
As the student pilot started a left turn back to the airport, at an altitude of approximately 100 feet agl, the airplane "pitched-up and to the right, starting to roll inverted."
Subsequently, the airplane impacted trees, before coming to rest in a vertical position.
During an interview with the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), the student pilot reported that the airplane was refueled with two 5-gallon containers of automotive fuel one week prior to the accident.
During the preflight inspection on the day of the accident, the student pilot checked the fuel from both wing fuel tank sump drains, but not the engine fuel strainer drain valve, and noted the fuel to be free of water and debris.
A pilot located at the north end of the airport witnessed the event.
The pilot reported to the IIC that he observed the accident airplane rolling out on the runway to the north.
At the end of the runway, the airplane turned around, and started a takeoff roll to the south.
With approximately one-quarter of the runway remaining, the airplane aborted the takeoff.
At the end of the runway, the airplane again turned around and started a takeoff roll to the north.
The witness added that, "the airplane managed to climb to approximately 100 feet (just above the treetops) when the pilot attempted to make a left turn back toward the airport.
The aircraft then stalled nose first into the trees."
Examination of the wreckage by an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who responded to the site of the accident, revealed that the right wing spar was partially separated and bent.
The outboard 5-feet of the right wing was crushed and torn aft to the spar.
The left wing remained intact, with damage to the aileron and flap.
The engine and engine firewall were crushed upward at an approximate 30-degree angle.
There were visible signs of fuel in the right wing fuel tank.
On May 6, 2004, at the owner's hangar, an FAA inspector and a Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) representative, under the supervision of the NTSB investigator-in-charge, examined the TCM O-200-A engine.
The crankshaft was rotated, and continuity was confirmed to the accessory drive gears and valve train.
There was "thumb" compression on all four cylinders.
No fuel was observed in the fuel strainer located near the firewall, however, fuel was expelled from the fuel nozzle when the carburetor accelerator pump was actuated.
The metal carburetor floats were intact and free of anomalies.
Rotating the crankshaft produced a spark at each of the magneto harness leads.
The top spark plugs were removed and examined; no anomalies were noted.
The #1 cylinder exhaust rocker valve was not equipped with an oil port.
Both the intake and exhaust rocker arms for cylinder #4 were equipped with an oil port.
The oil screen revealed a slight amount of an unknown substance.
Review of the aircraft engine logbooks indicated that the airplane had an annual inspection completed in August 26, 1994, with a tachometer reading of 4,771.20 hours and a Hobbs hour- meter reading of 1,675.6 hours.
The engine was removed from N60539 on June 15, 2003, overhauled on August 18, 2003, and re-installed on N60539 on November 1, 2003, with a tachometer reading of 4,808.32 hours and a Hobbs hour-meter reading of 1,716.3 hours.
The most recent annual inspection was performed on December 1, 2003, with a tachometer reading of 4,810.15 hours and a Hobbs hour-meter reading of 1,718.3 hours.
During the NTSB's examination of the engine on May 6, 2004, the tachometer reading indicated 4,810.51 hours and the Hobbs hour-meter indicated 1,718.3 hours.
The reason for the loss of engine power was undetermined.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
