National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Cambridge, OH
Accident Number: IAD04LA019
Date & Time: 05/01/2004, 1130 EDT
Registration: N626EA
Aircraft: Krotje VM-1 Esqual
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot attempted a takeoff in the homebuilt airplane.
During the takeoff roll, the airplane veered off the left side of the runway, struck runway lights, and went into a creek.
A post- accident examination of the airplane revealed that it was equipped with a free-castoring nose wheel and motorcycle brakes.
It was found that the left brake dragged due to a lack of clearance between the brake pad and brake rotor.
The lack of clearance was attributable to the design of the brakes and their adaptation from a motorcycle to an airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control.
A factor was the inadequate brake system installed on the airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL BRAKE SYSTEM - INADEQUATE ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 3.
OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER Factual Information On May 1, 2004, about 1130 eastern daylight time, a homebuilt VM-1 Esqual, N626EA, was substantially damaged during an attempted takeoff from Cambridge Municipal Airport (CDI), Cambridge, Ohio.
The certificated private pilot received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the local personal flight, conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, he attempted to take off from runway 22.
After he set the throttle to takeoff power, the airplane "started pulling abruptly to the left."
The pilot applied "strong right rudder," in an effort to counteract the turning, but to no avail.
The airplane then veered off the left side of the runway, struck runway lights, and went into a creek.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane after the accident and submitted a Service Difficulty Report (SDR).
According to the report, the airplane was equipped with a free-castoring nose landing gear and was configured to use motorcycle brakes on the main landing gear.
A post-accident examination of the brakes revealed that the right brake operated normally; however, the left brake dragged due to a lack of clearance between the brake pad and the brake rotor.
The lack of clearance was attributable to the design of the brakes and their adaptation from a motorcycle to an airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 68, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
