National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Laurel, MT
Accident Number: SEA04LA077
Date & Time: 05/01/2004, 1245 MDT
Registration: N5483H
Aircraft: Piper PA-18-105
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that he and his wife were sightseeing along the Yellowstone River just south of Laurel, Montana, when he spotted what he described as unusual animal tracks on a gravel sand bar adjacent to the river.
He applied one notch of flaps and executed a 180 degree course reversal for a "low and slow look."
The aircraft subsequently struck the water and nosed over.
The pilot reported that there was no mechanical malfunction or failure with the aircraft or its powerplant/systems.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain adequate clearance/altitude while maneuvering resulting in the inadvertent in-flight collision with water/terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER 2.
Neither the pilot nor the passenger was injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.
The local flight, which was personal, was operated under 14 CFR 91, and originated from Billings, Montana, at 1157.
The pilot reported that he and his wife were sightseeing along the Yellowstone River just south of Laurel, Montana, when he spotted what he described as unusual animal tracks on a gravel sand bar adjacent to the river.
He applied one notch of flaps and executed a 180 degree course reversal for a "low and slow look."
He further reported "...In a moment I was hitting the water and then flipped forward and onto the back of the plane..." (refer to attached NTSB Form 6120.1/2.
The pilot reported that there was no mechanical malfunction or failure with the aircraft or its powerplant/systems.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 48, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
