National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Philadelphia, MS
Accident Number: ATL04CA108
Date & Time: 05/01/2004, 1050 CDT
Registration: N32DS
Aircraft: Sawyer Skybolt
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane collided with a guy wire while in low altitude cruise near Philadelphia, Mississippi.
The pilot had just passed over Philadelphia Municipal Airport and turned left to a heading of 140 degrees, cruising at an altitude of 1600 feet.
The pilot stated that at the reduced power setting of 2000 RPM, the airplane had a slightly higher angle of attack than normal cruise.
After about 8 minutes on the heading of 140 degrees, the pilot felt a shock on the airframe and heard a loud noise.
The airplane turned 30 degrees to the left.
The airplane was still flyable so the pilot proceeded to the nearest airport, Barrett Field in Philadelphia, Mississippi and landed without incident.
The pilot did not report any mechanical malfunctions with the airplane.
Examination of the airplane revealed that both left wings were broken off from the middle portion of wing, left wing spar damaged and the left aileron almost completely detached.
The pilot stated that "aircraft with characteristics of tandem seating with Pilot-In- Command in the rear, and forward visibility obscured to any degree above the level flight path should not be flown for long periods on a steady heading.
Small course changes, left and right will eliminate the obscured area."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to see and avoid a guy wire which resulted in an in-flight collision.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) OBJECT - GUY WIRE 2.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
