The commercial helicopter pilot had completed 25 to 30 water drops in a fire zone using a 
firefighting bucket on suspension cables. After refueling, he completed three or four additional 
drops and then filled and pulled the bucket from the water and immediately felt "a severely out 
of CG [center of gravity] condition to the right." He assumed that the bucket cables were 
entangled in the right landing skid, so he released the water from the bucket. The condition 
persisted, so he rocked the helicopter to attempt to free the cable without success. He then 
released the cable with the cargo release button and heard the "clunk" sound typically heard 
when the bucket was released, but then he heard another "clunk." The helicopter then began to 
spin violently and crashed into the water.
Examination of the wreckage revealed 6-inch long cable marks on the right rear landing skid 
tube and a torsional fracture of the tail rotor short shaft. Based on the pilot's statement, the 
cable marks likely occurred initially when a cable became entangled on the skid tube, followed 
by the fracture of the tail rotor shaft due to cable or bucket contact with the tail rotor assembly. 
The pilot reported that there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or anomalies with 
the helicopter that would have precluded normal operation.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate clearance between the helicopter's skid and the 
firefighting bucket and suspension cable, which resulted in the cable becoming entangled on 
the landing skid and a subsequent loss of helicopter control.
On May 2, 2017, about 1815 eastern daylight time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N911GE, sustained 
substantial damage during firefighting operations near Orange Springs, Florida. The helicopter 
was registered to and operated by the Marion County Sheriff's Office as a public-use aircraft. 
The commercial pilot sustained serious injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan was filed for the local flight that departed Ocala International Airport, Ocala, 
Florida, about 1500.
According to the Aviation Unit Commander and the pilot, the pilot was utilizing a firefighting 
bucket (Bambi Bucket®) and had completed between 25 and 30 drops on the fire zone. He 
landed at a nearby landing zone, refueled, and completed 3 or 4 additional drops when the 
accident occurred. After lowering the bucket into the water and filling it, he pulled the bucket 
from the water and immediately felt "a severely out of CG condition to the right." He assumed 
that the bucket cables were entangled in the right landing skid, so he released the water from 
the bucket. The condition persisted, so he rocked the helicopter to attempt to free the cable; 
however, this was not successful. He then released the cable with the cargo release button. He 
heard the "clunk" sound that was typical with releasing the bucket, then he heard another 
"clunk." The helicopter then began to spin violently and crashed into the water. The pilot freed 
himself from the cockpit, inflated his personal flotation device, and swam to shore. He utilized 
his cell phone to call for assistance and was rescued by first responders.
The pilot reported there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or anomalies that would 
have precluded normal operation of the helicopter.
An examination of the wreckage revealed cable marks on the right rear landing skid tube for 
about 6 inches in length. There was also a torsional fracture of the tail rotor short shaft.
