The private pilot reported that, during the initial climb shortly after takeoff, the airplane lost 
partial engine power. He tried a series of troubleshooting steps, but with limited time available, 
he then performed a forced landing onto a street just beyond the runway. The airplane 
impacted power transmission cables and traffic lights during the descent, rupturing both 
wingtip fuel tanks and spraying ignited fuel onto cars at the intersection below. The airplane 
sustained substantial damage when it collided with the ground and came to rest on the street. 
The airplane had been fueled almost to capacity just before takeoff and postaccident 
examination did not reveal any anomalies with the airframe or engine that would have 
precluded normal operation. Examination of the carburetor revealed multiple maintenance-
related discrepancies, all of which could have resulted in a loss of engine power. One of the 
discrepancies was related to the float, which appeared to have been touching the wall of the 
carburetor bowl. A witness reported visible exhaust emissions coming from the engine during 
flight, and the spark plugs were coated in black soot. Both observations were indicative of an 
excessively rich fuel-to-air mixture, consistent with a stuck carburetor float. As such, the loss of 
engine power was likely the result of a stuck carburetor float.
Based on atmospheric conditions, carburetor icing could not be ruled out; however, the 
airplane began the takeoff ground roll almost immediately after the pilot performed the engine 
runup, which included the application of carburetor heat, and it is unlikely that the loss of 
engine power was the result of carburetor icing.
The pilot accepted an intersection takeoff due to a passenger jet performing taxi tests at the 
approach end of the runway. Had he chosen to use the full runway length, he likely would have 
had enough runway available to safely land the airplane following the loss of power.
The improper maintenance of the carburetor, which resulted in a stuck float and a partial loss 
of engine power during takeoff. 
