The commercial pilot departed on a planned 1-hour cargo cross-country flight in the autopilot-
equipped airplane. About 3 minutes after departure, the controller instructed the pilot to fly 
direct to the destination airport at 2,000 ft mean sea level (msl). The pilot acknowledged the 
clearance, and there were no further radio transmissions from the airplane. The airplane 
continued flying past the destination airport in straight-and-level flight at 2,100 ft msl, 
consistent with the airplane operating under autopilot control, until it was about 100 miles 
beyond the destination airport. 
A witness near the accident site watched the airplane fly over at a low altitude, heard three 
"pops" come from the airplane, and then saw it bank to the left and begin to descend. The 
airplane continued in the descending left turn until he lost sight of it as it dropped below the 
horizon. 
The airplane impacted trees in about a 45° left bank and a level pitch attitude and came to rest 
in a heavily wooded area. The airplane sustained extensive thermal damage from a postcrash 
fire; however, examination of the remaining portions of the airframe, flight controls, engines, 
and engine accessories revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction. The fuel 
selector valves were found on the outboard tanks, which was in accordance with the normal 
cruise procedures in the pilot's operating handbook. Calculations based on the airplane's flight 
records and the fuel consumption information in the engine manual indicated that, at 
departure, the outboard tanks of the airplane contained sufficient fuel for about 1 hour 10 
minutes of flight. The airplane had been flying for about 1 hour 15 minutes when the accident 
occurred. Therefore, it is likely that the fuel in the outboard tanks was exhausted; without pilot 
action to switch fuel tanks, the engines lost power as a result of fuel starvation, and the airplane 
descended and impacted trees and terrain.
The overflight of the intended destination and the subsequent loss of engine power due to fuel 
starvation are indicative of pilot incapacitation. The pilot's autopsy identified no significant 
natural disease: however, the examination was limited by the severity of damage to the body. 
Page 2 of 10ERA17FA172
Further, there are a number of conditions, including cardiac arrhythmias, seizures, or other 
causes of loss of consciousness, that could incapacitate a pilot and leave no evidence at 
autopsy.
The pilot's toxicology results indicated that the pilot had used marijuana/tetrahydrocannabinol 
(THC) at some point before the accident. THC can impair judgment, but it does not cause 
incapacitation; therefore, the circumstances of this accident are not consistent with 
impairment from THC, and, the pilot's THC use likely did not contribute to this accident. The 
reason for the pilot's incapacitation could not be determined.
The pilot's incapacitation for unknown reasons, which resulted in an overflight of his 
destination, a subsequent loss of engine power due to fuel starvation, and collision with terrain.
