Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
ST. PAUL, MN
Accident Number:
CHI97FA200
Date & Time:
07/02/1997, 0720 CDT 
Registration:
N83353
Aircraft:
Piper PA-32R-301
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Fatal, 1 Serious, 1 
Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business
Analysis 
Shortly after takeoff in gusty winds, the forward baggage door opened.  The pilot attempted to 
return to the airport when the airplane impacted trees and descended into the river.  The 
passengers stated the airplane was at a low altitude, the wings were rocking left and right, and 
a buzzer was sounding just before the accident.  One passenger stated to his knowledge the 
baggage door was latched, but not locked prior to takeoff.  Inspection of the baggage door latch 
after the accident showed it was in the latched position.  No failure of the latch was noted 
which would have resulted in it opening during the flight.  The takeoff was performed on 
runway 16 and the winds were from 210 degrees at 13 knots, gusting to 21 knots. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed which resulted in a stall.  Related factors were 
the pilot's diverted attention and gusty wind conditions. 
Page 2 of 7CHI97FA200
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) DOOR,CARGO/BAGGAGE - NOT SECURED
2. (F) DOOR,CARGO/BAGGAGE - OPEN
3. (F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS
5. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (C) STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. OBJECT - TREE(S)
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
8. TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER
Page 3 of 7CHI97FA200
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 2, 1997, at 0720 central daylight time (cdt), a Piper PA- 32, N83353, operated by 
Corporate Aviation, Inc., sustained substantial damage when it impacted trees and water after 
departing from the South St. Paul Municipal Airport, St. Paul, Minnesota.  Witnesses reported 
that the forward baggage door opened during the takeoff.  The pilot and two passengers 
sustained fatal injuries.  One passenger sustained serious injuries and one sustained minor 
injuries.  The 14 CFR Part 91 business flight was destined for Fort Dodge, Iowa.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and an IFR flight plan was filed.
One of the passengers stated he arrived at the airplane around 0630 cdt.  He stated the 
airplane was already out and the pilot and passenger doors were open.  He reported the 
forward baggage door was closed and the pilot went into the hangar to get the key.  They 
opened the baggage door and put a briefcase in.  The same passenger stated that since not all 
the passengers were there yet he decided to make some telephone calls on his cell phone which 
was in the briefcase.  He stated he made the calls and he put the briefcase back in the baggage 
area once again.  He stated he thinks he closed and latched the baggage door, but he was not 
sure.  He reported that he did not "double latch" the door because he knew others were coming 
and figured they would have baggage to stow.  He stated the pilot then went into the hangar to 
answer the telephone and he went to use the facilities.  When he returned the other passengers 
had arrived at which time they entered the airplane.  
The passenger stated he was in the front right seat for takeoff.  The pilot started the engine and 
did the "mag checks" and everything was normal.  He stated they departed to the south and at 
an altitude of about 50 feet above the ground the front cargo door opened and stayed "straight 
up" the entire time.  The pilot stated they would have to go back and land.  The passenger 
stated the airplane seemed to "wallow" as they climbed and likened it to landing in a strong 
crosswind.  According to the passenger, the pilot made a comment about needing to turn the 
airplane into the wind at which time the pilot initiated a turn to the left.  The passenger stated 
the airplane motion became more erratic as they climbed.  He stated the pilot raised the gear 
and he recalled hearing a buzzer going off.  The pilot then moved the flap handle and stated 
"...we're going in."  He stated the right side of the airplane then contacted the trees and the 
airplane descended into the water.  He stated the green water filled the airplane followed by 
darkness.  The passenger reported he unlatched his seat belt and felt around thinking he 
needed to go to the right.  He stated his shoulder harness was still catching and after he freed it 
he was able to exit the airplane. 
The other surviving passenger reported that it was turbulent and after takeoff the wings were 
rocking left to right.  He stated he heard a couple of "buzzers" go off, but he wasn't alarmed as 
he had heard them before when flying in this airplane.  He reported they flew over powerlines 
and noticed the altitude was low.  He stated the nose was higher then normal and the pilot was 
fighting with the controls because of the turbulence.  He reported that at this point, he felt they 
were going to crash.  He reported the airplane impacted trees along the river then dove into the 
water in a 45 degree nose down attitude.  This passenger reported the engine sounded normal 
until the airplane impacted the trees.  He exited the airplane through a broken window.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Page 4 of 7CHI97FA200
The pilot was born on September 15, 1943.  He was the holder of a commercial pilot certificate 
with single engine land and instrument ratings.  He also held a flight instructor certificate with 
single engine land and instrument ratings.  The pilot held a second class medical certificate 
issued on October 4, 1996.  The medical certificate contained the limitation that the holder 
must wear corrective lenses for distant vision and must posses glasses for near vision.  At the 
time of his last medical, the pilot reported having 1,950 hours of flight time.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N83353 was a Piper PA-32R-301, s/n 32R-8313004.  The airplane was equipped with a 
Lycoming IO-540-K1G5D engine.  The hobbs time on the airplane at the time of the accident 
was 4848.4 hours.  The last annual inspection on the airplane and engine was accomplished on 
January 8, 1997, at a tach time of 4727 hours.  At the time of the inspection the engine had 633 
hours since overhaul.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The local weather observation recorded at the South St. Paul Municipal Airport, at 0756 cdt, 
reported the weather as 3,000 foot broken, 10 miles visibility, temperature 61 degrees F, 
dewpoint 53 degrees F, winds from 210 at 13 knots gusting to 21 knots, and an altimeter setting 
of 29.47". 
The maximum demonstrated crosswind velocity for the airplane is 17 knots.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane was recovered from the Mississippi River.  The right wing was separated from the 
airplane and was not located.  The upper and lower spar caps were separated at the outboard 
bolt line.  The left wing remained attached to the fuselage at the front and main attach points 
which were bent forward.  The aft attach point was separated.  The inboard section of the left 
wing near the wing root was crushed back as was the outboard half of the leading edge.  The 
left wing aileron received minor damage and was free to move.  The aileron control cables 
remained attached.  The flap remained attached to the wing and it had contained minor 
damage.
The fuselage was bent downward in the middle.  The right side of the fuselage sustained heavy 
impact damage.  The engine and firewall were partially separated in the forward baggage area.  
The upper portion of the main cabin door was separated and remained attached to the lower 
portion only by the weather stripping.  
The aft cabin and cargo doors were in place and secure.  The forward baggage door received 
moderate damage.  The surrounding structure was displaced and it had sustained heavy 
damage.  The forward baggage door latch was found in the closed (latched) position.  The catch 
was fully extended.  The latch and lock operated normally with the exception that the latch 
could be closed when the key was removed and the lock was in the locked position.  The 
latching mechanism cover plate was removed and no anomalies were noted.  The forward 
baggage door striker plate was intact and no signs of wear were noted.
The vertical stabilizer and rudder were intact with little damage.  The majority of the left 
horizontal stabilator was torn from the airplane and was missing.  The right horizontal 
stabilator was attached and had crush damage along the leading edge.  
The engine remained attached to the engine mounts, but most of the mount tubes were bent 
Page 5 of 7CHI97FA200
and broken.  The engine mounts were partially separated from the firewall.  The engine was 
removed from the airplane and transported to Buldoch Aviation at the Anoka County Airport 
for an engine run.  After preparing the engine for the test run it was started during which time 
it ran with no anomalies noted.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A post mortem examination of the pilot was conducted on July 3, 1997, at the Regina Medical 
Center, Hastings, Minnesota.
A toxicological examination of specimens from the pilot were tested at the Federal Aviation 
Administration Civil Aeromedical Institute in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The tests were 
negative for those substances tested with the exception of Quinine which was found in the 
urine.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Parties to the investigation were The New Piper Aircraft and Textron Lycoming.    
Upon completion of the investigation the wreckage was released to a representative from the 
USAIG insurance.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
53, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/04/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1950 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7CHI97FA200
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N83353
Model/Series:
PA-32R-301 PA-32R-301
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32R-8313004
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/08/1997, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3615 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
121 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4848 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540
Registered Owner:
CORPORATE AVIATION, INC.
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
CORPORATE AVIATION, INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SGS, 820 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0756 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
13 knots / 21 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
210°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
16°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (SGS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
FORT DODGE, IA (FOD)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0000 
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
SOUTH ST. PAUL-FLEMING (SGS)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Page 7 of 7CHI97FA200
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal, 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal, 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
WESLEY     M ROBBINS
Adopted Date:
09/28/1999
Additional Participating Persons:
ROLLAND   SNYDER; MINNEAPOLIS, MN
MICHAEL C MCCLURE; ARLINGTON, TX
GREGORY   ERICKSON; WAYNE, IL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
