Prior to departure, the commercial pilot experienced a hot start while attempting to start the 
750-horsepower turbo-prop engine.  The pilot received assistance from an airframe and 
powerplant mechanic.  The mechanic reviewed the handwritten checklist the pilot used to start 
the engine and informed him that the procedures were out of sequence, which was most likely 
the cause of the hot start.  The pilot then motored the engine and allowed the starter to cool for 
approximately two minutes before he attempted to start the engine.  The engine started, 
sounded "normal" and ran "stable" for approximately 30-45 seconds.  The pilot then shut down 
the engine, and no smoke or engine surging was observed.  The pilot dismounted the airplane 
and walked inside the terminal building with the female passenger.  The mechanic then 
informed the pilot that he should let the starter cool down for at least 30 minutes to 1-hour.  
About an hour later, the pilot started the engine, and departed.  About a minute after takeoff, 
the pilot announced that he had an "engine out" and he attempted to perform a forced landing 
on a road south of the airport.  Witnesses said the airplane was "wobbling in the air from side 
to side and having trouble flying straight."  It then made a sudden "right down wind turn" and 
descended "suddenly as if it had to land."  The airplane landed on the southbound lanes of the 
road and collided with the pavement, the center concrete guardrail, and a metal guardrail 
before catching on fire.  Examination of the airplane revealed that a major portion of the 
airplane's structure was consumed by fire and the position of the fuel selector valve could not 
be determined.  Examination of the experimental engine revealed it had sustained extensive 
thermal damage; however, no mechanical deficiencies were noted with the engine that could 
have prevented normal flight operations.  
  
A loss of power for undetermined reasons.  A contributing factor was the lack of suitable 
terrain for the forced landing.
On May 2, 2007, approximately 1858 central daylight time, a single-engine experimental 
LIVPT Incorporated Lancair IV-P airplane, N119TC, was destroyed during a forced landing 
following a reported loss of engine power while on initial takeoff climb from the McAllen Miller 
International Airport (MFE), near McAllen, Texas.  The commercial pilot and his passenger 
were fatally injured.  The airplane was registered to Cite Aviation, LLC, Wilmington, Delaware, 
and was being operated by the pilot.  An instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the 
international cross-country flight destined for Tampico, Mexico.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the personal flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91.
According the a fixed base operator at the airport, the pilot purchased 54-gallons of Jet A fuel 
about 2 hours prior to the accident.  According to the line service technician who fueled the 
airplane, about 10-15 minutes after the airplane was fueled, the pilot attempted to start the 
engine.  The technician observed "flames shooting out of the exhaust and the side of the engine 
cowling was on fire for about a second."  As the technician went to grab a fire extinguisher, the 
flames went out and he saw a mechanic walking up to the airplane.  The mechanic instructed 
the pilot to "keep spooling the engine."  The pilot  attempted to start the engine twice without 
success.  The pilot made a third attempt, and the engine started, but the pilot shut-down the 
engine about 3-seconds after the engine started.  The technician reported that he resumed his 
duties and did not see the airplane for about another hour.  Next time he saw the airplane, he 
observed the pilot and a female passenger boarding the airplane.  This time, when the pilot 
started the engine, he observed that flames "shot out of the exhaust and the engine started and 
ran without any problems."  The airplane sat on the ramp with the engine running for about 
10-minutes, before the pilot taxied the airplane to the active runway for takeoff.  
According to a certificated airframe and power plant (A&P) mechanic who worked for the fixed 
base operator at McAllen Airport, he heard what sounded like an "aborted [engine] start cycle"  
coming from the ramp area.  A few moments later, he heard the sound of a second engine abort 
cycle.  The mechanic looked out at the ramp and observed the accident airplane was 
experiencing a "wet [hot]  start" and flames were coming out of the exhaust pipe.  He then 
observed the pilot and a female passenger exiting the airplane, so he elected to run over to the 
airplane and instructed the pilot to motor the engine to verify there was no burning fuel.  The 
pilot got back in the airplane and motored the engine for approximately one minute, and then 
shut the engine down to let the starter motor cool down.  During that time, the mechanic and 
pilot had a discussion about what happened.  The mechanic added that the pilot acted 
"nervous" and was not "very knowledgeable" of the airplane.  The pilot then showed the 
mechanic the checklist he used to start the engine.  The mechanic reviewed the checklist and 
observed that there were some handwritten notes, which were instructions on starting the 
engine.  The mechanic noted that the items on the checklist were out of sequence, and 
informed the pilot that is what most likely the cause of the hot start.  The pilot then motored 
the engine a second time for approximately 30 seconds, and allowed the starter to cool for 
approximately two minutes before he attempted to start the engine.  The engine started, and 
sounded "normal" and ran "stable" for approximately 30-45 seconds.  The pilot then shut down 
the engine, and no smoke or engine surging was observed.  The pilot dismounted the airplane 
and walked inside the terminal building with the female passenger.  The mechanic also walked 
inside, and informed the pilot that he should let the starter cool down for at least 30 minutes to 
1-hour.  The mechanic, whose work day had ended, gave the pilot his cell phone number and 
instructed him to call if he had any more problems with the airplane.  At 1906, the mechanic 
received a call from his employer letting him know that the airplane had crashed. 
A review of the air traffic control communications revealed that the pilot departed the McAllen 
Airport at 1857.  Less than a minute after takeoff, the pilot announced that "one one nine tango 
charlie is actually declaring an emergency, we have an engine out."  A controller responded, 
"November nine nine one nine tango charlie roger enter right downwind runway one three.  
The pilot responded, "negative sir were going down right here."  This was the last 
communication received from the pilot.
An officer with the Hidalgo County Sheriff's Office interviewed three eyewitnesses.  Each of 
these witnesses were traveling in their vehicles on a road south of the airport and gave similar 
accounts of the accident sequence.  According to the Sheriff's report, the witnesses observed 
the airplane flying in an easterly direction and was "wobbling in the air from side to side and 
having trouble flying straight."  The airplane made a sudden "right down wind turn" and 
descended "suddenly as if it had to land."  The witnesses moved their vehicles out of the way so 
the airplane could land on the road, which was aligned north and south.  The airplane landed 
on the southbound lanes and the right wing struck the pavement.  The airplane was "violently 
tossed" back to the left and struck the center cement guardrail.  The witnesses said the airplane 
then began to tumble south before it struck a metal guardrail on the west side of the road and 
exploded into flames.  The airplane nearly missed colliding with several vehicles and there 
were no ground injuries.  None of the witnesses reported observing any signs of fire on the 
airplane prior to the forced landing.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) safety inspector performed an on-scene examination 
of the airplane.  According to the inspector, the airplane touched-down on the busy highway 
two miles south of the airport and subsequently collided with concrete barriers.  The airplane 
came to rest at an intersection and was consumed by post-impact fire.  The wreckage, including 
the experimental turbine engine, was recovered to a secured hangar at the airport for further 
examination.   
The experimental airplane was powered by a 750-horsepower Walter M601-E turbo-prop 
engine.  Examination of the airframe and the engine by representatives of the engine 
manufacturer revealed that the condition lever on the fuel control unit was found between the 
run and closed position.  The condition lever in the cockpit was in the normal run position.  
Fuel was pumped into the mechanical fuel pump and the bleed valves were opened.  The fuel 
from the bleed valves was transferred through a clear pipe for the detection of air.  A small 
amount of air was detected; however, the amount was not sufficient enough to cause the engine 
to flame-out.  The main fuel filter was removed, disassembled, and found absent of debris.  
Fuel was present in the fuel lines, the fuel control unit, and the fuel filter.  The fuel had an odor 
and color similar to Jet fuel and was absent of debris.  The fuel control unit was removed from 
the engine and examined.  The drive shaft was intact and rotated freely when manipulated.  
A detailed examination of the power turbine by representatives from the engine manufacturer 
revealed that the power turbine was bent in the direction opposite of rotation.  Additionally, 
the nose case was bent, which caused the power turbine blades to make contact with the power 
turbine nozzle.  All power turbine blades were found to be intact.  The compressor was also 
examined with the aid of a boroscope.  All of the compressor turbine blades were intact with no 
visual damage or signs of over-temping were observed.  Inspection of the inner and outer 
combustion chamber appeared to be normal with no indication of over-temping.  Visual 
examination of the first stage compressor revealed the compressor was in place and some soot 
particulates were noted.
The starter-generator was removed from the engine and examined.  The turbine was turned 
manually from the starter splines, and the compressor shear-shaft to the auxiliary rear gearbox 
rotated freely.
All three propeller blades remained attached to the propeller hub.  All of the propeller blades 
had been distorted due to impact forces. 
The airplane was equipped with a 30-gallon header (belly) tank.  The tank sustained fire 
damage, and it was not possible to determine the position of the fuel valve.   The fuel selector 
valve in the cockpit was also fire damaged and a position could not be determined.  No 
mechanical deficiencies were noted with the engine that would have attributed to a loss of 
engine power.
Only one of the two Chelton EFIS systems installed on the airplane was found in the airplane 
wreckage.  The badly burned unit was sent to the Safety Board's Research and Engineering 
Laboratory in Washington DC for examination; however, data could not be retrieved from the 
unit due to excessive heat damage.
The airplane's maintenance logbooks were found in the airplane and sustained some thermal 
and water damage.  A review of the logbooks revealed that the airplane was manufactured in 
2002.  The last condition inspection was completed on April 25, 2007, at a total time of 521.1 
hours.  
The 34-year old pilot held a commercial pilot certificate for airplane single and multi-engine 
land, and instrument airplane.  He also held several type ratings.  His last FAA second class 
medical was issued on April 18, 2006.  A that time of his last medical examination, the pilot 
reported having accumulated a total of 3,600 flight hours.  The pilot's personal logbook was 
not located.
Weather at McAllen Miller International Airport at 1853 was reported as wind from 130 
degrees at 15 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, clear skies, temperature 84 degrees Fahrenheit, 
dewpoint 68 degrees Fahrenheit, and a barometric pressure setting of 29.68 inches of Mercury.
