The pilot reported that the airplane was at a cruise altitude of 12,500 feet msl on a cross-
country flight when he experienced a sudden and complete loss of ruddervator control. The 
pilot said that control of the airplane was regained after reducing engine power to 1,500 rpm, 
and stabilizing the airspeed at 100-knots.  He added that subsequent airplane control was 
accomplished via aileron and power inputs. The pilot flew to an airport about 75 miles from 
where the loss of control occurred. On short final for the intended runway, he lowered the 
landing gear. The airplane entered a dive and collided with terrain about 300 yards short of the 
runway in a nose-low attitude, which resulted in structural damage to the airframe. According 
to first responders to the accident, the pilot told them that he encountered severe turbulence, 
and momentarily lost control of the airplane. Examination of the airplane revealed that both 
ruddervators had separated from their respective stabilizer attach points at some earlier time 
during the flight. The ruddervators were not found at the accident site, and only remnants 
remained attached to the hinge points on the stabilizers. The remaining pieces of ruddervator 
were examined. The examination revealed no evidence of preexisting cracks, fatigue, or 
corrosion damage, and all fracture features were consistent with overstress separations. For 
the portions of the flight documented by radar coverage, the data indicated calculated true 
airspeeds routinely above design maneuvering speed (VA-132-kts), with two sustained periods 
at design cruising speed (VC-165-kts), and occasional periods 5 to 12-knots above VC. There's 
no evidence indicating that the airplane's never-exceed speed (VNE-195-kts) was exceeded. An 
AIRMET (Airman's Meteorological Information) for moderate turbulence was issued during 
the timeframe of the accident, and included the route of flight.
The overstress separation of both ruddervators during cruise flight. Contributing to the 
accident was the flight's encounter with turbulence.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 2, 2007, about 1455 mountain daylight time, a Beech V35B, N3210L, sustained 
substantial damage when it collided with terrain approximately 300 yards from the threshold 
of runway 23 at the Kayenta Airport (0V7), Kayenta, Arizona. The private pilot, who was the 
owner and operator of the airplane, and sole occupant, was seriously injured. The airplane was 
being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-county flight under Title 14, Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91, when the accident occurred. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated from Walker Field Airport, Grand 
Junction Colorado, about 1300 with an intended destination of Tucson, Arizona.
In a written statement the pilot reported that about 30 minutes after takeoff, at a cruise 
altitude of 12,500 feet mean sea level (msl), there was a "...complete loss of ruddervator 
control" that developed into a spin "...with my artificial horizon tumbling and vertical airspeed 
fluctuating from 3,000 feet up and down" and the airspeed indicator "stuck" in the yellow zone. 
The pilot stated the forces associated with the "violent" loss of control "resulted in me being 
thrown free of [my] seatbelt and harness." The pilot further reported that control of the 
airplane was regained after reducing engine power to 1,500 RPM and stabilizing airspeed at 
100-knots. He added that subsequent airplane control was accomplished via aileron and power 
inputs.
After regaining control of the airplane the pilot maneuvered toward Kayenta, about 75 miles 
southwest from where the loss of control occurred. After identifying the airport the pilot 
descended to 1,500 feel above ground level (agl) and circled the airport. After circling, the pilot 
prepared for a straight in final approach and lowered the landing gear. The pilot stated that 
when he lowered the gear, the airplane rapidly pitched to a nose low attitude. The pilot raised 
the landing gear and completed a go-around maneuver. He circled the airport a second time 
and reestablished himself on final for the landing runway. On short final, about 200 feet agl, 
the pilot again lowered the landing gear. The airplane entered a "dive" and collided with terrain 
about 300 yards short of the intended runway.  
The pilot stated that prior to the loss of control the airplane was in a level cruise at 12,500 msl. 
The engine power was set at 27 inches of manifold pressure with a propeller RPM of 2,450. The 
airplanes airspeed was reported, by the pilot, to be about 160-knots (ground speed). The pilot 
stated he was utilizing the onboard Global Positioning System (GPS [Garmin 530]) as his 
primary reference for airspeed.  
First responders stated that when they arrived at the site the pilot was ambulatory and 
bleeding "profusely" from a gash on his forehead. One of the first responders stated the pilot 
reported to him that he "encountered severe turbulence and lost control of the aircraft 
approximately 40 miles east of Kayenta."
First responders reported that a cursory inspection of the airplane revealed that both 
ruddervators were missing with the exception of small pieces of the control surfaces still 
attached to their respective attachment hinges. The remaining ruddervator pieces/sections 
were not located.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
The single engine, low-wing, v-tail airplane, serial number D9953, was manufactured in 1976. 
It originally was powered by a Continental IO-520-BA engine rated at 285-hp (continuous) and 
equipped with a controllable pitch propeller.
Review of copies of maintenance records showed that on April 23, 2007, the airplanes naturally 
aspirated engine, (Continental IO-520-BA) was retrofitted with a Garrett turbocharger (turbo 
normalizing) in accordance with Western Skyways Supplemental Type Certificates (STC) 
SE8677SW, SA8676SW and SA71GL. Maintenance records showed that a 100-hour inspection 
of the airframe, engine and propeller, was completed on April 23, 2007. The airframe total 
time at inspection was 1,097 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
The pilot stated in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) that he 
received a full weather briefing from Denver Flight Service Station. The pilot reported no 
restrictions to visibility and a broken ceiling at 10,000 feet, with scattered clouds at 4,300 feet.
An AIRMET (Airman's Meteorological Information) for turbulence (TANGO) was updated at 
1345 and warned of moderate turbulence below 15,000 feet for areas in California, New 
Mexico, Utah, Nevada and Arizona, including the accident airplanes route of flight.
TESTS AND RESEARCH 
Post accident examination of the airframe was completed at a storage facility in Phoenix, 
Arizona, on May 8, 2008. 
The examination revealed the following: The right stabilizer was intact. There was a small 
crease noted on the lower leading edge skin about 19" outboard of the root and 12" forward of 
the forward spar. The stabilizer reinforcement cuff was installed at the leading edge root of the 
stabilizer. The outboard ruddervator hinge was deformed outboard and up and twisted in a 
counter-clockwise direction. The hinge was intact with a small piece of the ruddervator 
attached to the aft hinge half. The hinge was disassembled and examined. The grease was dry 
and the bearing surface exhibited scoring and flaked plating. The middle hinge was intact and 
twisted clockwise. The hinge was disassembled and examined. The grease was dry and the 
bearing surface exhibited scoring and roller impressions. A 17" section of the ruddervator from 
the hinge inboard was still attached. The right ruddervator fitting hinge was not recovered. The 
right leg of the ruddervator support fitting was fractured through the bearing bore. The 
bushing was not recovered. The trim cable was intact from the actuator through the stabilizer, 
through the rear spar and remained attached to the tab control arms. The arms were fractured 
from the tab. All of the fractures on the right stabilizer exhibited a matte, angled, grainy 
appearance.
The left stabilizer was intact. A dent in the lower skin about 50" outboard of the root and 4" 
forward of the rear spar was noted. The stabilizer reinforcement cuff was installed at the 
leading edge root of the stabilizer. The outboard hinge was in place and deformed outboard 
and downward and appeared twisted counter-clockwise. The outboard hinge was intact with a 
small section of ruddervator attached to the aft hinge half. The hinge was disassembled and 
examined. The grease was dry and dirty and the bearing surface exhibited scoring, corrosion 
and roller impressions. The middle hinge, forward half was deformed outboard and fractured 
through the bearing bore. The aft half was not recovered. The left ruddervator fitting remained 
attached to the differential tail control rod, but was separated from the ruddervator. The 
ruddervator fitting hinge was separated from the bearing in the ruddervator support fitting. 
The grease on the bearing was dry and dirty and the bearing did not exhibit any notable 
scoring. The inboard 15" of the left ruddervator remained attached to the trim control cables 
and was impaled on the left leg of the ruddervator support fitting. The trim cable was intact 
from the actuator through the stabilizer, through the rear spar, and remained attached to the 
remaining section of left ruddervator. The cable was twisted along its length. The upper and 
lower trim tab attachments were bent, but free to rotate. 
Control continuity was established from the landing gear lower actuator access panel to the aft 
ends of the differential tail control rods. All cables remained attached to their control arms and 
were free to move.
The cockpit flight controls were intact to the front carry through structure. The nose keel 
deformation prevented the cockpit flight control sub assembly, forward of the front carry 
through from being visually examined.
The bulkheads in the aft fuselage at stations 272, 256.9 and 246.3 were intact and undamaged. 
The skin of the aft fuselage was intact and did not exhibit wrinkling or twisting. Small impact 
marks on the right side with flaked paint and gouges was noted.
The recovered pieces of ruddervator were examined at the NTSB Materials Laboratory. The 
examination revealed no evidence of preexisting cracks, fatigue, or corrosion damage and all 
fracture features were consistent with overstress separations.
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION 
The NTSB Office of Research and Engineering completed a performance study using radar data 
recordings associated with the accident flight. 
The radar data showed that the airplane departed Grand Junction, Colorado, about 1300, 
proceeded south toward Brush Mountain, Colorado, turned southwest and crossed the 
Colorado-Utah border near Ucolo, Utah, and continued southwest toward Bluff, Utah. Radar 
coverage terminated at 1344. The airplanes last recorded position was about 75 miles northeast 
of Kayenta, at an altitude of about 13,000 feet msl. 
For the portions of the flight documented by radar coverage, the data indicated calculated true 
airspeeds routinely above Va (132-kts), with two sustained periods at Vc (165-kts) and evidence 
of occasional exceedances 5 to 12-knots above Vc. There's no evidence indicating that the 
airplanes Vne limit (195-kts) was exceeded.
 
A copy of the radar study and performance data is included in the public docket of this 
accident.
Airspeed information:
The limitations section of the Pilot Operating Handbook (POH) for the accident airplane lists 
the following airspeed limitations (for an airplane at gross weight) and definitions: 
Maneuvering (Va) speed is 132- knots indicated, Maximum Structural Cruising speed (Vc) is 
165 knots indicated and Never Exceed (Vne) speed is 195-knots indicated. The POH limitation 
section states the following:
"Va: Do not make full or abrupt control movements above this airspeed."
"Vc: Do not exceed this airspeed except in smooth air and then only with caution."
"Vne: Do not exceed this airspeed in any operation."  
