The airplane was being operated by a mountain flying service delivering climbers and their 
equipment to a glacier base camp, under Title 14, CFR Part 135.  The commercial certificated 
pilot said during the landing roll on the glacier, while turning to the left, the right ski loaded up 
with snow.  He said the ski attachment to the right main landing gear broke, and the gear leg 
dug into the snow.  The airplane nosed down, and the right wing struck the surface of the 
glacier, damaging the wing and aileron.  The pilot said an examination of the landing gear 
revealed that the ski attaching bolts had sheared.  He said he had made several trips to the 
glacier that day, and that there were no problems with the airplane or the landing gear prior to 
the accident.
The main landing gear attachment bolts to the right ski sheared during the landing roll in deep 
snow, resulting in a nose down, and structural damage to the right wing and aileron.
On May 1, 2007, about 1700 Alaska daylight time, a ski-equipped Cessna A185F airplane, 
N185M, sustained substantial damage when the right main landing gear broke while landing 
on a glacier, about 74 miles west of Haines, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated by 
Mountain Flying Service, Haines, as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight 
under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The commercial certificated pilot, 
and the three passengers were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a 
VFR flight plan was filed.  The flight departed the Haines Airport, Haines, about 1600.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on May 2, the pilot said during the landing roll on the glacier, he 
started a left turn, and the right ski started loading up with snow.  He said the ski attachment 
to the right landing gear broke, and the gear leg dug into the snow.  He reported the airplane 
nosed down, and the right wing struck the surface of the glacier.  The pilot said an examination 
of the landing gear revealed that the ski attaching bolts had sheared, and that the right wing 
and aileron received structural damage.  He said he had made several trips to the glacier that 
day, and that there were no problems with the gear prior to the accident.  Due to the remote 
location, the airplane was not examined by the NTSB.
