Not long into the flight the left engine began running rough.  After adjusting the engine 
controls the engine smoothed out, but then began running rough again, prompting the pilot to 
proceed to his home base.  Approaching his destination and observing that he could only get 
1900 rpm out of the right propeller after advancing the throttle to 28.5 inches of manifold 
pressure, the pilot elected to proceed to a nearby airport.  However, due to a radio 
communication failure and inability to maintain sufficient altitude to clear terrain bordering 
the airport, the pilot decided to make a water landing on the 20 square-mile bay adjoining the 
airport.  Not realizing the tide was out and that the water was only about 6 inches deep, the 
pilot landed approximately 600 to 650 feet paralled to the shoreline.  Subsequently, the right 
wing float impacted subsurface terrain, collapsing the float aft in compression and pivoting the 
float aft and up, substantially damaging the right aileron and four wing ribs.  A post accident 
examination of the right engine and propeller revealed the propeller's oil control valve had 
developed a leak, which resulted in a lack of engine oil to the propeller.  No definitive reason 
for the leak had been determined.   Examination of the rough running left engine failed to 
reveal any anomalies which would preclude normal operation. 
The failure of the pilot to select the proper touchdown point while conducting a forced landing.  
Factors included the #1 engine malfunction, the right propeller oil control valve leak, and the 
shallow subsurface terrain condition.
On April 2, 2004, approximately 1230 Pacific standard time, an amphibian Grumman G-44 
multiengine airplane, N65914, sustained substantial damage after impacting terrain while 
making a water landing near Bellingham, Washington.  The aircraft was registered to and 
operated by a private individual.  The commercial pilot and his two passengers were not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 
CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The flight originated from Lake Whatcom, Washington, at 
approximately 1210.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB form 6120.1/2), and in a 
telephone interview with the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot reported that not 
long into the flight the left engine developed intermittent roughness, which smoothed out after 
the pilot reduced his power setting.  The pilot reported that he then decided to proceed to his 
home base.  The pilot stated that while approaching his home base he advanced the right 
propeller control to full increase and opened the right throttle to 28.5 inches of manifold 
pressure, but could only get 1900 rpm out of the right propeller.  The pilot reported that at 
1,200 feet above ground level and in a slow descent his intention was to land at Bellingham 
International Airport (BLI).  The pilot related that due to a communications failure and unable 
to clear terrain bordering the airport, he opted to make a water landing in Bellingham Bay, a 
bay which encompasses an area of more then 20 square miles.  The pilot reported, "The only 
thing I didn't realize before landing was that the tide was out."  The pilot stated it was only after 
he landed in the bay, 600 to 650 feet parallel to the shoreline, that he realized the water was 
only about 6 inches deep.  The pilot stated that the right wing float impacted subsurface 
terrain, collapsing the float aft in compression and pivoting the float aft and up, substantially 
damaging the right aileron and four wing ribs. 
On May 13, 2004, the IIC spoke with the pilot, who is also the registered owner and an FAA 
certificated airframe and power plant mechanic.  The pilot reported that during the 
examination of the right engine, the engine's propeller control valve had developed a leak 
which resulted in a lack of engine oil to the propeller.  The pilot stated that no definitive reason 
for the leak had been determined.  The pilot also reported that as a result of his examination of 
the left engine, which he had reported as "running rough" during the flight, he found no 
anomalies with the engine which would preclude normal operation.
