The airplane, operated by a university aviation training program as a student solo instructional 
flight, veered off runway 05 during landing.  The flight was the student pilot's second solo flight 
at which time he had accumulated a total flight time of 28 hours.  The university placed a 
maximum crosswind limitation of 5 knots for the student pilot's solo flight.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed with winds from 340 degrees at 13 knots at the time of the 
accident.  The student pilot performed eight takeoff and landings on runway 35 when the tower 
air traffic controller instructed the student pilot to change to runway 05.  The student pilot 
complied with the instruction and landed on runway 05 using a 30-degree flap setting.  The 
airplane information manual states that in strong crosswinds a minimum flap setting required 
for field length should be used.  Federal Aviation Order states that air traffic control (ATC) is to 
use the runway most nearly aligned with the wind when the wind is 5 knots or more.  There 
was no runway in use program in effect for the accident runway.  The order notes that if a pilot 
prefers to use a runway different from the one specified, the pilot is expected to advise ATC.  
The student pilot did not advise ATC of his preference of runway use.
The air traffic control procedures/directives not followed by tower air traffic controller, the 
inadequate compensation for wind conditions by the student pilot during landing, the lack of 
total experience by the student pilot, and the recommended crosswind flap setting not followed 
by the student pilot.  The crosswind conditions were a contributing factor.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 2, 2004, at 0909 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172R, operated by Western 
Michigan University (WMU) as an instructional airplane, received substantial damage during 
landing when it veered off runway 05 at Kalamazoo/Battle Creek International Airport (AZO), 
Kalamazoo, Michigan.  The airplane impacted two runway lights and a taxiway sign.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 solo 
instructional flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The student pilot was uninjured.  The 
local flight originated from AZO at 0808.
The student pilot reported that his last dual instructional flight was with his flight instructor on 
April 1, 2004, at which time they discussed his assigned solo flight for the morning of April 2, 
2004.  The student pilot reported that he used runway 05 (3,466 feet by 100 feet, asphalt) 
during his first solo flight, which he described as fine.
On the day of the accident, the student pilot checked winds, which were reported to be 360 
degrees at 10 knots.  He filled out his dispatch release sheet and had it signed by the flight 
instructor on duty.  The student pilot then departed using runway 35 and performed eight 
touch and go's on runway 35.  Another Kalamazoo air traffic controller (ATC) then changed the 
runway in use for aircraft to runway 05.  The student pilot complied with the runway change 
and performed one touch and go on runway 05.  As the airplane touched down, it felt to the 
student pilot as if the left wing lifted up.  The airplane rolled down the runway on the right 
main and nose wheel.  He regained control of the airplane before he put flaps up, continued the 
roll out, and took off.  He then decided that he would end his flight and requested a full stop 
landing.  He indicated that he felt confident that he could land the airplane safely.  He selected 
30 degrees of flaps and while in ground effect he applied two quick nose-up trims to flair 
easier, which his instructor recommended.  He noted that the airplane was crabbing on final 
and touched down on the left main landing gear and the right main landing gear.  The wind 
caught the wing and forced the airplane to nose down.  The airplane began to fishtail and skid 
hitting the runway 05 apron sign and shearing off the left main landing gear off coming to rest 
in grass.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was enrolled in WMU's Aviation Science and Administration program on January 2, 
2004.  He was issued an airman medical certificate on November 22, 2003.  He received his 
first solo endorsement on March 30, 2004, in a Cessna 172R at a total flight time of 22.5 hours.  
He accumulated a total flight time of 25.5 hours at the time of his second solo flight, which was 
the accident flight.  
According to WMU's Flight Dispatch Sheet, dated April 2, 2004, and signed by the an 
"authorizing instructor," the pilot had maximum wind limitations as follows:
Maximum wind: 12 knots
Maximum crosswind: 5 knots
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The 1998 Cessna 172R, serial number 17280580, was registered to and operated by WSU as an 
instructional airplane used in the College of Aviation.  The airplane accumulated a total time of 
2,647 hours.
According to the Cessna 172R Skyhawk Information Manual, "When landing in a strong 
crosswind, use the minimum flap setting required for the field length.  If flaps settings greater 
than 20 degrees are used in sideslips with full rudder deflection, some elevator oscillation may 
be felt at normal approach speeds.  However, this does not affect the control of the airplane.  
Although the crab or combination method of drift correction may be used, the wing low 
method gives the best control.  After touchdown, hold a straight course with the steerable nose 
wheel and occasional braking if necessary.  
"The maximum allowable crosswind velocity is dependent upon pilot capability as well as 
airplane limitations.  Operation in direct crosswinds of 15 knots has been demonstrated."
METERLOGICAL INFORMATION
The AZO Automated Surface Observing System recorded wind for the following time periods:
0653: wind 350 degrees at 10 knots
0753: wind 350 degrees at 10 knots
0853: wind 340 degrees at 13 knots
0923: wind 340 degrees at 13 knots
0953: wind 360 degrees at 12 knots
1053: wind 350 degrees at 12 knots
There were no wind gusts recorded on the day of the accident until 1253 at which time the wind 
was from 360 degrees at 13 knots, gust 17 knots.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Runway 17-35 was a 6,500 feet by 150 feet grooved asphalt runway.  
Runway 05-23 was a 3,436 feet by 100 feet grooved asphalt runway.
According to the airport manager, only runway 17-35 was part of a runway use program, which 
was voluntary for jet aircraft noise abatement.  
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The pilot stated during an interview that he "thinks" the maximum demonstrated cross wind 
for the accident airplane is 15 knots.  He said that prior to the accident he did not know what 
the crosswind landing flaps setting and procedures were, but he received instruction in these 
area following the accident.  He said that the air traffic controller who initiated the runway 
change was different from the one prior to the change.  The change in runways occurred about 
0910.  The pilot said that the reason he did not request a different runway was due to his being 
a new student; he felt belittled by the "tower" and was intimidated by air traffic control.
The airport manager said that the airport has a voluntary runway in use program that is 
"strictly" for noise abatement for noise abatement and only for runway 17-35.  The noise 
abatement is mainly designed for jet aircraft.
According to Federal Aviation Administration Order 8400.9, National Safety and Operational 
Criteria for Runway Use Programs, section 3-5-1:
a. Except where a "runway use" program is in effect, use the runway most nearly aligned with 
the wind when 5 knots or more or the "calm wind" runway when less than 5 knots (set 
tetrahedrons accordingly) unless use of another runway:
NOTE -
1 - If a pilot prefers to use a runway different from that specified, the pilot is expected to advise 
ATC.
2 - At airports where a "runway use" program is established, ATC will assign runways deemed 
to have the least noise impact. If in the interest of safety a runway different from that specified 
is preferred, the pilot is expected to advise ATC accordingly. ATC will honor such requests and 
advise pilots when the requested runway is noise sensitive.
The student pilot did not advise ATC of his preference of runways to use.
