The private pilot said that he "ran out of fuel." The pilot attempted a forced landing to an open 
field near the east shore of the lake. During the forced landing, the airplane's right wing struck 
several branches on the top of a 50-foot tree and the airplane subsequently struck the ground 
in a nose-down attitude. An examination of the airplane showed that both wing fuel tanks were 
intact. Approximately 2 cups of fuel was recovered from the tanks. 
the pilot's improper in-flight planning and decision making, resulting in fuel exhaustion and 
the loss of engine power. Contributing factors include the dark night light conditions, and the 
trees.
On April 2, 2004, at approximately 0300 mountain standard time, a Cessna 150M, N66758, 
was substantially damaged when it impacted trees during a forced landing to a field near Orem, 
Utah. The private pilot, and passenger sustained minor injuries. Night visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The personal cross-country flight was being 
conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan. The flight to 
Provo, Utah, originated at Emmett, Idaho, at approximately 0010.
The pilot said that he "ran out of fuel," and was forced to make an emergency landing. Prior to 
the flight, the pilot purchased 22.8 gallons of fuel. During the flight to Provo, the engine "cut" 
as he was flying south over Utah Lake. The pilot attempted a forced landing to an open field 
near the east shore of the lake. During the forced landing, the airplane's right wing struck 
several branches on the top of a 50-foot tree near the edge of the field. The airplane spun to the 
right, approximately 180 degrees, and struck the ground in a nose-down attitude 
approximately 100 feet southeast of the tree.
According to Cessna's pilot operating handbook (POH), for a Cessna 150M with standard fuel 
tanks, the total fuel capacity is 26 gallons, and the total useable fuel is 22.5 gallons.
An examination of the airplane showed the airplane's engine separated from the firewall, the 
upper portion of the firewall crushed aft, the leading edges of both wings crushed aft, and a 
buckled aft fuselage. Further examination showed both fuel tanks were intact. On draining 
both wing tank sumps, approximately 2 cups of fuel was recovered.  
