Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Seward, AK
Accident Number:
ANC06LA015
Date & Time:
01/02/2006, 1100 AST 
Registration:
N212RF
Aircraft:
Cessna 180
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airline transport certificated pilot was conducting a personal cross-country flight under 
Title 14, CFR Part 91, in an area of steep mountainous terrain.  The pilot said his routine was to 
fly over a mountain saddle near the top of a glacier at 4,500 feet above sea level, and continue 
to his destination.  He reported that he was cruising above the glacier at 4,500 feet altitude, 
when he encountered severe turbulence and downdrafts, and subsequently collided with the 
glacier.  A U.S. Coast Guard C-130 airplane flying in the area received a signal from the 
accident airplane's emergency locator transmitter, and located the wreckage on the glacier.  
The aircraft commander said when they arrived over the area, the area was covered in clouds.  
He said they located clear air, descended, and returned to the accident site underneath the 
overcast.  He said they could see up the glacier, and that there was about 200 feet of clearance 
between the saddle at the top of the glacier and the cloud cover.  He stated as they passed over 
the wreckage approaching the saddle, their navigation instruments indicated a 40 knot 
headwind, and noted that the mountain peaks on either side of the saddle were obscured by 
clouds.  He said they had to leave the area due to deteriorating weather.  An Air National Guard 
helicopter dispatched to the accident site aborted several attempts to reach the site due to poor 
weather, and eventually reached the accident site about 9 hours after the accident.  The Air 
National Guard para-rescue technician who made initial contact with the pilot reported that 
the pilot said he was flying up the glacier, encountered a downdraft, and turned down slope to 
"escape" when the airplane contacted the glacier.  An area weather forecast valid at the time of 
the accident, indicated areas of marginal VFR weather with rain and snow showers.  The 
forecast did not forecast any significant turbulence.  The closest automated weather reporting 
facility is 7 miles from the accident site.  Observations taken during the timeframe of the 
accident, reported rapidly varying visibilities from 10 miles to less than 1 mile, and ceilings 
varying from 100 feet to 6,000 feet.  The accident pilot said there were no mechanical 
anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident.  As of August, 2006, the airplane had not 
been recovered.
Page 2 of 6ANC06LA015
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inadequate weather evaluation, which resulted in an in-flight encounter with low 
ceilings, turbulence, and downdrafts in cruise flight, and the pilot's failure to maintain 
altitude/clearance while maneuvering, which resulted in an in-flight collision with terrain.  
Factors associated with the accident were low ceilings, turbulence, and downdrafts.
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
2. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - DOWNDRAFT
3. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - TURBULENCE
4. (C) WEATHER EVALUATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO REVERSE DIRECTION
Findings
5. (C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY
7. TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED
Page 3 of 6ANC06LA015
Factual Information
On January 2, 2006, about 1100 Alaska standard time, a wheel-equipped Cessna 180 airplane, 
N212RF, sustained substantial damage when it collided with terrain during maneuvering flight, 
about 7 miles east of Seward, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated by the pilot as a visual 
flight rules (VFR) personal cross-country flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident 
occurred.  The airline transport pilot received serious injuries, and the sole passenger received 
fatal injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The 
flight departed the Quartz Creek airstrip, Cooper Landing, Alaska, about 1030.
A U.S. Coast Guard C-130 airplane from Coast Guard Air Station Kodiak, was  flying in the area 
of the accident, and received an emergency signal from the accident airplane's emergency 
locator transmitter (ELT), about 1205.  The Coast Guard airplane located the accident airplane 
on the Godwin Glacier, and relayed its location to the Rescue Coordination Center (RCC) in 
Anchorage, Alaska.  A helicopter from the Alaska, Air National Guard, 210th Rescue Squadron, 
was dispatched to the scene, but was unable to reach the site due to clouds obscuring the 
accident site.  After aborting several attempts to reach the site due to weather on the glacier, 
the helicopter made it to the site about 2000.       
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on January 4, the Air National Guard para-rescue technician who 
made initial contact with the pilot, said the pilot told him he had been flying up the glacier, 
encountered a downdraft, and was being pushed down.  He said the pilot told him he turned 
down slope to "escape" when the airplane contacted the glacier.  The rescue technician 
described the accident site as a snow-covered glacial slope of 10 degrees or less, about 4,100 
feet in elevation, and noted that they were able to land their helicopter on the slope.  He said 
the airplane contacted the glacier up slope from where it had come to rest, and that the landing 
gear had separated from the airplane, and lay upslope from the main wreckage.
During an interview with the NTSB IIC and an FAA Aviation Safety Inspector on January 4, the 
pilot said he departed Cooper Landing for a private airstrip he frequents at Cape Junken, 
Alaska, which is typically a 30 minute flight.  He said his general routine is to fly over Seward, 
cross a saddle near the top of the glacier at 4,500 feet above sea level, and proceed to Cape 
Junken.  He said he did not recall anything out of the ordinary, and said there were no 
problems with the airplane or its engine.  He said he does not have any independent 
recollection of the accident.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on January 12, the aircraft commander of 
the Coast Guard C-130 airplane that located the wreckage, said they were transiting the area of 
the accident when they received a signal from the accident airplane's emergency locator 
transmitter (ELT).  He said the area had an overcast cloud cover, which was underneath them.  
He located clear air where they could descend, and returned to the accident site underneath the 
overcast.  He said they could see up the glacier, and that there was about 200 feet of clearance 
between the saddle at the top of the glacier and the cloud cover.  He said as they passed over 
the accident site approaching the saddle, their navigation instruments indicated a 40 knot 
headwind, and that the mountaintops on either side of the glacier were obscured by clouds.  
The aircraft commander said they were able to circle in a bowl near the accident site for a short 
time until deteriorating weather forced them back on top of the overcast.
In a written statement to the NTSB dated January 27, the pilot wrote that while maneuvering 
Page 4 of 6ANC06LA015
in the mountains at 4,500 feet altitude, he encountered what he believed was severe turbulence 
and downdrafts.
An area weather forecast valid at the time of the accident, indicated areas of marginal VFR 
weather with rain and snow showers.  The forecast does not indicate any turbulence.  The 
closest automated weather reporting facility is at the Seward Airport, about 7 miles from the 
accident site.  Observations taken during the timeframe of the accident indicate rapidly varying 
visibilities from 10 miles to less than 1 mile, and ceilings varying from 100 feet to 6,000 feet.
As of August 2006, the airplane was not recovered from the glacier.  No pieces or parts of the 
accident airplane were taken or retained by the NTSB.       
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/01/2005
Flight Time:
25000 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N212RF
Model/Series:
180 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32394
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6500 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-470K
Registered Owner:
Wayne Koecher
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
Wayne Koecher
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ANC06LA015
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4000 ft agl
Visibility
3 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 4500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
40 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
-7°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Blowing - Snow
Departure Point: 
Cooper Landing, AK (JLA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Cape Junken, AK 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1045 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
60.155278, -149.215556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lawrence R Lewis
Adopted Date:
08/29/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Mike Dolsen; Anchorage, FSDO-03; Anchorage, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC06LA015
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
