The pilot said that while on final approach to runway 26, engine power remained too high even 
though the throttle had been completely retarded.  On the second approach, engine power was 
still too high even with the throttle closed.  He initiated a second go around and when the 
airplane was 50 feet above the ground, the mixture control was slowly moved towards idle 
cutoff 'to decrease power.'  The airplane touched down at high speed.  Directional control was 
lost when the pilot became distracted, and the airplane ground looped to the right.  The left 
wing buckled when it struck the runway, and the side loads tore off the left main landing gear 
and damaged the right main landing gear.  It was later discovered that the clamp securing the 
throttle sleeve to the throttle housing had come loose, allowing the sleeve (not the cable) to 
move when the throttle control was operated. 
The pilot's inadvertent ground loop/swerve during landing. A factor was his attention being 
diverted by a malfunctioning throttle control. 
 On October 2, 1999, approximately 0750 mountain daylight time, a Piper PA-12, N2493M, 
registered to and operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged when it veered off the side 
of the runway while landing at Las Cruces International Airport, Las Cruces, New Mexico.  The 
private pilot and his private pilot certificated passenger were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight 
being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight originated at El Paso, Texas, 
approximately 0730.
The pilot said that while on final approach to runway 26, he noticed that engine power 
remained too high even though the throttle had been retarded completely.  He made a go 
around.  On the second approach to the same runway, he noticed engine power was still too 
high with the throttle closed.  He initiated a second go around and when the airplane was 50 
feet above the ground, he slowly moved the mixture control towards idle cutoff "to decrease 
power."  The airplane touched down at high speed and, according to the pilot, directional 
control was lost when he became distracted, and the airplane ground looped to the right.  The 
left wing buckled when it struck the runway, and the side loads tore off the left main landing 
gear and damaged the right main landing gear.
The pilot later reported the clamp that secures the throttle sleeve to the throttle housing had 
come loose, allowing the sleeve (not the cable) to move when the throttle control was operated.
