The pilot said that prior to initiating the flight he conducted a 'run-up.'  He said, during the 
magneto check the engine ran rough and exceeded the normal magneto drop.  He said he 
continued to run the engine at high RPM and leaned the fuel mixture for a minute.  He said he 
then conducted another 'run-up' and the magneto drop was within specified limits..  He stated 
that during the initial climb the engine began to 'pop' and the rotor RPM was dropping.  He 
said he elected to attempt a turn to the heliport; however, due to the continued loss of power he 
elected to conduct an autorotational landing in a gravel construction area.  During the 
autorotational landing the helicopter landed hard and received substantial damage.  
Subsequent to the accident an examination of the helicopter and engine was conducted. The 
magneto and harness were examined and no discrepancies were found.  All the spark plugs 
were removed and examined. The bottom spark plug from the #2 cylinder was oil fouled and 
did not test fire.  The top spark plug from the same cylinder (#2) fired with a weak and 
intermittent spark.  All the other spark plugs test fired.  No additional anomalies were found in 
the helicopter or engine. 
The pilot's attempted operation of the helicopter with known deficiencies, and his improper 
autorotation to landing. Factors were one fouled spark plug and another partially failed spark 
plug in the same cylinder, and the construction area. 
 On October 2, 1999, at 1040 eastern standard time, an Enstrom EN-28, N602H, sustained 
substantial damage during an autorotational landing in a construction area, near the 
Downtown Indianapolis Heliport, in Indianapolis Indiana, following a partial loss of engine 
power.  The pilot and one passenger reported minor injuries.  The personal 14 CFR Part 91 
flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.  No flight plan was on file.  The flight 
was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot said that prior to initiating the flight he conducted a "run-up."  He said, during the 
magneto check the engine ran rough and exceeded the normal magneto drop.  He said he 
continued to run the engine at high RPM and leaned the fuel mixture for a minute.  He said he 
then conducted another "run-up" and the magneto drop was within specified limits..  He stated 
that during the initial climb the engine began to "pop" and the rotor RPM was dropping.  He 
said he elected to attempt a turn to the heliport; however, due to the continued loss of power he 
elected to conduct an autorotational landing in a gravel construction area.  During the 
autorotational landing the helicopter landed hard and received substantial damage.
Subsequent to the accident an examination of the helicopter and engine was conducted.  The 
flight and engine controls were found to work correctly and have continuity.  Both magnetos 
and harnesses were examined and no discrepancies were found.  All the spark plugs were 
removed and examined.  The bottom spark plug from the #2 cylinder was oil fouled and did 
not test fire.  The top spark plug from the same cylinder (#2) fired with a weak and 
intermittent spark.  All the other spark plugs test fired.  No additional anomalies were found in 
the helicopter or engine.
