The pilot remained in the traffic pattern to practice touch and go landings.  At approximately 
the point where the helicopter would turn onto the base leg, rotor rpm began to decay (95%).  
The pilot turned towards the runway and began autorotation.  During the descent, the pilot 
managed to avoid houses and powerlines.  The helicopter struck the ground tail first, then 
rolled over on its left side.  The engine was later functionally tested and, despite impact damage 
to the crankshaft, operated normally. 
The pilot inadvertently allowing main rotor rpm to decay while avoiding obstacles during an 
emergency autorotation following a loss of power for reasons undetermined.  Factors were 
houses and powerlines. 
 On October 1, 1999, approximately 0645 mountain daylight time, a Gray Rotorway Executive 
homebuilt helicopter, N716JB, registered to and operated by the pilot, was destroyed when it 
collided with terrain during descent at Gallup, New Mexico.  The solo student pilot was 
seriously injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed 
for the instructional flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight originated at 
Gallup, New Mexico, approximately 0630.
In his accident report, the pilot said he intended on remaining in the traffic pattern to practice 
touch and go landings.  He had purposely planned the early morning flight because the "wind 
is usually calm and density altitude is lowest, giving the helicopter best performance 
capabilities."  The flight was uneventful until the helicopter reached the point where the pilot 
would turn from downwind to base leg, and he noticed the "rotor rpm was low (95%)."  He 
turned the helicopter towards the runway and "lowered collective [to] stabilize rotor rpm."  At 
this point, "the engine failed."  He "lowered collective [control] all the way down, [pushed] the 
cyclic [control] forward, and began autorotation."  The helicopter descended toward houses, so 
he "extended [the descent path] by pulling collective."  Rotor rpm fell to 80%.  The pilot headed 
towards a small open field but as he descended to 100 feet agl (above ground level), he noticed 
powerlines ahead.  He did a "second extension," and power dropped to 60%.  Approximately 
30 feet agl, he pulled the nose up and added full up collective to arrest the descent.  The 
helicopter struck the ground tail first, then rolled over on its left side.
In December 1999, the engine was functionally tested at the facilities of Rotorway in Chandler, 
Arizona.  Despite impact damage to the crankshaft, the engine operated normally.
