Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Hickory, NC
Accident Number:
ERA17FA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2016, 1310 EDT 
Registration:
N4648V
Aircraft:
CULVER PQ 14A
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The commercial pilot, who owned the airplane, was making a local personal flight from his 
home airport. During taxi for takeoff, the airplane experienced a total loss of engine power. The 
pilot/owner reported to a controller in the airport's air traffic control tower that he did not 
know why the engine stopped but that he got it restarted. The airplane subsequently departed. 
Minutes after departure, the pilot reported "engine problems" to the controller, asked to 
return, and was cleared to land on any runway. The airplane reversed course and witnesses 
near the accident site reported hearing the engine sputter and then stop. The airplane struck 
trees about 1 mile from the extended runway centerline as the pilot was attempting to reach the 
airport.
Examination of the wreckage revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical anomalies that 
would have prevented normal engine operation. The fuel drained from the airplane presented 
the color and odor of automobile gasoline, and the pilot was seen refueling his airplane from 
cans transported in his car. Further, the pilot had not serviced his airplane with aviation 
gasoline at his home airport.
Atmospheric conditions were conducive to serious icing at descent power and moderate icing 
at cruise power. The airplane's loss of power when the power setting was low while taxiing and 
its loss of power when the power was reduced to cruise power after takeoff were both likely due 
to carburetor icing. A search of the airplane's maintenance records revealed no supplemental 
type certificate that authorized the use of automobile gasoline in the airplane, and the 
likelihood of carburetor icing is increased when automobile gasoline is used. While the airplane 
was equipped with carburetor heat, impact-related damage to the engine controls precluded an 
assessment of the control's preimpact position.
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 9ERA17FA001
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power due to carburetor icing. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's 
use of automobile gasoline, which increased the likelihood of carburetor icing.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid type (Factor)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Effect on equipment (Cause)
Page 3 of 9ERA17FA001
Factual Information
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Wrong fuel
Maneuvering
Fuel related
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
On October 1, 2016, at 1310 eastern daylight time, a Culver PQ-14A, N4648V, collided with 
trees, terrain, and a commercial building during a forced landing after takeoff from the Hickory 
Regional Airport (HKY), Hickory, North Carolina. The commercial pilot was fatally injured, 
and the airplane was destroyed. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under 
the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight.
Information from witnesses and HKY air traffic control tower controllers revealed that the 
airplane's engine stopped producing power during taxi for takeoff. The pilot explained to the 
controller that he "didn't know why it quit," but that he got the engine restarted. The airplane 
then departed from runway 24.
Shortly after takeoff, the pilot reported to the controller that he was "having engine problems" 
and announced his intention to return to HKY. The controller provided the altimeter setting, 
the wind information, and cleared the airplane to land on "any runway."
Radar data revealed that the airplane was about 2 miles south of HKY when it reversed course 
in the direction of runway 01. The radar track ended near the accident site, which was about on 
the extended centerline of runway 01 and about 1 mile south of the approach end of the 
runway.
Witnesses near the accident site described the engine sound as "sputtering" and "revving up 
and down." According to one witness, "I saw [the airplane] come over the hill, it was 
sputtering, and then it would rev back up. The airplane would climb a little when the engine 
ran, and then it would descend when it sputtered." The witness further stated that the airplane 
disappeared from view and the sounds of impact were heard.
Page 4 of 9ERA17FA001
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
83, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/02/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2462 hours (Total, all aircraft), 400 hours (Total, this make and model)
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land, multi-
engine land, and instrument airplane. His most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
third-class medical certificate was issued on October 2, 2014. He reported 2,462 total hours of 
flight experience on that date.
A review of the pilot's logbook revealed that he had accumulated 2,478 total hours of flight 
experience at the time of the accident of which about 400 hours were in the accident airplane. 
He accrued 7.5 total hours of flight experience in the year before the accident of which 3.5 
hours were in the accident airplane.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CULVER
Registration:
N4648V
Model/Series:
PQ 14A NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Limited
Serial Number:
N2432
Landing Gear Type: 
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/12/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1820 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
4 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
744.4 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Franklin
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
6A4150 B3
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 9ERA17FA001
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 1944. Examination of 
maintenance records revealed that the airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed 
on November 12, 2015, at 744.4 total aircraft hours.
Differences between the airplane's fuel system and the fuel system schematic depicted in the 
airplane's maintenance and operating manuals could not be reconciled.
According to the FAA Fuels Program Branch, a supplemental type certificate (STC) was 
required to use automobile gasoline in certificated aircraft and aircraft engines. An STC was 
available for the use of automobile gasoline in the Franklin 6A4-150-B3 engine that was 
installed in the airplane, but there was no STC for the Culver PQ-14A airplane.
A review of the accident airplane's records found no STC recorded for the use of automobile 
gasoline.
According to a line service technician employed by the fixed base operator (FBO) at HKY, he 
observed the pilot/owner servicing the accident airplane from 5-gallon cans. When asked if he 
had ever serviced the accident airplane with fuel, the technician stated he had never seen the 
airplane serviced at the FBO.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
HKY, 1189 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1653 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
190°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.09 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hickory, NC (HKY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Hickory, NC (HKY)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1305 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
At 1253, the weather reported at HKY included clear skies with 10 miles visibility. The wind 
was variable at 4 knots. The temperature was 23°C, the dewpoint was 11°C, and the altimeter 
setting was 30.09 inches of mercury.
Page 6 of 9ERA17FA001
According to the New Carburetor Icing-Probability chart published by the Australian Transport 
Safety Bureau, atmospheric conditions were conducive to "serious icing at descent power" and 
"moderate icing at cruise power."
Transport Canada has published TP 10737, "The Use of Automotive Gas (Mogas) in Aviation." 
Chapter 3.2 "Carburetor Icing," stated, "Mogas is generally higher in volatility than Avgas. 
Mogas will thus absorb more heat from the mixing air when vapourizing, resulting in ice 
accumulation at higher ambient temperatures. THE LIKELIHOOD OF CARB ICING WHILE 
FLYING ON MOGAS IS HIGHER."
According to National Transportation Safety Board Safety Alert 29, "Engines that run on 
automobile gas may be more susceptible to carburetor icing than engines that run on Avgas."
Airport Information
Airport:
HICKORY RGNL (HKY)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1189 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
01
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4400 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
35.723889, -81.387778
The wreckage was examined at the accident site on October 2, 2016. There was a strong odor of 
automobile gasoline, and all major components were accounted for at the scene. The wreckage 
path was oriented 359° magnetic and was about 100 ft in length. The initial impact point was in 
a tree about 35 ft above ground level, and ground scars were visible in the pavement about 25 ft 
before where the airplane came to rest against a building.
The wreckage was divided into three main sections: the engine and instrument panel, the 
wings and cabin floor structure, and the empennage with a nearly intact tail section. All 
sections remained attached by cabling and wires. The preimpact position of the engine 
controls, including carburetor heat, could not be determined due to impact damage.
Page 7 of 9ERA17FA001
Each wing contained three interconnected tanks that comprised the "main" fuel system. An 
auxiliary tank was also installed. All six tanks leaked fuel due to impact damage to the tanks 
and their connections. Continuity of the fuel lines was established from the tanks to the fuel 
selector, in-line auxiliary fuel pump, and the engine through several breaks. The fuel selector 
was in the "Main" position, and no blockages were found. All fuel drained from the airplane 
presented the odor and appearance of automobile gasoline. Control continuity was established 
from the cockpit area to all flight control surfaces. Sheet metal and cabling associated with the 
empennage, the horizontal and vertical stabilizers, and the elevators were identified.
The propeller remained attached, and the blades were bent or fractured in an aft direction. The 
engine was separated from the wreckage, and impact damage was noted to the No. 5 cylinder 
and the crankcase. The engine was rotated by hand, and continuity was established through the 
powertrain and the valvetrain to the accessory section. Compression was confirmed using the 
thumb method. The engine could not be rotated through 360° due to a mechanical stop.
The crankcase cover was removed, and damage to the crankcase was found that impinged upon 
the No. 5 cylinder and blocked the piston skirt, which stopped rotation. The internal engine 
components moved smoothly, were well lubricated, and showed no abnormal wear.
The engine-driven fuel pump was removed, and it pumped fuel when actuated with a drill. The 
hand-driven auxiliary "wobble" pump was pumped fuel when actuated by hand. All fuel 
screens were absent of debris. The carburetor was disassembled, and the internal parts moved 
freely and were undamaged. The metal floats were intact. The carburetor bowl was absent of 
debris.
The left magneto was removed, and, when actuated with a drill, it produced spark at all 
terminal leads. The right magneto was impact damaged, and the distributor was destroyed. The 
magneto drive was actuated with a drill, and spark was produced at the secondary output of the 
ignition coil.
Medical And Pathological Information
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, Raleigh, North Carolina, did not perform an autopsy 
on the pilot but completed an external examination. The probable cause of death was "multiple 
blunt force trauma."
The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
toxicological testing on the pilot. Toxicological samples tested were negative for ethanol. 
Salicylate (aspirin) was detected in urine.
Preventing Similar Accidents
Page 8 of 9ERA17FA001
Preventing Carburetor Icing
Accidents involving carburetor ice stem from pilots not recognizing when weather conditions 
are favorable to carburetor icing and inaccurately believing that carburetor icing is only a cold- 
or wet-weather problem. Pilots also may not use the carburetor heat according the aircraft's 
approved procedures to prevent carburetor ice formation. Carburetor icing accidents can occur 
when pilots do not recognize and promptly act upon the signs of carburetor icing.
Be sure to check the temperature and dew point to determine whether the conditions are 
favorable for carburetor icing. Remember, serious carburetor icing can occur in ambient 
temperatures as high as 90° F or in relative humidity conditions as low as 35 percent at glide 
power. Consider installing a carburetor temperature gauge, if available.
Refer to the approved aircraft flight manual or operating handbook to ensure that carburetor 
heat is used according to the approved procedures and properly perform the following actions: 
1) Check the functionality of the carburetor heat before flight. 2) Use carburetor heat to prevent 
the formation of carburetor ice when operating in conditions and at power settings in which 
carburetor icing is probable. Remember, ground idling or taxiing time can allow carburetor ice 
to accumulate before takeoff. 3) Immediately apply carburetor heat at the first sign of 
carburetor icing, which typically includes a drop in rpm or manifold pressure (depending upon 
how your airplane is equipped). Engine roughness may follow.
Engines that run on automobile gas may be more susceptible to carburetor icing than engines 
that run on Avgas.
See 
http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_029.pdf
 for additional 
resources.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents. Note that this should 
not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations 
(FARs). 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Brian C Rayner
Adopted Date:
04/17/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Paul D Meyer; FAA/FSDO; Charlotte, NC
Publish Date:
04/17/2018
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94119
Page 9 of 9ERA17FA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
