Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SKWENTNA, AK
Accident Number:
ANC96LA140
Date & Time:
09/01/1996, 1505 AKD 
Registration:
N4366Y
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Sightseeing
Analysis 
The pilot & 2 passengers departed on a local area sightseeing flight. While in cruise flight at 
about 4,000 ft, the engine developed a vibration, then lost power. Oil spray was deposited on 
the windshield. The pilot performed an emergency landing on a sand bar. After landing, he 
noticed that the entire propeller, propeller flange, & the outboard end of the engine crankshaft 
were missing from the engine. Examination of the engine revealed evidence of fatigue cracking, 
emanating from a corrosion pit on the inner diameter surface of the crankshaft bore. 
Numerous other corrosion pits were found adjacent to the fracture origin. The engine 
manufacturer reported the engine was built & shipped from the factory on 4/13/81. The engine 
was the subject of a mandatory service bulletin (S/B), dated 1018/94, that addressed the 
inspection of the inside bore of the crankshaft for the presence of corrosion. The S/B required 
that an initial inspection be conducted within the next 200 hrs of operation or 1 year from the 
date of the S/B. The operator's company manual stated the Director of Maintenance shall 
ensure that current manufacturer's mandatory S/B's were complied with. No record of 
compliance with the S/B was noted in the engine maintenance records. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
corrosion and subsequent fatigue failure of the crankshaft, which resulted in engine failure and 
a forced landing. Factors related to the accident were: the lack of suitable terrain for a forced 
landing, and the operator's non-compliance with a service bulletin. 
Page 2 of 6ANC96LA140
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - CORRODED
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,SERVICE BULLETIN/LETTER - NOT COMPLIED WITH - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
3. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - FATIGUE
4. PROPELLER SYSTEM/ACCESSORIES - SEPARATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
5. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
Page 3 of 6ANC96LA140
Factual Information
 On September 1, 1996, about 1505 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Piper PA-28-161, 
N4366Y, crashed during a forced landing about 7 miles east of Skwentna, Alaska.  The airplane 
was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area sightseeing flight under Title 14 
CFR Part 135 when the accident occurred.  The airplane, registered to and operated by Vernair 
Inc., Anchorage, Alaska, sustained substantial damage.  The certificated commercial pilot and 
one passenger were not injured.  One passenger received minor injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.  A VFR flight plan was filed and VFR company flight following 
procedures were in effect.  The flight originated at Merrill Field, Anchorage, at 1440.
The operator/pilot reported that he was in cruise flight about 4,000 feet mean sea level when 
the engine developed a vibration.  He switched fuel tanks and applied carburetor heat.  The 
engine condition did not improve and began to run rough.  The engine then quit and oil spray 
was deposited on the windshield.  The pilot maneuvered the airplane toward a sand bar 
adjacent to the Yentna River.  During the touchdown on the sand bar, the main gear 
encountered soft mud.  The airplane received damage to the main gear and fuselage.  After the 
emergency landing, the pilot noticed that the entire propeller, propeller flange and the 
outboard end of the engine crankshaft were missing from the engine.  The missing propeller 
and crankshaft segment were not recovered.
On September 11, 1996, an engine examination was conducted at Sea Air Inc., Anchorage, 
Alaska.  The examination revealed the crankshaft was broken about even with the front edge of 
the engine case.  The crankshaft displayed a diagonal fracture and crack oriented in an aft 
direction on a 45 degree angle from just forward of the oil slinger flange.
The engine crankshaft was submitted to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
Materials Laboratory for examination.  The examination revealed crack arrest positions 
indicative of fatigue cracking emanating from the inner diameter surface of the crankshaft 
bore.  The crack progressed between the forward edge of the oil slinger in a forward direction 
through 1/3 of the radius of the crankshaft, forward of the oil slinger.  Examination of the crack 
origin revealed a 0.01 by 0.01 inch corrosion pit.  A second fatigue crack origin was noted at the 
intersection of the first crack and the forward edge of the oil slinger.  This crack progressed in 
an aft direction along a 45 degree angle around and through the number 1 main bearing 
journal.
Numerous other corrosion pits were found adjacent to the fracture origin.  The inside diameter 
surface of the crankshaft bore was covered by heavy accumulations of sludge deposits.
Examination of the maintenance records revealed the engine was overhauled on October 8, 
1992.  The operator reported the engine accrued a total time in service of 8,775.0 hours, 1,879.9 
since the last overhaul.  The operator noted a previous major engine overhaul as "rebuilt" in 
June, 1988.  The crankshaft had been ground 0.006 inches undersize.
The engine manufacturer reported the engine was built and shipped from the factory on April 
13, 1981.  They did not have any record the engine was ever returned to the factory for an 
overhaul or remanufacture.
The engine is the subject of a Lycoming Engine Mandatory Service Bulletin number 505A, 
dated October 18, 1994.  The service bulletin addresses the inspection of the inside diameter of 
4 cylinder engines for the presence of corrosion.  The bulletin requires an initial inspection of 
Page 4 of 6ANC96LA140
the crankshaft..."For new, remanufactured and overhauled engines shipped from Lycoming 
prior to and including 1984, the initial inspection must be conducted within the next 200 hours 
of operation or 1 year from date of this Service Bulletin, whichever comes first.  For new, 
remanufactured and overhauled engine shipped from Lycoming after 1984, the initial 
inspection must be conducted at the next overhaul or engine disassembly or within 10 years of 
the original ship date, whichever comes first."
The operator's company operations manual, chapter XIII, states in part:..."13-1 Aircraft 
Inspection and Maintenance:...b.  It shall be the responsibility of the Director of Maintenance 
to ensure that adequate equipment, A.D. notes and current manufacturers service bulletins 
that are mandatory are complied with."
A review of the engine maintenance records did not reveal any notation that the operator 
complied with the service bulletin.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
63, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/26/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3100 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1586 hours (Total, this make and model), 3069 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 70 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ANC96LA140
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N4366Y
Model/Series:
PA-28-161 PA-28-161
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-8416053
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/12/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2440 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
63 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8453 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-D3G
Registered Owner:
VERNAIR
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
VERNAIR
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
INXA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
100 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
ANCHORAGE, AK (MRI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1440 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
SCOTT      R ERICKSON
Adopted Date:
03/31/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
WILBER   KEITH; ANCHORAGE, AK
JEFFREY   POSCHWATTA; KENT, WA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
