National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lindsay, MT
Accident Number: SEA02LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/2001, 1700 MDT
Registration: N3910F
Aircraft: Cessna 172
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was flying in cruise configuration at 300 feet AGL when the aircraft collided with the terrain.
He reported that a communication radio was making wind noise, and he was attempting to adjust it at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that he could not remember the details surrounding the accident sequence.
There was no report of mechanical malfunction or failure at the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain an altitude clear of terrain.
A factor was intentional low altitude flight.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) LOW ALTITUDE FLIGHT/MANEUVER - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On October 1, 2001, about 1700 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 172, N3910F, was destroyed when it collided with terrain near Lindsay, Montana.
The airplane was owned by the pilot, and was being operated as a personal/pleasure flight under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The private pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, received serious injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan was filed and activated for the cross-country flight.
The flight originated from Glendive, Montana (GDV), approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.
The pilot's planned destination was Helena, (HLN), Montana.
During a telephone interview with a NTSB investigator on October 1st, the pilot reported that he was adjusting the airplane's radio while in a cruise configuration at an altitude of 300 feet above ground level (AGL).
The pilot reported in a written statement that the communications radio on the copilot side was making noise due to airflow from the vent, and he was attempting to adjust its position just prior to the accident.
He reported that he remembered "pulling up" just before the airplane collided with terrain.
The pilot stated that he was unable to recall any of the detailed events leading up to the accident.
The pilot reported in a written statement that prior to the flight, he amended the flight plan cruise altitude from 6500 feet to 4500 feet.
The pilot reported on the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report Form no mechanical malfunction or failure at the time of the accident.
The automated weather observation at Glendive, Montana (GDV), at 1655 reported winds from 160 degrees at 6 knots, 10 statute miles visibility, and clear skies.
Glendive is approximately 25 nautical miles west of the accident site.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 41, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
