National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ashland, ME
Accident Number: NYC02LA003
Date & Time: 10/02/2001, 1400 EDT
Registration: N2528M
Aircraft: Piper PA-12
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While en route to refuel, the pilot experienced a loss of engine power and impacted trees during the ensuing forced landing.
The airplane experienced a loss of engine power and impacted trees during the ensuing forced landing.
Examination of the airplane did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.
Both fuel tanks remained intact and there was no evidence of a fuel spill.
Approximately 1/2 gallon of fuel was observed in the airplane's fuel system.
Additionally, the fuel line which connected from the airframe fuel filter to the carburetor was removed and contained "a few drops" of fuel.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate preflight planning, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On October 2, 2001, about 1400 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-12, N2528M, was substantially damaged during a forced landing near Ashland, Maine.
The certificated commercial pilot sustained minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the flight destined for the Shin Pond Seaplane Base (85B), Patten, Maine.
The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot said the airplane's fuel tanks were "topped off" on September 29, 2001, at 85B, before a flight to "Fish River Lake, Moose Point Lodge."
The following day, the pilot flew to East Grand Lake, Orient, Maine, and then returned to Fish River Lake.
The morning of the accident, the pilot conducted a 1 hour local fight, and then departed Fish River Lake with the intention of refueling at 8B5.
The airplane experienced a loss of engine power and impacted trees during the ensuing forced landing.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.
Both fuel tanks remained intact and there was no evidence of a fuel spill.
Approximately 1/2 gallon of fuel was observed in the airplane's fuel system.
Additionally, the fuel line which connected from the airframe fuel filter to the carburetor was removed and contained "a few drops" of fuel.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 55, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
