National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Angie, LA
Accident Number: FTW02LA010
Date & Time: 10/01/2001, 1500 CDT
Registration: N402RW
Aircraft: Air Tractor 402
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The airplane had been conducting aerial application flights from a grass airstrip.
During the 18th departure from the airstrip, the engine lost partial power during the takeoff roll.
The pilot aborted the takeoff; however, insufficient runway remained, and the airplane overran the departure end of the airstrip and collided with trees.
The reason for the partial loss of engine power was not determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the loss of engine power during takeoff for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: OTHER Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On October 1, 2001, approximately 1500 central daylight time, an Air Tractor 402 agricultural airplane, N402RW, was substantially damaged during a runway overrun following a partial loss of engine power during takeoff from a private grass airstrip near Angie, Louisiana.
The turbine powered airplane was registered to and operated by Payne Flying Service of Pelahatchie, Mississippi.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that during the 18th flight of the day from the airstrip, the engine lost partial power during the takeoff roll.
The pilot aborted the takeoff; however, due to the insufficient runway available, the airplane overran the departure end of the airstrip and collided with trees at the end of the airstrip.
The reason for the loss of engine power was not determined.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Commercial Age: , Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Other Aircraft Rating(s): Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
