Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CARTER, OK
Accident Number:
FTW99LA003
Date & Time:
10/02/1998, 1430 CDT 
Registration:
N9838R
Aircraft:
Beech M35
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane impacted terrain following a forced landing resulting from a loss of engine power 
while in cruise flight. The airplane underwent 'extensive' modification and repair for five to six 
months prior to the flight. Several maintenance personnel, who were working on the airplane 
the morning of the accident, stated that the pilot wanted the airplane back, even though he was 
told that maintenance was not complete. Also, one maintenance person reported that the pilot 
said, 'no matter what, I'm pulling this airplane out and flying to Albuquerque.' After about 30 
minutes of flight, the engine 'quit.' The left wing tank fuel quantity gauge indicated '3/4 full.' 
The pilot then switched the fuel tank selector switch from the left main wing tank to the right 
main wing tank and attempted to restart the engine, but was unsuccessful. He then tried to 
restart the engine with the auxiliary tank selected, but was unsuccessful. A forced landing was 
executed to a paved, country road. The airplane veered to the right into a ditch, subsequently 
the right wing dug into the ground and turned the airplane 180 degrees into a ditch. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Fuel starvation. Factors were; the pilot's self induced pressure to fly the aircraft when 
maintenance had not been completed, poor judgement by the pilot to commence and continue 
flight with known deficiencies in the aircraft, and the lack of suitable terrain for a forced 
landing. 
Page 2 of 6FTW99LA003
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
2. (F) JUDGMENT - POOR - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) SELF-INDUCED PRESSURE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
5. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH
Page 3 of 6FTW99LA003
Factual Information
 On October 2, 1998, at 1430 central daylight time, a Beech M35 single engine airplane, 
N9838R, owned and operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain 
during a forced landing following a loss of engine power near Carter, Oklahoma.  The private 
pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan was filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The flight originated 
from the Clinton/Sherman Municipal Airport, Clinton, Oklahoma, at 1400.
The pilot intended to remain in the traffic pattern at the Clinton/Sherman Municipal Airport, 
but on the initial climb passing through 800 feet AGL he observed clouds "hanging down into 
the downwind leg," and decided to climb above the clouds.  The pilot referenced the vertical 
speed indicator and interpreted its display as indicating a 500 foot per minute descent, which 
contradicted the readings the attitude indicator and altimeter were displaying.  He leveled the 
airplane at 8,500 feet and began to evaluate the situation.
"Approximately, 30 minutes into the flight the engine sputtered and quit."  The pilot noticed 
that the fuel gauge for the selected tank (left main) was reading 3/4 full and then he verified 
that the fuel selector was on the left main.  He switched the fuel selector to the right main fuel 
tank and attempted to restart the engine, but was unsuccessful.  He then switched to the 
auxiliary fuel tank and attempted to restart the engine and was unsuccessful.  Subsequently, he 
descended the airplane through several cloud layers, lowered the landing gear and attempted 
to land on a small, paved road.  Upon touchdown, the airplane was 10 to 20 degrees out of 
alignment with the road.  Subsequently, the airplane veered to the right into a ditch, whereby 
the right wing dug into the ground and spun the airplane 180 degrees.
According to the pilot the airplane underwent "extensive modifications," during the 5 to 6 
months prior to the flight.  An FAA certified airframe and powerplant mechanic who was 
working on the airplane stated that he informed the pilot that the oil temperature gauge was 
inoperative.  The pilot asked the mechanic if "anything quickee could be done?"  The mechanic 
attempted to correct the problem, but told the pilot, "I'm not finished with this aircraft."  A few 
minutes later he observed the airplane take off.  
Another mechanic who was installing equipment on the airplane the morning of the accident 
stated that the pilot appeared in the hangar at 0830 on the morning of the accident.  The pilot 
complained because the work on the airplane was not complete.  The pilot then began working 
on the airplane.  The mechanic reported that the pilot stated "No matter what I'm pulling this 
airplane out and flying to Albuquerque."  
A witness who conversed with the pilot at the airport the morning of the accident reported that 
the pilot stated that "he was going to fly his airplane whether the airplane was finished or not."        
According to a work order provided by Gipson Aviation located at the Clinton Municipal 
Airport, Clinton, Oklahoma, and the airplane's discrepancy log, the instrument panel was 
repaired and reinstalled.  At the time of the accident the installation work, which requires an 
FAA field approval before the airplane returns to service, had not been inspected by the FAA. 
An FAA inspector examined the airplane at the site and reported that the left wing fuel tank 
was empty.  The right wing fuel tank was full and the left and right auxiliary fuel tanks were 
full.
Page 4 of 6FTW99LA003
The aircraft is equipped with two switches for selecting a fuel tank.  One switch indicates right 
or left and the second switch indicates main or auxiliary.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/13/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
479 hours (Total, all aircraft), 11 hours (Total, this make and model), 479 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 26 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N9838R
Model/Series:
M35 M35
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
D-6386
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3875 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-470-C
Registered Owner:
JACK C. LOGAN
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
JACK C. LOGAN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW99LA003
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CSM, 1922 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
215°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 200 ft agl
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3400 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
CLINTON, OK (CLK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
1400 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
CLINTON-SHERMON AIRPORT (CSM)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ALEXANDER    LEMISHKO
Adopted Date:
02/16/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
RICHARD J FLETCHER; OKLAHOMA CITY, OK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW99LA003
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
