The pilot reported that about 40 minutes after takeoff the tachometer started surging. The oil 
pressure gauge dropped to zero and the engine started knocking.  The engine seized and the 
pilot landed the airplane in a soy bean field. During landing rollout the airplane hit some large 
ruts which collapsed the landing gear.  The engine examination indicated the number six 
connecting rod had failed and knocked a hole in the top of the crankcase. The number three 
upper piston pin plug had deteriorated and was contaminating the engine with aluminum 
metal.  The oil filter was opened and evidence of aluminum metal contamination was found.  
The cam shaft and tappets indicated various stages of spalling.  Rust was noted inside all 
cylinder walls and all the connecting rods had surface rust on them.  In addition to the 
separated number six connecting rod, the number four and five connecting rods were blued 
and not free to move. The pilot reported that the oil filter was not opened during the oil 
changes to inspect for metal contamination.  The pilot was unaware that the engine oil filter 
indicated that the oil system was contaminated with metal particles. 
oil contamination and starvation due to the inadequate maintenance inspection of the 
pilot/owner. Factors included the deterioration of the piston pin plug, the connecting rod 
failure, and the unsuitable terrain for landing. 
 On April 1, 1997, at 1824 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-235, N9004W, sustained 
substantial damage during a forced landing due to loss of engine power near Des Moines, Iowa.  
The commercial pilot was not injured.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight departed Morning Star 
Airport, Des Moines, Iowa, on a local flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan had been filed.
The pilot reported that he had preflighted the airplane thoroughly before departure.  After 
takeoff he climbed to about 2,500 feet mean sea level (msl) and was at cruise power with the 
propeller set at 2,300 rpm.  About 40 minutes after takeoff, the tachometer went from 2,300 
rpm to 2,600 rpm, and then down to 2,200 rpm.  The pilot reported that the engine sounded 
"okay," with no backfiring, mis-firing, or rough running of any kind.  He pulled the carburetor 
heat, checked magnetos, fuel switches, and set the mixture to rich.  He reported that he saw the 
oil pressure gauge read zero about 30 seconds before he made the decision to land in a field for 
a forced landing.  The engine was knocking and it seized before the pilot landed the airplane in 
a soy bean field.  During landing rollout the airplane hit some large ruts which collapsed the 
landing gear.  
The engine and engine logbooks were examined.  It was determined that the engine was a 
remanufactured engine that had been installed on the airplane in 1980.  The engine had about 
600 hours total operating time since being installed on the airplane.  The pilot reported that 
one of the reasons he had purchased the airplane was because the engine was a low time 
engine.
The engine examination revealed that the number six connecting rod had separated and 
knocked a hole in the top of the crankcase.  During the engine teardown, it was determined 
that the number three upper piston pin plug had been deteriorating and contaminating the 
engine with aluminum metal.  The oil filter was opened and evidence of aluminum metal 
contamination was found.  The oil pressure screen was inspected for contamination and it had 
some metal particles in the screen.  The cam shaft and tappets indicated various stages of 
spalling, some advanced.  Rust was noted inside all cylinder walls and all the connecting rods 
had surface rust on them. The number six connecting rod was black in color, and the number 
four and five connecting rods were blued and not free to move.  The number five connecting 
rod bearing was burnished and heat distressed.  
The pilot reported that the airplane was flown about 75 hours a year.  Oil was changed on the 
airplane about three times a year.  The oil filter was not opened during the oil changes to 
inspect for metal contamination.  The pilot reported that he was unaware that the engine oil 
filter indicated that the oil system was contaminated with metal particles.
