The CFI and student pilot were conducting night takeoffs and landings.  The CFI stated that 
after the third landing touchdown, at an airspeed of approximately 30 knot, the right main 
landing gear strut began to shimmy and the gear collapsed.  The airplane came to rest on the 
runway.  The CFI stated they had used aft elevator pressure to slow the airplane and not the 
brakes.  Metallurgical examination of the fractured landing gear strut/spar attachment screws 
revealed that two of the four screws contained fatigue cracking.  The other two screw fractures 
were secondary failures. 
a fatigue failure of the fight main landing gear strut/spar attachment screws. 
 On April 2, 1997, at 2230 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28- 161, N6148H, flown by a 
certified flight instructor (CFI) and a student pilot experienced a right main landing gear 
collapse during the landing roll on runway 28 (6,600' x 150') at the Lafayette-Purdue 
University Airport, Lafayette, Indiana.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  Neither pilot 
was injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 
local 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight.  The flight originated from the Aretz Airport, 
Lafayette, Indiana, at 2200 est.
The CFI reported that the accident occurred on the third landing of the flight.  He reported that 
after touching down, "We slowed the aircraft by full aft elevator to turn off the runway at C1.  At 
approximately 30 knots indicated, without ever touching the brakes, the right strut began to 
shimmy and then collapsed, bringing the wheel flush with the bottom of the wing.  We skidded 
about ten yards to a stop and immediately shut sown the engine."  The airplane came to rest on 
the runway.
A post accident inspection of the airplane was conducted by Inspectors from the Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) Indianapolis Flight Standards District Office (FSDO).  One of 
the Inspectors reported that the airplane was jacked up under the right wing at which time it 
could be seen that the right landing gear was "pulled away from the wing spar and positioned 
up and aft and slightly outboard."  He continued to report three of the four screw holes on the 
gear strut top and bottom attachment flanges were elongated.  The Inspector collected four 
portions of the strut/spar attachment screws which he forwarded to the NTSB for inspection. 
(See attached FAA Inspector's Statement)
The screw portions were inspected at Engineering Systems, Inc., on April 22, 1997.  The 
metallurgical examination of the screws revealed that two of the screws contained fatigue 
cracks.  One of these contained "...nearly 100% fatigue type cracking with numerous ratchets 
present."  The rim of the other screw contained "...numerous small ratchets, indicating that the 
fatigue cracking was associated with multiple crack initiation locations.  About 90% of the 
fracture area was instantaneous fracture."  The remaining two screw sections did not reveal any 
fatigue and were deemed as secondary failures.  (See attached Metallurgical Report)
