While taxiing, the pilot observed a van travelling in reverse motion, moving from the pilot's left 
to right.  The pilot signaled the van with the landing lights to attract the driver's attention, but 
the van passed the nose of the airplane.  The pilot stopped the airplane, and the van continued 
and struck the right rear fuselage of the airplane. The investigation revealed that the driver had 
exited the running van to work on another airplane, without setting the parking brake.  The 
van's transmission had been replaced the day of the accident, and the indicator for the gear 
selection was missing from the steering column. 
Failure of the driver of the van to set the parking brake before exiting the van. 
 On April 1, 1997, at 2220 eastern standard time, N280MA, a Fokker F27, operated by Eagle Jet 
Charter Inc. of Las Vegas, Nevada, was substantially damaged when it was struck by a 
driverless Nations Air maintenance van, while standing on the ramp at the Atlantic City 
International Airport, Atlantic City, New Jersey.  The certificated airline transport pilot, co-
pilot, flight attendant and the 34 passengers were not injured, while one passenger received 
minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight 
plan was filed for charter passenger flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
The pilot reported that while taxiing slowly through the ramp area, he observed a van 
approaching the airplane from the "10 to 11 o'clock position."  He said the van was travelling in 
reverse motion from left to right.  He signaled the van with the landing lights, but the van 
passed the nose of the airplane in a curving turn.  He stopped the airplane, but the driverless 
van continued in reverse until it struck the right rear fuselage.
According to the driver of the maintenance van, he had exited the running van to work on 
another airplane without setting the parking brake.  He had placed the gear shift handle in the 
park position.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, the van's transmission was replaced 
the day of the accident, and the gear selection indicator on the steering column was missing.
