The pilot, an employee of the National Park Service, related he was returning to his position as 
a Park Ranger/Pilot after a three month furlough from the park service. The purpose of the 
accident flight was to regain proficiency in the Piper PA-18 airplane. The pilot said that during 
the landing roll on the fourth landing, he lost directional control of the airplane, and it ground 
looped to the left, which resulted in substantial damage to the airframe. Also, the pilot said he 
did not fly during his furlough, and that his total flight experience in the PA-18 airplane was 
approximately five hours. 
failure of the pilot to maintain directional control of the airplane, which resulted in an 
inadvertent ground loop and damage to the airplane.  Factors associated with the accident 
were: the ice/snow covered runway, and the pilot's lack of experience in the make and model of 
airplane. 
 On April 1, 1997, about 1145 Alaska standard time, a wheel-ski equipped Piper PA-18 airplane, 
N4500W, registered to the U.S. Department of the Interior and operated by the National Park 
Service (NPS), received substantial damage while landing at the Noatak Airport, Noatak, 
Alaska.  The solo commercial pilot, a NPS employee, was not injured.  The U.S. Government 
operated flight was initiated for the purpose of maintaining pilot flight proficiency, and 
operated in visual meteorological conditions under 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight last departed 
Kotzebue, Alaska, and the immediate destination was the Noatak Airport.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB investigator-in-charge on April 3, the pilot 
related he was returning to work with the NPS as a Park Ranger/Pilot, after a three month 
furlough. Since he had not flown during the time he was furloughed, he felt a need to practice 
his flying skills prior to a mission flight planned for the next day.  The pilot was making a series 
of full stop landings at the Noatak Airport on wheel/ski equipped landing gear with the skis 
retracted.  On the fourth landing on runway 36, the pilot said the airplane porpoised and  
bounced, and then went to the left during the landing roll.  He said he overcorrected to the 
right, and then to the left.  The airplane ground looped to the left, and came to rest facing in a 
westerly direction.
Postaccident inspection disclosed damage to a longeron and the horizontal stabilizer.
The written report submitted to the NTSB by the pilot indicated his total flight experience in a 
Piper PA-18 airplane was approximately five hours at the time of the accident.
