National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SMITHFIELD, NC
Accident Number: ATL01LA046
Date & Time: 04/02/2001, 1740 EDT
Registration: N58JM
Aircraft: JACQUES J. MISTROT Skybolt
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
 Analysis This was the first flight of the experimental airplane.
The takeoff roll and initial climb appeared normal.
As the airplane continued the climb through 200 feet, it was observed entering a left  turn until the airplane developed a nose low attitude.
The airplane collided with trees on the right side of the runway.
Examination of the aircraft revealed no mechanical malfunctions.
The pilot had a  prosthetic leg.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during climb out that resulted in the in- flight collision with the ground.
A factor was the physical impairment.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FLIGHT CONTROLS - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) PHYSICAL IMPAIRMENT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On April 2, 2001, at 1740 eastern daylight  time, a Jacques J. Mistrot, Skybolt, N58JM,  an experimental airplane, collided with the ground shortly after liftoff from runway 03 at the Johnston County Airport in Smithfield, North Carolina.
The initial test flight was operated by the pilot for the owner under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot was fatally injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The test flight departed Smithfield, North Carolina, at 1739.
Reportedly, this was the first flight of the experimental airplane.
According to the operator, the engine had been running continuously during 3 separate 45 minute taxi sessions.
During each check the engine ran smoothly  with an rpm varying from 800-2375.
The operator stated, "immediately prior to the first flight on the afternoon of April 2, 2001, the pilot and myself accomplished a complete preflight and walk-around inspection.
During the inspection all control surfaces were carefully examined for range and proper attachment.
The engine compartment, including oil and fuel quantities, were carefully checked."
According to witnesses at the airport, the takeoff roll and initial climb appeared normal.
As the airplane continued the climb through 200 feet, it was observed entering a left  turn until the airplane developed a nose low attitude.
The airplane collided with trees on the right side of the runway.
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate and was a certified flight instructor.
His total flight time was 25,000 hours, and the approximate flight time in the Skybolt 10 hours.
The pilot held a current second-class medical certificate, dated December 8, 2000.
The pilot had a prosthetic leg.
Examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or component failures.
The pilot did not report any mechanical malfunctions.
Postmortem examination and the forensic toxicology of the pilot was performed by Dr. Chancellor  at the office of State Medical Examiner in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, on April 3, 2001.
The toxicology examinations were negative for  alcohol.
Atropine and Lidocaine  were detected in the blood and liver.
These drugs are commonly used during resuscitation.
According to the operator, there was attempted on site resuscitation.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
