National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KENNESAW, GA
Accident Number: ATL01LA045
Date & Time: 04/02/2001, 1715 EDT
Registration: N21306
Aircraft: Cessna 182 P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was conducting touch and go landings and after his second landing he was executing the climb out phase of the procedure.
During the initial climb , the pilot reported an unspecified engine problem.
The airplane collided with the ground in a nose low attitude, and flipped inverted.
Examination of the airframe and  failed to disclose any mechanical malfunctions or component failures.
The engine operated normally up to 2000 rpm during the functional check.
At the time of the accident conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor ice.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Conditions for carburetor icing were present at the time of the accident.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 2.
The personal flight was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, with no flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot received serious injuries at the time of the accident and the airplane was substantially damaged.
The flight departed Kennesaw, Georgia, at 1714.
Reportedly, the pilot was conducting touch and go landings, and was executing the climb out phase of the procedure.
According to air traffic control, during the initial climb out from runway 27, the pilot reported an unspecified engine problem.
The airplane collided with the ground in a nose low attitude and flipped inverted.
Examination of the airframe  assembly failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction or component failure.
Examination of the engine assembly disclosed that the fuel recovered in the carburetor bowl was brownish in color.
The fuel grade and type was not determined.
During the subsequent examination, necessary repairs were made to the engine assembly to facilitate a functional check.
The engine operated normally up to 2000 rpm during the functional check.
The engine ran smooth with no anomalies noted.
The entire run was approximately ten minutes in duration.
After the engine run-up, the oil sump was removed and inspected, and it was noted that there were pieces of metal  found in the sump.
The pieces of metal were identified as the oil control ring expander coil.
A review of recovered weather data showed that weather conditions at the time of the accident  were favorable for carburetor icing conditions.
Reportedly, the airplane had recently undergone a pre-purchase inspection.
A review of the inspection findings showed that there were approximately 60 maintenance related write-ups which included water in fuel tanks.
A review of the airplane and engine maintenance logs revealed that the engine had a total of 3,277 hours and 1,676.99 hours since the last major overhaul.
The last annual inspection was completed on February 1, 2001 at 2463.2 airframe hours.
The pilot was hospitalized after the accident and was placed in intensive care.
On May 26, 2001, the pilot passed as a result of the serious injuries sustained in the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 37, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane; None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine; Instrument Airplane; None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
