National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Conroe, TX
Accident Number: FTW01LA105
Date & Time: 04/01/2001, 1415 CDT
Registration: N195S
Aircraft: Cessna 195B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was taking off with a 20-degree left crosswind at 9 knots, and did not use any crosswind takeoff technique.
During the takeoff roll, the left wing raised and right wing tip dragged on the ground.
The pilot applied full left aileron and right rudder; however, the airplane weather vaned into the wind.
As the airplane neared the edge of the runway, the pilot reduced the power, and the airplane nosed over.
The pilot stated that he could have prevented the accident by "use[ing] crosswind [takeoff] technique."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to compensate for the wind conditions during takeoff, which resulted in a ground loop.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The private pilot, who was the sole occupant and registered owner of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The local flight was departing from the Montgomery County Airport at the time of the accident.
According to a written statement provided by the pilot, he was taking off from runway 19.
He stated that the wind was from 170 degrees at 9 knots, and he did not use any "crosswind technique."
During the takeoff roll, the left wing raised and right wing tip dragged on the ground.
The pilot applied full left aileron and right rudder; however, the airplane weather vaned into the wind.
As the airplane neared the edge of the runway, the pilot reduced the power, and the airplane "immediately nosed down and landed on its back."
According to the pilot, the propeller, engine cowling, firewall, engine, fuselage, both wings, and the empennage sustained damage.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), under the section titled "Recommendation (How Could This Accident Have Been Prevented)," the pilot wrote, "use crosswind [takeoff] technique."
Pilot Information Certificate: Age: 56, Male Airplane Rating(s): Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
