National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Tecumseh, MI
Accident Number: CHI01LA112
Date & Time: 04/02/2001, 0840 EDT
Registration: N495C
Aircraft: Meyers 200A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane sustained substantial damage on impact with trees and terrain during a forced landing following an in-flight loss of engine power on initial climb.
A post impact fire occurred.
The pilot reported no injuries.
The pilot stated, "I had just completed an annual inspection on it.
... On Monday morning I drained the sumps did a full power run up and proceeded to take off on runway 36 for a local check flight.
Everything seemed normal until just after I rotated and cycled the landing gear.
A few seconds later I lost power.
I switched on the boost pump not normally used for take off, to no avail.
The stall warning horn activated and I came down in the trees off the north end of the airport.
I had a fire originating from the fuel line to the distrabution valve on top of the engine.
I exited the aircraft unhurt but neglected to turn off the master switch or the boost pump which was feeding the fire.
...
It seems like I lost fuel pressure from the line at the distrabution valve which did not come off but was leaking.
This caused the engine to quit."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The fuel starvation.
Factors were the loose line at the distribution valve, the inadequate annual inspection the owner/pilot mechanic performed, the unsuitable terrain the pilot encountered during the emergency landing after takeoff, and the trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE FITTING - LOOSE 2.
(F) MAINTENANCE,ANNUAL INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OWNER/PILOT MECHANIC 3.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF Findings 4.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 5.
A post impact fire occurred.
The personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
No flight plan was on file.
The pilot reported no injuries.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated, "I had just completed an annual inspection on it.
On Friday I had taxied the airplane around [and] done a full power run up[.]
I then removed the cowling to check things over.
Everything seemed OK.  On Monday morning I drained the sumps did a full power run up and proceeded to take off on runway 36 for a local check flight.
Everything seemed normal until just after I rotated and cycled the landing gear.
A few seconds later I lost power.
I switched on the boost pump not normally used for take off, to no avail.
The stall warning horn activated and I came down in the trees off the north end of the airport.
I had a fire originating from the fuel line to the distrabution valve on top of the engine.
I exited the aircraft unhurt but neglected to turn off the master switch or the boost pump which was feeding the fire.
After evaluating the situation for safety I reentered the aircraft and turned off the master switch.
We were then able to put out the fire which was isolated to the top of the engine compartment.
It seems like I lost fuel pressure from the line at the distrabution valve which did not come off but was leaking.
This caused the engine to quit."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
