National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Angel Fire, NM
Accident Number: DEN01LA080
Date & Time: 04/01/2001, 1045 MDT
Registration: N679WB
Aircraft: Fox Pegazair 100
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The initial portion of the airplane's takeoff on runway 17 was normal.
The wind was from 250 degrees at 15 knots.
Just as the airplane lifted off, a crosswind blew it off the left side of the runway.
The airplane struck a fence and nosed over.
The pilot said that it was "likely that a wind gust in excess of the aircraft's capability was encountered."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain directional control during takeoff.
A contributing factors was the gusty crosswind condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 3.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 4.
The commercial pilot, the only occupant aboard, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
In a telephone interview, the pilot said he was making a takeoff on runway 17.
Just as the airplane lifted off, a crosswind blew it off the left side of the runway.
The airplane struck a fence and nosed over.
At the time of the accident, the wind was from 250 degrees at 15 knots.
In his accident report, the pilot said the initial portion of the takeoff was normal, but after the airplane had rolled 520 feet, "directional control was lost and the aircraft departed the runway at about a 30 degree angle."
The airplane became airborne and continued 524 feet before crossing a small ditch and colliding with a barbed wire fence.
The airplane traveled another 40 feet before striking the ground in a right wing low attitude.
The right main landing gear collapsed and the airplane skidded another 16 feet before nosing over.
The pilot said that there were gusty crosswinds at the time of the accident and that is was "likely that a wind gust in excess of the aircraft's capability was encountered."
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 48, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Glider Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
