Page 1 of 14
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SPOKANE, WA
Accident Number:
SEA96FA039
Date & Time:
01/04/1996, 1853 PST 
Registration:
N358SA
Aircraft:
Convair 340
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
Analysis 
Before the ferry flight, the pilot (PIC) & inexperienced copilot noted the left & right, float-type, 
underwing, fuel gauges indicated about 3,900 & 4,050 lbs of fuel, respectively. After takeoff, 
they noted that the cockpit gauges showed an opposite fuel imbalance of 4,100 & 3,600 lbs in 
the left & right tanks. Due to this indication, the PIC crossfed fuel from the left tank to both 
engines for about 30 min to rectify the perceived fuel imbalance. Later as they approached the 
destination, the left tank was exhausted of fuel, & the left engine lost power, although the left 
gauge indicated about 500 lbs of fuel remaining in that tank. The PIC then crossfed fuel from 
the right tank to both engines, & left engine power was restored. ATC vectored the flight for an 
emergency ILS runway 3 approach. The PIC was distracted during the approach & maneuvered 
the airplane to re-intercept the localizer. About 500' agl in IMC, both engines lost power. 
During a forced landing at night, the airplane struck a raised berm & was damaged. No 
evidence of fuel was found in the left tank; 125 gal of fuel was found in the right tank. Unusable 
fuel was published as 3 gal. During an exam of the engines & fuel system components, no 
preimpact failure was found. Historical data from the manufacturer indicated that when the 
airplane had a low fuel state, unporting of fuel tank outlets could occur during certain 
maneuvers. This information was not in the Convair 340 flight manual, although unporting of 
the outlets on this flight was not verified. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's improper management of the fuel/system, which resulted in loss of power in both 
engines, due to fuel starvation.  Factors relating to the accident were: false indications of the 
cockpit fuel gauges, darkness, and the presence of a berm in the emergency landing area. 
Page 2 of 14SEA96FA039
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - FAF/OUTER MARKER TO THRESHOLD (IFR)
Findings
1. ALL ENGINES
2. (F) ENGINE INSTRUMENTS,FUEL QUANTITY GAGE - FALSE INDICATION
3. AIRCRAFT MANUALS - INADEQUATE
4. (C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. INFORMATION UNAVAILABLE - MANUFACTURER
6. LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - COPILOT/SECOND PILOT
7. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
8. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
9. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - BERM
Page 3 of 14SEA96FA039
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 4, 1996, at 1853 Pacific standard time, N358SA, a Convair 340, operated by 
Salair, Inc., Spokane, Washington, collided with terrain during a forced landing in Spokane 
and was destroyed.  The forced landing was precipitated by a total loss of engine power during 
final approach.  The first pilot received minor injuries and the second pilot was not injured.  
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules (IFR) clearance 
was issued.  The ferry flight departed from Deer Valley,  Arizona, at 1320 Pacific standard time 
and was destined for Spokane.  The flight was conducted under 14 CFR 91.
The first pilot stated that he began his day (the day of the accident) about 0500.  He flew 
via commercial airline cockpit jump seat from Spokane to Phoenix, Arizona, to pick up the 
Convair 340 and ferry it to Spokane.  He stated that a "very thorough inspection" of the 
airplane was performed.  He asked the second pilot, who had picked up the first pilot earlier 
that morning in Phoenix, to fuel the airplane. The airplane was fueled with an additional 647 
gallons of 100 low lead aviation gasoline.  The first pilot stated that the float-type, direct-
reading "Boston" fuel gauges, located underneath each wing, were indicating 650 gallons 
(3,900 pounds) in the left wing, and 675 gallons (4,050 pounds) in the right wing, for a total 
indicated fuel load of 1,325 gallons.  The underwing Boston fuel gauges reads in gallons, and 
the cockpit fuel gauges reads in pounds.
The first pilot and second pilot then started up the engines, taxied out to a run-up area, 
ran up the engines, and taxied back to inspect the airplane.  The first pilot briefed the second 
pilot on all of the systems and procedures of the airplane.  The crew then departed.  During 
climbout, the engines were "running great."  Fuel flows during the climb were "just perfect" at 
950 pounds per hour.  The airplane climbed to 6,500 feet above mean sea level (msl).  Visual 
flight rules (VFR) weather conditions prevailed . 
The first pilot stated that he opened a VFR flight plan at cruise with a destination of  
Mountain Home, Idaho, because the weather "was good" and the second pilot had family there. 
The first pilot stated that air traffic control (ATC) could not provide flight following, because 
the transponder was apparently not working.  This anomaly surprised him, because the 
transponder was supposed to have been repaired at Deer Valley.  The crew then overflew an 
airport to test the localizer.  They also performed navigational airborne checks.  Although the 
flight was VFR, the crew elected to follow airways.
The second pilot stated that they climbed to 10,500 feet initially.  They checked the 
systems and navigational equipment.  They also checked the instrument landing system (ILS) 
over Prescott, Arizona, and headed toward Kingman, Arizona.  When they were east of Las 
Vegas, they "picked up another airway and headed north."  The weather was "nice."  They then 
climbed to 12,500 feet and determined they would have from 45 minutes to one hour of fuel 
reserves.  The second pilot stated that the highest altitude that the airplane reached during the 
flight was 16,500 feet, at which time the crew was on breathing oxygen.
The first pilot stated that based on the winds, the flight was expected to be about 5-1/2 
hours.  He presumed to have 7,600 pounds of fuel on board, and planned on 1,200 pounds for 
the first hour, followed by 1,100 pounds for each hour afterward.  The flight was about 900 
nautical miles, and the first pilot planned to have 1,500 pounds of fuel after landing.  He stated 
Page 4 of 14SEA96FA039
that he had the second pilot perform time-speed-distance calculations during the flight, and 
the results for ground speed ranged from 167 knots to 180 knots.  
The first pilot stated that he climbed to a cruising altitude of 14,500 feet "to stay above 
the clouds" as they neared Spokane, flying over Boise-Lewiston-Pullman-Spokane.  He stated 
that he constantly evaluated his fuel situation.  Based on cockpit indications, the first pilot 
calculated to land with just under 1,000 pounds of fuel. 
The first pilot stated that he noticed a fuel imbalance on the cockpit fuel gauges when he 
departed Deer Valley.  He remembered the left gauge reading 4,100 pounds, and the right 
gauge reading 3,600 pounds.  This is opposite of what he remembered the Boston gauges 
reading.  He stated that he crossfed fuel from the left tank to both engines during cruise for 
"maybe 30 minutes" to re-balance the fuel.  The second pilot stated that the crossfeed 
operation lasted "one hour maximum."  The first pilot also stated that he observed the left 
boost pump not working (as indicated by the fuel pressure gauge) when he initiated the 
crossfeed operation.  He remembered that he told the second pilot to check the circuit 
breakers, which he did.  He reset the circuit breaker, and the left boost pump operated 
normally.
The first pilot stated that they "ran out of oxygen" so they asked for an IFR clearance to  
descend toward Spokane.  He advised ATC that he had no distance measuring equipment 
(DME) or transponder.  The flight was cleared to 10,000 feet, then down to 9,000 feet.  The 
first pilot remembered that the left and right cockpit fuel gauges read between 400 and 600 
pounds respectively when the airplane was about 30 miles from Spokane.  
The first pilot stated that the left engine fuel light came on and the left engine lost 
power.  He felt the adverse yaw.  He stated that he turned on the left boost pump in an attempt 
to restore engine power.  Since the engine power was not restored, he opened the crossfeed 
valve, turned on the right boost pump, turned off the left tank, and turned off the left boost 
pump.  He stated that this restored power to the left engine, and he verified fuel flow to the left 
engine from the right boost pump.  No Salair checklist exists for this procedure.
The first pilot stated that he thinks the "left tank ran out of gas" because engine power 
was not restored when he activated the left boost pump.  He notified ATC of a potential low fuel 
situation.  He then "toggled both engines back to 1,500 RPM and 20 inches."  Both engines 
were running at AUTO LEAN to conserve fuel.   Air traffic control cleared the flight down to 
4,000 feet.  The cowl flaps were then closed and the first pilot briefed the approach to the 
second pilot.  The crew was handed off to approach control and cleared to intercept the 
localizer for the ILS approach to Runway 3 at Spokane.  
When just outside the outer marker, the crew performed the landing checklist.  The first 
pilot stated that the "left generator overheat warning" was lit.  At that point, the first pilot 
turned off the cockpit heater, turned off the left generator, and observed the load meter on the 
right generator.  The generator problem was rectified.  The first pilot stated that the problem 
caused him to deviate right of course, so he initiated a left turn to re-intercept the localizer, 
followed by a right turn to re-establish the airplane on course.  He stated that the angle of bank 
to re-intercept the localizer was "no more than 30 degrees."
The first pilot then called for landing gear down and selected approach flaps.  He then 
performed the "landing checklist."  He stated that one of the items in the landing checklist was 
for the fuel boost pumps on.  He reached up and noticed the right boost pump was already on, 
Page 5 of 14SEA96FA039
so he had only to turn on the left boost pump, which is what he did.  At that point, both low fuel 
pressure lights illuminated "about a second later."  Both engines quit, and he could feel the loss 
of power.  The first pilot said he then closed both throttles, declared a MAYDAY, selected full 
flaps down, immediately "put the nose down," and called for the landing gear to be raised.
The second pilot stated that the cockpit fuel gauges were reading 600 pounds on each 
side.  The landing gear was lowered and so were the flaps..  Then, "both fuel lights went on and 
the engine just went dead."  He stated that the first pilot then called for gear up and throttled 
both engines back..  The second pilot called out airspeeds to the first pilot during the forced 
landing.  He estimated that they impacted about 75 knots.  He stated that he had his hands on 
his lap during the flare.  After the impact, he turned off the master switch.
The first pilot stated that he closed the last (right) fuel tank valve switch just prior to the 
impact, and the second pilot turned the master switch off after the impact.   He further stated 
that he did not use any emergency checklists during the flight, but did use the descent/landing 
checklists.
The first pilot closed both throttles and force-landed the airplane in a field about one 
mile from the approach end of Runway 3.  The airplane struck a berm and was destroyed.  
The accident occurred during the hours of darkness at the following coordinates:  47 
degrees, 35.85 minutes North; 117 degrees, 33.92 minutes West.
ATC COMMUNICATIONS
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Report of Aircraft Accident and 
ATC transcripts (excerpts attached), the accident airplane departed Deer Valley at 1320 Pacific 
standard time, five hours and 33 minutes prior to the accident.  At 1357, the crew contacted the 
Prescott, Arizona Flight Service Station (FSS) and requested weather information along their 
route of flight to Spokane.  The FSS briefer provided the information and indicated that VFR 
flight was not recommended north of Elko, Nevada.  The crew contacted the FSS on three more 
occasions for weather information from 1357 until 1409, at which time then ammended their 
intended routing to fly direct from Las Vegas, Nevada, then to Elko, then north of Elko to 
Boise, Idaho.
At 1601, two hours and 41 minutes after departure, the crew contacted the Boise FSS for 
a weather briefing and change in destination to Spokane.  At 1759, the flight was handed off 
from the Salt Lake City Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) to the Seattle ARTCC.  The 
crew reported that they were level at 16,500 feet and requested an IFR clearance.  The 
clearance was not issued at that time.  At 1806, the crew reported that they were non-DME or 
transponder equipped.  At 1811, the crew updated their estimated time of arrival at Spokane 
from 1745 to 1850.  At 1821, the crew requested and received an IFR clearance direct to 
Spokane at 14,000 feet.  The crew also requested and received the lowest available altitude of 
10,000 feet.
At 1838, the crew reported that they were level at 9,000 feet and requested a position.  
They were told that they were 32 miles south of Spokane.  At 1843, the crew requested priority 
handling to Spokane because of a "potential emergency situation."  The crew further reported 
that the left engine had shut down, but the fuel quantity for the left engine was indicating 800 
pounds.  The crew also stated that they were unsure how much fuel remained in the right 
engine.  At 1845, the flight was handed off to Spokane Approach Control.  The first pilot 
radioed that "the left engine [was] starved for fuel before we expected it to.  We're still showing 
Page 6 of 14SEA96FA039
500 pounds of fuel on the left engine's gauge.... We're now running both engines off the right 
and we're concerned about whether its indication is reliable or not."  At 1848, the flight was 
cleared for the ILS runway 3 approach and told to contact the Spokane ATC Tower.  Two 
minutes later, at an altitude of about 500 feet above the ground, the pilot declared a "mayday" 
because both engines suddenly quit.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Basic Aircraft Description.
The accident airplane, a Convair model 340, was manufactured in 1954.  It was powered 
by two Pratt & Whitney Double Wasp R-2800-CB16 engines, and was an all-metal, low-wing 
monoplane with full cantilever wing and tail surfaces.  The empty weight of the airplane was 
31,000 pounds, and its wingspan was 105 feet.  
Fuel System Description.
The fuel system of the Convair 340 (schematics and diagrams attached) is comprised of 
two independent integral fuel systems, one for each engine, with a crossfeed line which may be 
opened to allow either engine to be supplied by the opposite tank; or both engines to be 
supplied by either tank.  Each wing, outboard of the nacelle, has a fuel-tight compartment 
which serves as a 865-gallon fuel tank.  The compartment in one wing is not connected with 
the compartment in the other wing.  A line leads inboard to an electrically operated fuel boost 
pump in each nacelle.
Two outlets, equipped with screens, pass through the lower wing surface at the inboard 
end of each fuel tank.  When fuel is low in the tank, one or the other of the outlets will be 
covered "throughout the range of normal flight attitudes of the airplane, permitting engines to 
draw all but 2.3 gallons for each tank," according to Tracor Flight Systems, the current type 
certificate holder of the Convair 340.  Baffles traps are located outboard of the tank outlets to 
"insure coverage of the outlets in any normal flight attitude of the airplane."
A crossfeed line, fitted with two valves operated electrically and simultaneously by a 
crossfeed switch on the fuel control panel, crosses from one nacelle to the other and 
interconnects the two fuel lines downstream from the boost pumps.
The boost pump on either side is thus able to help feed fuel to the opposite engine 
during crossfeed operation, as well as to its own engine, as required.  An electrically operated 
main fuel shutoff valve is installed in each nacelle upstream from the boost pump.  Each engine 
has an engine-driven fuel pump.  A fuel quantity gauge for each tank and dual indicating fuel 
flow meters and fuel pressure gauges are provided on the engine instrument panel.
Normal operating fuel pressure range is 21 to 23 pounds per square inch (psi), with 
desired pressure 21 psi and minimum idling pressure 14 psi.  The boost pumps are intended to 
be used when starting, when at an altitude of 10,000 feet or over, or whenever fuel pressure 
fluctuation occurs.  Company policy also requires the use of boost pumps for takeoff and 
landing.  There is no company policy regarding the use of boost pumps for crossfeed operation.  
According the Tracor Flight Systems, nothing can be found in either the Convair 340 or 440 
FAA approved flight manuals requiring boost pumps for crossfeed operation.  Boost pumps are 
required, however, for operations above 10,000 feet msl.
The cockpit fuel quantity gauges are of the electronic, internally-mounted probe type.  
Four such units are installed in each wing tank, wired in parallel, in order to keep error due to 
Page 7 of 14SEA96FA039
change in normal airplane flight attitude to within 3 percent.  A fuel compensator also is 
installed at the inboard end of each tank in order to minimize change in dielectric constant of 
fuel, thus resulting in more accurate fuel gauge readings.  The system operates on 115-volt, 
400-cycle alternating current power.  The two quantity indicators are calibrated in pounds of 
fuel, from zero to 5,500 pounds.
Maintenance History.
The accident airplane was purchased by Salair in March 1988 and used for international 
nonscheduled cargo flights from Miami, Florida, and the Dominican Republic.  During that 
time, it was maintained at a Salair maintenance base in Borinquen, Puerto Rico.  According to 
maintenance record entries, the airplane underwent a "C-3" check on July 19, 1995.  Because of 
a fatal accident involving another Salair Convair 340 on June 27, 1995, Salair was banned from 
further flights by the government of the Dominican Republic and the airplane was flown to 
Miami after the accident. 
On December 12, 1995, the airplane was then ferried to Deer Valley.   Salair had 
intended the airplane to be ferried to Spokane on that day, but adverse weather had prevailed.  
Weather conditions to Deer Valley were adequate and fuel prices were attractive.   The airplane 
remained at Deer Valley until the day of the accident, and received maintenance on the 
transponder, which had been malfunctioning. Maintenance record entries indicate that the 
airplane had accumulated a total of 8,642 hours of flight time at the time of the accident, and 
21 hours since the C-3 check.  
Maintenance record entries also indicate that the left fuel quantity cockpit gauge was 
removed and replaced with a serviceable unit on April 5, 1995, because it was "stuck indicating 
2100."  The right fuel quantity cockpit gauge was also removed and replaced during the C-3 
check because of sticking.  The left engine fuel boost pump cockpit switch was removed and 
replaced on June 7, 1995, for use in another Convair 340.  Both engine-driven fuel pumps were 
removed and replaced with overhauled units during the C-3 check.  Both electrically-driven 
fuel boost pumps were installed in the airplane in 1991 with no further maintenance actions 
noted.
Previous Flight.
The Safety Board contacted the ferry pilot who flew the accident airplane to Deer Valley 
on December 12, 1995.  According to the pilot, no problems with the airplane were noted except 
for a radio transponder malfunction.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
First Pilot.
The first pilot, age 40, held an FAA airplane transport pilot certificate with ratings for 
single engine land, single engine sea, mulitengine land, and instrument airplanes.  He was type 
rated in Douglas DC-3, Convair 240, 340, and 340 airplanes.  The pilot reported that he had 
accumulated a total of 5,194 hours of flight time, including 4,275 hours in multiengine 
airplanes as pilot-in-command, 294 hours in simulated and actual IMC, and 817 hours in type.  
During the 90 days previous to the accident, the first pilot had reported a total of 32 hours of 
flight time, including the 5.5 hours in type that he had accumulated during the accident flight.   
The pilot was issued an FAA First Class Medical Certificate on October 10, 1995, with the 
limitation that he "must wear corrective lenses."
Page 8 of 14SEA96FA039
Second Pilot.
The second pilot, age 25, held an FAA commercial pilot certificate with ratings for single 
engine land, mulitengine land, and instrument airplanes.  He was also an certified flight 
instructor in single engine airplanes.  He did not hold any type ratings, and the accident flight 
was his first flight in a Convair 340.  The pilot reported that he had accumulated a total of 550 
hours of flight time, including 54 hours in multiengine airplanes, and 4.4 hours in actual IMC.  
During the 90 days previous to the accident, the second pilot had reported a total of 31 hours of 
flight time, including 10.2 hour in multiengine airplanes and the 5.5 hours he accumulated in 
type during the accident flight.  The pilot was issued an FAA Second Class Medical Certificate 
on July 11, 1995, with the limitation that he "must wear corrective lenses."  The second pilot 
was hired by Salair about three weeks prior to the accident. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
According to a meteorological surface observation taken at the Spokane International 
Airport about three minutes after the accident, the following conditions prevailed:  cloud 
ceiling 600 feet broken above ground level, visibility 10 statute miles, temperature 20 degrees 
F, dewpoint 18 degrees F, winds from 030 degrees magnetic at 7 knots, with no precipitation or 
restrictions to visibility.  Dark night conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was examined at the accident site one day after the accident on 
January 5, 1996.  The airplane came to rest on level terrain in an open field along the extended 
centerline of Runway 3 and about one mile from the runway threshold.  The wreckage was 
distributed along a magnetic bearing of 030 degrees.  The wreckage path was measured to be 
about 250 feet in length.
The initial ground scar led to a raised berm located about 100 feet from the beginning of 
the scar.  Portions of the right and left main landing gear doors, left aileron, and left skin pieces 
were located on this berm.  Evidence of a disintegrated left wing and left fuel tank was found 
distributed from the berm to the main wreckage area.  No evidence of fuel spillage was found in 
this area.  The main wreckage area included both engines, the right wing, fuselage and 
empennage.  The left wing had been sheared off about six feet from its fuselage interface.
No evidence of fire, explosion, or in-flight breakup was found.  All primary and 
secondary flight control surfaces were accounted for at the accident site.  No evidence was 
found to indicate a flight control deficiency.   Preimpact flap positions could not be determined.  
The main landing gear was found in the retracted position.
An examination of the left engine did not reveal any evidence of catastrophic failure.  A 
small amount of a clear blue liquid that resembled the color, smell and viscosity of 100 low lead 
aviation fuel was drained from the carburetor inlet line.  An examination of the fuel filter 
revealed that it was free of contamination or blockages.  
An examination of the right engine did not reveal any evidence of catastrophic failure.  
About a cup of a clear blue liquid that resembled the color, smell and viscosity of 100 low lead 
aviation fuel was drained from the carburetor inlet line.  An examination of the fuel filter 
revealed that it was free of contamination or blockages.  
The right wing had separated from the fuselage and was found lying parallel to the 
longitudinal axis of the fuselage.  The root of the wing was raised about 24 inches above the 
Page 9 of 14SEA96FA039
ground, and the tip of the wing was resting on the ground.  The fuel cell within the right wing 
was not compromised.  About 125 gallons of fuel was pumped out of the right wing tank.  
An examination of the fuel outlets for both wings, as well as the fuel baffles, did not 
reveal evidence of malfunction or blockage.
An examination of the cockpit revealed the following switch positions on the overhead 
fuel panel:  
Right fuel tank valve switch : CLOSED (switch guard open) Left fuel tank valve switch:  
CLOSED (switch guard open) Crossfeed valve switch : OPEN (switch guard open) Emergency 
Power Off switch: NORMAL (switch guard closed)
The pilot stated that the cockpit had been secured prior to egressing the airplane.  Both the 
portable breathing oxygen bottle and airplane's oxygen supply had been depleted.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Both pilots voluntarily submitted to a drug screen test immediately after the accident at 
the request of Salair management.  Specimens were collected at Deaconess Medical Center in 
Spokane and were analyzed by Virginia Mason Medical Center in Seattle, Washington.  
According to the reports of results of the drug screen (attached), negative results were reported 
for both pilots.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Additional detailed examinations and functional tests of the airplane's fuel system 
components were performed by the Safety Board at facilities operated by Discount Aircraft 
Salvage in Deer Park, Washington, on February 21, 1996, and April 25, 1996.
Fuel Boost Pumps.
Both fuel boost pumps were powered up from a 24-volt battery and were able to provide 
positive fuel flow with no deficiencies noted.  
Engine-driven Fuel Pumps.
The left engine-driven fuel pump was spun with a hydraulic power tool and was able to 
pump one gallon of fuel in 18 seconds with no deficiencies noted.
The right engine-driven fuel pump was seized; however, its frangible drive coupling was 
found intact. The aft backing plate of the pump was missing and the four bolts that held the 
plate to the pump housing were fractured almost flush with the housing.  An examination of 
the pump was performed by the Safety Board's Materials Laboratory Division.  According to 
the metallurgist's factual report (attached):
Visual examination of the bolt fractures...disclosed no evidence of 
preexisting cracking.  The lower 2 bolt fractures were damaged by post fracture 
mechanical smearing.  However, deformation of the bolt shafts within the housing 
were consistent with the face plate moving right (outboard) relative to the housing.  
The upper bolts contained fracture surfaces and deformation consistent with 
shear fracture as if the face plate was moving outboard relative to the 
housing.  The missing face plate allowed for examination of the exposed vanes in the 
pump.  One of the vanes was out of its slot and moved aft.  This out of slot vane 
was wedged between the internal bore of the pump and the inboard surface of a 
Page 10 of 14SEA96FA039
diametrically opposite vane that was still within its slot.  Such wedging 
appeared to have caused seizure of the pump vanes from rotation within the 
housing.
Fuel Boost Pump Switches.
The circuit continuity of both left and right cockpit boost pump switches were tested 
with a hand-held Multimeter while installed in the airplane.  Continuity from both switch 
circuits was intermittent.  The switches were removed and disassembled.  A minute amount of 
a grayish-black material was found on the switch contacts and inside the switch housing.  A 
chemical analysis of a sample of the material was performed (report attached).  Results were 
inconclusive; however, it was determined that the material was not nicotine.
The switches were then reassembled and tested at facilities operated by the Honeywell 
Micro Switch Division in Freeport, Illinois, with voltage and current values that are similar to 
those generated by an aircraft electrical system.  Results of the test (attached) indicate that the 
switches operated with no anomalies noted. It was determined that the left switch was 
manufactured in April 1956 and the right switch was manufactured in April 1963.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Previous Accidents.
Salair was involved in two previous fatal accidents during a two-year period preceding 
this accident.  The first fatal accident occurred on March 18, 1994, at the Spokane International 
Airport (NTSB Accident Case No. SEA94FA085).  The accident involved a Salair Douglas DC-
3C that collided with terrain shortly after takeoff.  The collision occurred after the second pilot 
reported that the flight was returning to the airport with the right engine shut down.  The 
Safety Board ruled that the probable cause of the accident was "the failure of the pilot-in-
command to maintain airspeed."  The Board also ruled that the contributing factors to the 
accident were "[right engine] cylinder fatigue, dark night and stall encountered." 
The second fatal accident occurred on June 27, 1995, in the vicinity of La Romana, in the 
Dominican Republic (NTSB Accident Case No. MIA95RA162).  The accident involved a Salair 
Convair  340 that had departed from Santa Domingo, Dominican Republic, on an 
international, nonscheduled cargo flight.  After departure, the crew reported that they were 
experiencing problems and were returning to Santo Domingo.  The airplane's left engine failed 
and caught fire.   The airplane impacted terrain and was destroyed.  The accident was 
investigated by Dominican Republic Aviation Authorities.  According to their report, the cause 
of the accident was the flightcrew's failure to properly utilize emergency procedures, and the 
mechanical failure of the left engine.
Military Safety Supplement.
On April 26, 1972, the United States Air Force (USAF) issued a Safety Supplement 
(attached) to modify the flight manual for the C-131D and C-131E aircraft.  According to Tracor 
Flight Systems, these military aircraft are similar to the Convair Model 340/340 type aircraft.  
The purpose of the safety supplement was "to provide additional information concerning the 
fuel system and cross-wind landing."  According to the Safety Supplement:
    The investigation of a recent...incident revealed that      fuel 
starvation to the low wing engine can occur during      prolonged cross control, cross-
wind approaches.  Flight      tests during similar controlled conditions confirmed      
Page 11 of 14SEA96FA039
that with as much as 900 lbs [150 gallons] per      tank...fuel 
remaining, bank angles of 15 degrees or     more in any cross control situation will 
cause fuel      starvation in approximately one minute.
The Safety Supplement requires that the following notes and warning be added to the C-131D 
and C-131E flight manuals:
                                       NOTE
    Due to the location of the wing fuel outlets, fuel      starvation of an 
engine could occur during cross     control flight with less that a full load of fuel.  
                              WARNING
    Extreme wing-low cross control attitudes for prolonged      periods of 
time can cause fuel starvation of the low      wing engine due to fuel flowing away 
from the wing fuel      outlet.  Tests have shown that with as much as 900      
pounds per tank (1800 pounds total) fuel remaining,     bank angles of 15 
degrees or more in any cross control     situation will cause fuel starvation in 
approximately      one minute.
This information was not contained in the Salair Convair 340 Airplane Operating Manual or 
any Salair checklists or documents.   No evidence was found to indicate that the information 
was disseminated to other Convair operators.   According to Tracor Flight Systems, the 
operation of USAF aircraft and the information contained in the USAF technical order is 
governed and controlled by the USAF.  The information contained in the USAF technical 
orders is not the same as that in an FAA approved flight manual.  If Convair was never officially 
notified of the accident, or requested to participate in the investigation or informed of the 
cause, it would have been impossible for them to disseminate any information regarding the 
accident to any civilian operator.
Convair 640/340D Fuel System Limitations.
According to Tracor Flight Systems, the Convair Model 640 (also designated as the 
340D) has a similar airframe as the Convair 340, with some changes in the fuel distribution 
system.  The Convair 640 is a conversion  (via FAA Supplemental Type Certificate) of the 
Convair 340/340 which installed Rolls-Royce Dart MK 542-4 turboprop engines in place of the 
Pratt & Whitney piston engines.  
An examination of the FAA Approved Flight Manual for the Convair 340D revealed the 
following:
When operating with very low fuel quantity during abnormal flight conditions, 
it may be possible for  the fuel tank outlets to become uncovered resulting in air 
ingestion into the engine fuel system
Air in the engine fuel system can cause engine power fluctuations or flame out.
                            1.  In turbulent air with very low fuel and both engines operating, open the                                   
crossfeed valves and leave both boost pumps "on."                             2.  When operating with very 
low fuel during single engine operation, open                                   crossfeed valves and leave 
both boost pumps "on."  Keep wings as level as                                   possible.
This information is not contained in any Convair 340 manuals.
Page 12 of 14SEA96FA039
Wreckage Release.
             The aircraft wreckage was released to Mr. Gary Valkenaar, Spokane, Washington, on 
August 12, 1996.  Mr.Valkenaar is representing the registered owner of the airplane.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/10/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
5194 hours (Total, all aircraft), 817 hours (Total, this make and model), 4962 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 33 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 21 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 6 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Convair
Registration:
N358SA
Model/Series:
340 340
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
153
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/19/1995, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
48000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
21 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8642 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
R-2800-CB16
Registered Owner:
SALAIR, INC.
Rated Power:
2400 hp
Operator:
SALAIR, INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Supplemental
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
SLIA
Page 13 of 14SEA96FA039
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GEG, 2372 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1856 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
30°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 600 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
30°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-7°C / -8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
DEER VALLEY, AZ (DVT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 (GEG)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1420 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class B
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JEFFREY    B GUZZETTI
Adopted Date:
05/23/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVID   AVEY; SPOKANE, WA
BRUCE   SALERNO; SPOKANE, WA
LARRY   DAVIS; MOJAVE, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 14 of 14SEA96FA039
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
