Page 1 of 15
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Calhoun, KY
Accident Number:
ERA12FA262
Date & Time:
04/01/2012, 1600 CDT 
Registration:
N9448Q
Aircraft:
BEECH 58
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot was departing his home airport to fly to another airport to refuel the airplane. 
Witnesses reported that the airplane lifted off from the 1,800-foot-long grass runway; however, 
none of the witnesses observed the airplane crash shortly after takeoff. The airplane rolled left 
and impacted the ground inverted in a wooded area near the departure end of the runway; 
there was no postcrash fire.
Examination of the flight controls revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction. 
Damage to one of the right engine propeller blades was consistent with engine power at impact, 
whereas the left engine propeller blades showed no evidence of power at impact. Thus it is 
likely that the left engine experienced a total loss of power just after takeoff, which the pilot 
was unable to control. Both engines were removed, transported to the manufacturer™s facility, 
and test run with no mechanical discrepancies noted. 
Rust-colored water was detected in various fuel system components from both engines. 
Further, the strainer drain lines and outer tank drains in both engines™ fuel systems were 
partially blocked by rust-colored debris.  Postaccident examination revealed evidence of long-
term water contamination of both engines™ fuel systems due to leakage past the fuel caps, which 
are normally replaced on an ﬁon-conditionﬂ basis during maintenance. The engine failure was 
likely due to the water contamination in the fuel system, which was not detected by the pilot 
during the preflight inspection. 
Further, the leaking fuel caps most likely existed, but went undetected, when the airplane™s 
most recent annual inspection was performed about 4 months earlier. A review of airplane 
maintenance records revealed that the only entry related to the fuel filler caps since the 
airplane was manufactured in 1972 was dated July 2010, at which time the left fuel filler cap 
was replaced and an outer o-ring of the incorrect dimension was installed. In April 2011, as a 
result of a 2008 investigation of a Canadian registered Beech 58 airplane that had water enter 
the fuel tank due to deteriorated fuel filler cap o-rings, the manufacturer revised the 
maintenance manual of Beech 55 and 58-series airplanes to require fuel cap overhaul. 
Maintenance manual guidance in effect when the accident airplane™s most recent annual 
Page 2 of 15ERA12FA262
inspection was performed excluded the accident airplane (by serial number) from this 
overhaul.  Since this accident, the manufacturer has revised its Beech 55 and 58 maintenance 
manuals to include the fuel cap overhaul requirement for all potentially affected airplanes, 
including the accident airplane. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the pilot to maintain airplane control after experiencing a loss of power from the 
left engine due to water contamination of the fuel system. Contributing to the accident was the 
pilot™s inadequate preflight inspection of the airplane and maintenance personnel™s inadequate 
annual inspection, because both failed to detect the long-term water contamination of the fuel 
system and the deteriorated outer o-rings on both fuel caps. Also contributing to the water 
contamination of the fuel system was the inaccurate information and instructions in the 
airplane maintenance manual pertaining to overhaul requirements of the fuel filler caps.
Findings
Aircraft
Scheduled maint checks - Inadequate inspection (Factor)
Maintenance/inspections - Related maintenance info (Factor)
Directional control - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Preflight inspection - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 15ERA12FA262
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2012, about 1600 central daylight time, a Beech 58, N9448Q, registered to and 
operated by a private individual, crashed shortly after takeoff from Woosley Field Airport 
(96KY), Calhoun, Kentucky. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no 
flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal flight from 
96KY to Madisonville Municipal Airport (2I0), Madisonville, Kentucky. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage and the private pilot, the sole occupant was fatally injured. The flight was 
originating at the time of the occurrence.
The purpose of the flight was for the pilot to fly to 2I0 for fuel.
Two witnesses reported to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector-in-charge 
(IIC) that they observed the airplane takeoff and noted the airplane became airborne before 
being abeam a building on the north side of the runway. One witness also reported that after 
becoming airborne and before reaching tree height, the wings rocked then returned to wings 
level. The witness reported the airplane turned left and flew over trees on the south side of the 
runway. The witnesses who were familiar with the pilot reported he ﬁalwaysﬂ flew past the 
departure end of the runway then turned to fly over the neighborhood, and they considered it 
strange for him to turn before reaching the end of the runway.
Another witness reported observing the accident airplane being taxied to the approach end of 
runway 27, followed by staying there for a longer than normal period of time. While there, the 
witness heard run-up of the engines followed by seeing the airplane being positioned into 
alignment for takeoff. The witness further stated the airplane was on the takeoff roll and 
appeared to get airborne faster than normal. The witness estimated that the airplane became 
airborne abeam the pilot™s house, then she lost sight of the airplane but heard what she thought 
was the sound of an impact. She went inside her house and listened to her local scanner and 
heard nothing about the crash. Because she did not see any smoke, and not believing the 
airplane had crashed, she did not immediately report the crash. About 2246 that evening, she 
called the McClean County 911 Center, and reported observing the airplane takeoff.
Later that same day, because the pilot did not return as expected, a search was initiated. The 
wreckage was located about 2330.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 46, held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings airplane single land and 
instrument airplane. He also held a private pilot certificate with airplane multi-engine land 
rating which was limited to visual flight rules only. He was issued a third class medical 
certificate with no limitations or restrictions on April 30, 2010.
Review of the pilot™s third logbook that begins with an entry dated May 29, 2010, and ends with 
an entry dated December 10, 2011, revealed the carry forward time on the first page was 
recorded to be approximately 1,609 hours. Between those dates, he logged a total of 
approximately 138 hours, of which, approximately 117 hours were in multi-engine airplanes. Of 
the 117 hours in multi-engine airplanes, approximately 2 hours were logged in the accident 
airplane on the date of his airplane purchase (December 10, 2011). The approximately 2 hours 
of flight were from Middlesboro-Bell County Airport (1A6), Middlesboro, Kentucky, to the 
Page 4 of 15ERA12FA262
Madisonville Municipal Airport (2I0), Madisonville, Kentucky. The airplane hour meter 
reflected that the airplane had been operated approximately 5 hours since the pilot™s purchase 
on December 10, 2011.
A certified flight instructor reported that during the flight on December 10, 2011, the accident 
pilot had performed all of the maneuvers required for a flight review, so he endorsed the pilot 
logbook.
The pilot™s wife reported that her husband did not have any significant health issues. Review of 
his medical file from FAA located in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, revealed he had not previously 
reported any heart issues.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was manufactured in 1972 by Beech Aircraft Corporation as model 58, and was 
designated serial number TH-204. It was powered by two 285 horsepower Continental Motors, 
Inc., IO-520-C engines and equipped with Hartzell constant speed propellers.
The airplane was equipped with 172 gallon total capacity bladder type fuel tanks of which 166 
gallons are usable. Each wing contained three interconnected fuel cells for a total capacity of 86 
gallons per wing. The fuel cells consist of an inboard leading edge baffled cell, an outboard 
leading edge cell in which the fuel filler cap is installed, and a box section cell. Each wing fuel 
system has 3 drains consisting of one in the inboard aft section of the inboard leading edge 
baffled cell, the fuel strainer drain, and a drain in the aft inboard section of the box section cell.
The fuel system is an off/on/crossfeed selectable arrangement controlled from the cockpit via 
cable to a valve located in each respective wheel well. With the fuel selector in the on position, 
each engine receives its fuel supply from the inboard baffled cell, to the selector valve, strainer, 
airframe electric boost pump, then to the engine-driven fuel pump on the accessory section of 
the engine.
Review of the maintenance records that begin with the standard airworthiness certificate 
issuance entry in the 1st airframe logbook dated February 23, 1972, to the last entry in the 4th 
airframe logbook dated December 9, 2011, revealed only 1 entry specifically referencing 
replacement or repair of the fuel filler caps. The entry, dated July 2, 2010, indicates the left fuel 
cap was replaced with a serviceable unit and a new packing part number (P/N) MS29513-338 
was installed; the hour meter reading at that time was recorded to be approximately 778. There 
was no entry in the maintenance records indicating the right fuel cap was repaired, replaced, or 
overhauled since the airplane was manufactured.
The airplane was last inspected in accordance with an annual inspection on December 9, 2011, 
which was 1 day before the pilot purchased the airplane. The airplane total time at the time of 
the annual inspection was recorded to be approximately 5,542 hours, and the hour meter 
reading was 784.
The mechanic who performed the last annual inspection of the airplane reported he used 14 
CFR Part 43 Appendix D and the Beech 100-Hour or Annual Long Form Inspection Guide as 
references; however, he did not keep the copy of the Beech 100-Hour or Annual Long Form 
Inspection Guide which he marked on during the inspection signifying compliance with each 
inspection item. The mechanic further stated that discrepancies noted during the inspection 
were annotated on the invoice he provided to the airplane owner and subsequently to NTSB. A 
statement from the mechanic is an attachment to the public docket for this case.
Page 5 of 15ERA12FA262
The hour meter reading at the time of the accident was approximately 789.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A surface observation weather report taken at Owensboro-Daviess County Airport (OWB), 
Owensboro, Kentucky, on the day of the accident at 1556 hours local, or approximately 4 
minutes before the accident indicates the wind was from 230 degrees at 11 knots with gusts to 
16 knots, the visibility was 10 miles, and scattered clouds existed at 8,500 feet. The 
temperature and dew point were 31 and 17 degrees Celsius, respectively, and the altimeter 
setting was 29.68 inches of Mercury. The accident site was located about 205 degrees and 13 
nautical miles from OWB.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The Woosley Field Airport (96KY) is a private airstrip owned by the pilot and is equipped with 
a single grass runway oriented 09/27, which is listed as being 1,800 feet in length and 100 feet 
wide. The airport elevation was reported to be an estimated 465 feet. A steep drop-off in terrain 
elevation from the runway elevation was noted beyond the departure end of runway 27.
Trees border the south side of the runway beginning at 37 degrees 33.146 North latitude and 
087 degrees 16.360 minutes West longitude. Inspection of the trees revealed no evidence of 
tree contact.
Inspection of the airstrip and hangar on April 3, 2012, revealed no airplane parts on the 
runway and no evidence of fuel storage. Further inspection of the airstrip revealed tie down 
stakes associated an outside parking space; the pilot™s stepson reported his stepfather would 
park the airplane outside if intended to be flown soon.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT
The airplane impacted in a wooded area and came to rest inverted with the empennage 
elevated; the airplane was resting on a magnetic heading of approximately 250 degrees. The 
accident site was located at 37 degrees 33 minutes 03.9 seconds North latitude and 087 
degrees 16 minutes 37.2 seconds West longitude, or approximately 1000 feet and 225 degrees 
from the departure end of runway 27.
Examination of the airplane revealed all components necessary to sustain flight remained 
attached or were in close proximity to the main wreckage. There was no in-flight or postcrash 
fire noted. Flight control cable continuity was confirmed for roll, pitch, and yaw; the elevator 
and rudder flight control cables were cut to facilitate recovery of the airplane. All primary and 
secondary flight control surfaces remained attached at their respective attach points. Both 
engines remained attached and the right propeller remained attached to the engine while the 
left propeller was separated from the engine but found in the area of the left engine. The 
landing gear was extended and the flaps were symmetrically extended approximately 15 
degrees (approach setting). Both engines were removed and retained for further examination.
Examination of the fuel system of left wing revealed a section of the outer fuel cell with 
attached fuel cap was separated; no fuel was detected in the remaining cells of the wing. An 
aluminum fuel line from the auxiliary fuel pump to the fuel strainer was partially fractured; no 
fuel stains were noted in the area. Additionally, the spar web in that area was fractured. The 
fuel sump/strainer was not safety wired. Following removal of the fuel sump/strainer bowl, 
rust colored water was noted and the interior surface of the strainer bowl was heavy corroded. 
The strainer filter was also corroded. Disassembly of the fuel strainer drain line revealed it was 
Page 6 of 15ERA12FA262
nearly completely blocked internally by rust debris. Examination of the drain of the inboard 
baffled fuel cell revealed no obstructions, while inspection of the box section cell sump drain 
revealed the drain holes were plugged by unknown debris. The fuel selector was in the on 
position and there were no obstructions from the inboard cell to the engine. No obstructions 
were noted to the fuel vent system. The fuel cap and adapter were retained for further 
examination. Further examination of the left wing revealed the aileron trim measured 1.75 
inches extended, which equates to approximately 6 units tab trailing edge down (up and down 
limits are 12.5 units).
Examination of the right wing revealed fuel leakage was noted from the installed right wing 
fuel cap during recovery of the airplane. Approximately 11 gallons of blue colored fuel 
consistent with 100 low lead were drained from the right wing fuel tank. No fuel was noted at 
the fuel sump/strainer. Rust colored water was noted coming from the fuel sump/strainer 
during removal of the strainer bowl. Following removal of the fuel sump/strainer bowl, rust 
colored water was noted and the interior surface of the strainer bowl was heavy corroded. The 
strainer filter was also corroded. The fuel strainer drain line was nearly completely blocked 
internally by white powdery substance (consistent from corrosion) at the 90-degree fitting. A 
sample of liquid from the auxiliary fuel pump to the strainer then to the firewall contained fuel 
admixed with water. Examination of the drain of the inboard baffled fuel cell revealed no 
obstructions, while inspection of the impact damaged drain of the box section cell sump also 
revealed no obstructions. The fuel selector was in the on position and there were no 
obstructions from the inboard cell to the engine. No obstructions were noted to the fuel vent 
system. The fuel cap and adapter were retained for further examination.
Examination of the cockpit revealed the elevator trim indicator indicated 6 units airplane nose 
up, the aileron trim indicated neutral, and the rudder trim indicated 6 units airplane nose left. 
The left and right fuel selectors were in the on position, and both fuel boost pump switches 
were in the high position. Inspection of the single control throw-over control yoke revealed it 
was positioned to the left seat and found consistent with right roll input. The cockpit floor was 
crushed and clockwise displacement of the co-pilot™s rudder torque tube was noted. 
Examination of the rudder flight control system revealed the rudder interconnect rod was 
connected to the pilot™s rudder bellcrank; however, the rod was fractured near the attach point 
of the co-pilot™s rudder bellcrank. Further, the interconnect rod exhibited chafing associated 
with contact by a lighting hole of a structural member adjacent to the pilot™s rudder bellcrank.
Examination of the empennage revealed the left elevator trim actuator near the control surface 
revealed an extension between 1 1/8 to 1 3/16 inches, which corresponds to 7 to 8 degrees tab 
trailing edge down (limits are 10 units up and 25 units down). The right elevator trim actuator 
near the control surface measured 1.0 inch extension which corresponds to 2 to 3 degrees tab 
trailing edge down. Inspection of the rudder trim actuator near the control surface revealed an 
extension of 3 ¾ inches, which corresponds to 5 degrees trailing edge tab right (limits are 25 
left and right).
The fuel system components of both engines were examined to determine whether fuel or 
contaminants were noted. Testing of samples of fluid recovered from the fuel system 
components and lines in both engine compartments was performed with a new tube of ﬁSAR-
GELﬂ, which is an alcohol and water indicating paste. By design, a change to red indicates the 
presence of water and/or alcohol. Water/alcohol was detected in the samples taken at the left 
engine-driven fuel pump, left engine fuel strainer sump filter, and left engine-driven fuel pump 
Page 7 of 15ERA12FA262
drain line, while water/alcohol was detected in samples taken at the right engine fuel pressure 
line, right engine fuel metering unit, right engine fuel strainer sump filter, and right engine fuel 
boost pump to firewall. No water/alcohol was detected in a sample of blue colored fuel 
consistent with 100 low lead fuel drained from the right fuel tank. The water and fuel samples 
drained from the airplane™s fuel system were not further analyzed.
Both engines were removed from the airframe, and sent to the engine manufacturer™s facility 
for proposed engine runs. Impact damaged components of the left engine consisting of the 
starter adapter, starter, induction elbows, and engine mounts were removed and replaced. 
Also, the oil pump housing which was cracked was temporary repaired for the engine run. The 
crankshaft flange was fractured and missing a section consisting of approximately 1 ½ 
propeller mounting holes; circumferential cracks were noted on the exterior surface of the 
crankshaft aft of the crankshaft flange. Safety concerns pertaining to the cracked crankshaft 
precluded a full operational test of the engine, which was operated a total of approximately 9 
minutes. The engine was placed in the test cell with a test club propeller installed, started, and 
allowed to warm up. Magneto testing was performed at 2,100 rpm, each magneto drop was 
approximately 40 rpm, and full throttle rpm was recorded to be approximately 2,550 
(specification is 2,700 rpm). Throttle chop and throttle burst checks were performed twice, no 
discrepancies were noted. During the engine run, there was no oil pressure at the oil transfer 
collar; this was later attributed to impact damage to the nose section of the engine. Removal of 
the alternator to inspect the collar revealed no visible discrepancies. Post engine run, a 
differential compression check of each cylinder was performed at 80 psi; all cylinders were 69 
psi or greater.
Impact damaged components of the right engine consisting of the oil sump, inlet and outlet 
fittings of the mechanical fuel pump, inlet fitting of the metering unit, induction elbows, engine 
mounts, and exhaust risers for cylinder Nos. 1, 3, and 5 were removed and replaced. The top 
and bottom ignition leads for the No. 5 cylinder which were impact damaged were repaired. 
Additionally, a crack related to impact damage in the induction ﬁYﬂ was temporarily repaired. A 
circumferential crack in the crankshaft aft of the crankshaft flange was weld repaired in an 
effort to run the engine. Safety concerns pertaining to the cracked crankshaft precluded a full 
operational test of the engine, which was operated twice. The engine was placed in the test cell 
with a test club propeller, started, and allowed to warm up, but shut down after 4 minutes due 
to a fuel leak. The engine was started a second time and operated a total of 11 minutes. During 
the second engine run magneto testing was performed at 2,100 rpm, each magneto drop was 
approximately 60 rpm, and full throttle rpm was recorded to be approximately 2,572 
(specification is 2,700 rpm). Throttle chop and throttle burst checks were performed twice, no 
discrepancies were noted. During the engine run, there was no oil pressure at the oil transfer 
collar; this was later attributed to impact damage to the nose section of the engine. Post engine 
run, a differential compression check of each cylinder was performed at 80 psi; all cylinders 
were 70 psi or greater.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL
A postmortem examination of the pilot was not performed. Specimens for toxicological testing 
were not taken prior to embalming which began about 30 minutes after the body was received 
at the funeral home.
While no x-rays were performed, the coroner stated that based on his experience, the
Page 8 of 15ERA12FA262
right radius and ulna were fractured. He also said that 3 bones in the cervical vertebrae
were fractured. Bruising was noted on the abdomen and right side of the abdomen. The
coroner estimated that the pilot weighed 260 pounds. The skull was fractured about the left 
eye, and the left index finger was broken. He also had a possible broken right ankle.
After embalming, vitreous fluid, blood, and urine specimens were obtained at the request of 
the FAA/NTSB for toxicological testing.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens of the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The toxicology report stated testing 
for carbon monoxide, cyanide, and drug screen was not performed. The results were negative 
in vitreous for ethanol, while 2 mg/dL Isopropanol and 36 mg/dL Methanol were detected in 
vitreous. The blood and urine specimens were not in sufficient amounts for analysis.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
A review of the Beechcraft Baron B55/E55/58 and G58 Illustrated Parts Catalog (IPC), P/N 58-
590000-19, Section 28-10-00, Fuel Cap and Adapter, revealed two fuel cap assemblies are 
useable on the accident airplane. The applicable P/N™s are 96-380035-1, and 96-380035-3. 
The IPC further indicates that Beech fuel cap assembly P/N 96-380035-1 correlates to Shaw 
Aero Devices fuel cap assembly P/N 431-40, while Beech fuel cap assembly P/N 96-380035-3 
correlates to Gabb Special Products, Inc., fuel cap assembly P/N 37810-1. The Beech IPC for 
Beech fuel cap assembly P/N 96-380035-1 specifies the outer and inner packing or o-ring™s are 
P/N™s MS29513-338 and MS29513-10 or spares replacement P/N MS29513-010, respectively. 
The IPC for Beech fuel cap assembly P/N 96-380035-3 specifies the outer and inner packing or 
o-ring™s are P/N™s MS37617-339 and MS9021-110, or spares P/N AS3578-110, respectively. 
Outer packing or o-ring P/N 37617-339 is equivalent to packing or o-ring P/N MS29513-339.
Parker Hannifin (formerly Shaw Aero Devices, Inc.) purchased the Gabb Special Products, Inc., 
product line in 1975, and the last fuel cap of P/N 37810-1 was manufactured by Parker 
Hannifin in 1979.
Examination and operational testing of the fuel caps was performed at Parker Hannifin™s 
facility located in Naples, Florida. The left and right fuel caps installed on the airplane at the 
time of the accident were identified by raised markings on their cap bodies as Gabb Special 
Products, Inc., P/N 37810-1. The fuel caps were not serialized; therefore, the date of 
manufacture could not be determined. Operational testing of the fuel caps was performed by 
placing them as received into a manufactured adapter, and then placing water in the center of 
the fuel cap followed by pressurizing the adapter from below. Leakage from the cap outer 
perimeter or shaft lock is evidenced by bubbles. The acceptance test procedures (ATP) for the 
fuel cap specifies to examine the product, and pressure testing at 0.8 and 25.0 psig.
Examination of the left fuel cap and adapter revealed impact damage was noted to the radius 
adapter flange. Extensive embedded corrosion was noted on the sealing surface of the adapter. 
The handle (P/N 37656), did not remain flush with the base when pushed closed; the upper 
surface of the handle protruded slightly above the base and would not remain completely 
closed. Slight contact mark was noted on the base adjacent to the adapter flange bend. Damage 
to the adapter precluded testing of the cap and adapter as an assembly. The fuel cap as received 
was placed in a test fixture which was attached to a calibrated air supply. Water was poured 
onto the center of the fuel cap and the fixture was pressurized to 0.01 psig; leakage was noted. 
Page 9 of 15ERA12FA262
The fuel cap was pressurized to 0.02 to 0.03 psig; bubbles of air were noted from the lock P/N 
38038 and also at the outer seal. At 0.09 psig, leakage from the lock P/N 38028 and the entire 
perimeter of the fuel cap/test adapter was noted. The fuel cap/test fixture could not be 
pressurized greater than 5.0 psig because of excessive leakage noted from the lock and 
perimeter of the cap/test fixture. Air pressure was removed from the fixture and with the cap 
installed onto the test fixture, 100mL of water were poured onto the center of the fuel cap. The 
water drained into the test fixture in a total of 1 minute 36 seconds. As viewed while installed, 
the outer o-ring was hard and had embedded corrosion on the outer surface which contacts the 
adapter. The outer o-ring was removed from the base and was still pliable on the inner surface. 
No surface cracks were noted on the outer surface of the o-ring when it was deformed by hand. 
Inspection of the surface area of the outer o-ring of the base revealed it appeared to be in 
satisfactory condition, but was dirty (normal). An exemplar o-ring of the same P/N that was 
installed per the maintenance records on July 2, 2010, P/N MS29513-338 (incorrect for this 
fuel cap), was installed onto the base and the fuel cap was returned to the test fixture. The cap 
and test fixture were pressurized to 0.18 psig. Leakage was noted from the center of the lock 
and 3 areas of the cap perimeter. A new outer o-ring P/N MS29513-339 (correct for this fuel 
cap) was installed onto the base and the fuel cap was returned to the test fixture. The cap and 
test fixture were pressurized to 0.08 psig. Leakage was only noted from the center of the lock. 
At 5.0 psig, no leakage was noted around the cap perimeter; however, heavy leakage was noted 
around the center of the lock.
Further examination of the left fuel cap revealed initial attempts to remove the handle by 
normal disassembly methods were unsuccessful. The handle was submerged in penetrating 
fluid for greater than 1 hour in an attempt to remove it, but was unsuccessful. Because the 
handle pin P/N 38061 could not be removed and to facilitate complete disassembly of the fuel 
cap, the handle was cut in half from the finger recess towards the center of the lock shaft. 
Following cutting, a calibrated torque wrench was positioned on both halves of the cut handle 
to document the lifting force required to open the handle. Repeated testing revealed no 
detectable measurable force was required to open the handle beyond the unlock position. It 
should be noted that the ATP for this fuel cap does not specify this type of test. Complete 
disassembly of the fuel cap was then performed. The handle was worn on the radius portion 
that contacts the surface of the bearing plate (which resulted in the handle not remaining fully 
closed despite being fully pushed down and released). Examination of the inner o-ring revealed 
more visible cracks on the bottom surface, and the o-ring was flat on the bottom, sides, and 
inside diameter surfaces. The inner o-ring was hard and not pliable. The base, retainer, spring, 
and bearing plate were unremarkable. The fuel cap was reassembled using the existing base, 
retainer, spring, bearing plate, handle from the right fuel cap, and new outer and inner o-rings. 
The fuel cap was placed in the test fixture and pressurized to 25.0 psig. Only slight leakage was 
noted from the outer perimeter. Because an exemplar handle was not available, with new inner 
and outer or-rings installed, the left fuel cap would not pass testing to 25.0 psig due to the 
worn radius of the right handle. An adequate seal was obtained by pushing down on the handle 
(roughly simulating a handle that is seated properly). Inspection of the outer o-ring revealed 
the outer surface had a rough texture. The outer o-ring was measured with a ring gauge, and 
the ID was confirmed to be a ﬁ-338ﬂ P/N, which corresponds to the entry in the airframe 
maintenance records.
Examination of the right fuel cap and adapter revealed extensive embedded corrosion on the 
sealing surface of the adapter. The handle P/N 37656 did not remain flush with the base when 
Page 10 of 15ERA12FA262
pushed closed; the upper surface of the handle protruded slightly above the base and would not 
remain completely closed. Paint build-up was noted on the shaft of the lock. The outer o-ring 
exhibited a rough texture with embedded corrosion on the outer surface of the o-ring. The fuel 
cap as received was placed in a test fixture which was attached to a calibrated air supply. Water 
was poured onto the center of the fuel cap and the fixture was pressurized to 0.09 psig. 
Leakage was noted at the lock shaft and 1 area of the outer perimeter. At 2.35 psig, heavy 
leakage was noted at the lock shaft and some at the perimeter, while at 5.54 psig, heavy leakage 
was noted at the lock shaft and some at the perimeter which precluded testing at a higher 
value. The outer o-ring sealing surface area of the base appeared OK. The base did not exhibit 
evidence of a contact mark. The outer o-ring was removed from the base and was still pliable 
on the inner surface, but heavy surface corrosion was noted on the adapter sealing surface area 
of the o-ring. No surface cracks were noted on the outer surface of the o-ring when it was 
deformed by hand. An exemplar o-ring P/N MS29513-338 was installed onto the base of the 
fuel cap in an effort to determine the affect of an incorrect sized outer o-ring installed. The fuel 
cap was returned to the test fixture. The cap and test fixture were pressurized to 0.03 psig; 
leakage was noted from the perimeter. The pressure was increased and at approximately 0.07 
psig, leakage began at the shaft of the lock. At approximately 0.09 psig, leakage was noted at 
the shaft of the lock and perimeter, while at approximately 0.10 psig, leakage was noted at the 
perimeter. The exemplar outer o-ring P/N MS29513-338 was removed, and o-ring P/N 
MS29513-339 (correct for this fuel cap) was installed. The fuel cap was returned to the test 
fixture. The cap and test fixture were pressurized to 0.03 psi; leakage was noted from the 
perimeter. At 0.07 psig, leakage was noted from the shaft of the lock. At 0.91 psig, heavy 
leakage was noted at the shaft of the lock, while at 1.77 psig, heavy leakage was noted at the 
shaft of the lock and some at the outer perimeter. At 6.2 psig, heavy leakage was noted at the 
shaft of the lock and some at the outer perimeter. Further testing at a higher pressure was not 
feasible due to the leakage from the shaft of the lock. The fuel cap was completely disassembled 
and the inner o-ring was noted to be flat on the top, bottom, and inside diameter.
Further examination of the right fuel cap revealed the outside diameter of the inner o-ring was 
somewhat curved. Cracks were noted on the bottom side of the o-ring, which was hard but 
somewhat pliable. The radius of the handle was worn. The base, retainer, spring, and bearing 
plate were unremarkable. The fuel cap was reassembled using the existing base, retainer, 
spring, bearing plate, handle, and new outer and inner o-rings. The fuel cap was placed in the 
test fixture and pressurized to 25.37 psig. No leakage was noted at the shaft of the lock or outer 
perimeter. With new inner and outer o-rings installed, a calibrated torque wrench was 
positioned on the handle to document the lifting force required to open the handle. Repeated 
testing revealed no detectable measurable force was required to open the handle beyond the 
unlock position. It should be noted that the ATP for this fuel cap does not specify this type of 
test.
Dimensionally, o-ring P/N™s MS29513-338 and 37617-339/MS29513-339 have the same 
thickness; however, the inside diameter for P/N MS29513-338 is 3.124 to 3.076 inches, while 
the inside diameter for P/N 37617-339/MS29513-339 is 3.310 to 3.240 inches.
The Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB of Canada) tested the fuel caps from a 
Canadian registered Beech 58 airplane, registration C-GLAC, that was ditched in a river in 
British Columbia on September 17, 2008, following loss of power from the right engine shortly 
after takeoff. The TSB of Canada file number for the event was A08W0197, which according to 
the IIC, is not a public report. Following recovery of the airplane, a sample of water taken from 
Page 11 of 15ERA12FA262
the engine-driven fuel pump cavity was compared with the river water and the properties were 
different. The TSB of Canada requested testing of the fuel caps Parker Hannifin (formerly Shaw 
Aero Devices, Inc.) which revealed that at 0.5 psi applied to the test fixture, both fuel caps 
leaked past the axle and handle assembly. Both fuel caps were disassembled after testing which 
revealed missing parts, o-rings on both axles were cracked and broken, and both axle shafts 
had corrosion suggesting long term exposure to moisture. In September 2009, Transport 
Canada published Service Difficulty Advisory AV-2009-05, which outlined the discrepancies of 
flush mounted fuel caps from the September 2008 event, and the importance of proper 
maintenance of the fuel cap assemblies.
In December 2009, the FAA published Aviation Maintenance Alert No. 377, referencing 
Transport Canada™s Service Difficult Advisory AV-2009-05.
As the TSB of Canada investigation was ongoing, personnel from HBC along with personnel 
from Parker Hannifin, the current manufacturer of the Shaw Aero Devices flush mounted fuel 
caps, reviewed the then current HBC Maintenance Manual (MM) procedures for the Model 35, 
36, 55 and 58 series airplanes and the King Air Model 90, 100, 200, and 300 series airplanes in 
regards to the flush mounted fuel filler caps. These MMs were revised to include a note stating 
the following: ﬁInspect the fuel filler cap outer o-ring for flexibility, splits, cracks, or distortion. 
If the o-ring is damaged in any way, replace or overhaul the fuel filler cap.ﬂ This was to provide 
the user with a defined condition to allow the flush cap to be effectively evaluated for condition. 
After the revision was incorporated in the Baron 55 and 58 MM, specifically to section 28-10-
00, HBC realized that because of the note™s placement it may not be obvious to the user that 
this requirement was applicable to all Baron 55 and 58 airplanes. The applicable MM 
paragraphs for the other airplanes referred to read correctly. The Baron 55 and 58 MM, section 
28-10-00, was corrected to read as intended in the July 2012 MM change; the note was 
applicable to all serial number airplanes.
Inspection of the fuel filler cap is also specified in the Baron 55, 56TC and 58 100-Hour or 
Annual Long Form Inspection Guide. Section D of the guide titled Wings and Carry-Through 
Structure, item 7, which calls to inspect the fuel filler cap and fuel filler adapters, and 
references the Maintenance Manual Chapter 28-10-00, 201.
A review of the maintenance manual revealed the fuel caps used for the accident airplane are 
considered an on-condition item, and there is no procedure(s) described in the MM that a 
mechanic can perform/use to determine whether there is leakage past the fuel cap™s inner or 
outer packings or o-rings.
According to documents from 2 different airports, and information from the pilot™s wife, the 
accident airplane was fueled at 1A6 after the pilot took possession of it. The Middlesboro Bell 
County Aiport (1A6) Board Attorney reported that there were 2 fuel sales on the date the pilot 
took possession of the accident airplane (December 10, 2011). One sale was associated with his 
previous airplane, and the second sale was attributed to the accident airplane; both were 
associated with 100 low lead (100LL). The Board Attorney reported that the self- service fuel 
pump used to fuel both airplanes has a standard filtration system that is ﬁsumped™ regularly. 
Additionally, water absorbing filters were installed. The last servicing of the fuel tank before 
the fuel sale of December 10, 2011, was made on November 25, 2011. Between December 10, 
2011, and March 31, 2012, a total of approximately 127 fuel sales were made; there were no 
reported issues related to the quality of fuel. On February 13, 2012, a total of 50.0 gallons 
100LL fuel were purchased by the pilot at the Madisonville Municipal Airport, Madisonville, 
Page 12 of 15ERA12FA262
KY. The Madisonville Municipal Airport manager reported the water absorbing fuel filters are 
installed, and the last fuel load received prior to the fueling on February 13, 2012, was on 
October 12, 2011. The manager also reported that there have been no fuel issues prior to or 
since receipt of the fuel load. The pilot™s wife reported that her husband put the fuel from that 
sale into a portable container and transported that container to an airstrip located in 
Sacramento, KY.
Weight and balance calculations were performed using the latest empty weight of the airplane 
listed in the maintenance records (3,609.5 pounds), empty weight moment (291,322.74), and 
the weight of the pilot per medical records from his last medical visit of March 13, 2012 (276.6 
pounds), positioned at midpoint of the allowable seat positions (arm 78.5). Because the actual 
fuel load on board could not be determined, a fuel load of 13 gallons in each wing stipulated by 
the POH/AFM for minimum required for takeoff was used for calculation purposes. The 
calculations indicate the weight and center of gravity at the moment of engine start was 3,970.1 
pounds and 80.47 inches aft of datum, respectively. The center of gravity range about that 
weight is 74.01 to 86.01 inches aft of datum. Assuming all other variables remain the same, any 
increase in fuel load causes an increase in gross weight.
Calculations to determine takeoff roll distance and accelerate stop distance were performed 
using weather data listed in the Meteorological Information section of this report, and the 
estimated airplane weight at the moment of engine start. The takeoff distance chart in the 
POH/AFM stipulates that takeoff power is applied, the flaps are retracted, the landing gear is 
retracted at positive climb, the runway is paved, level, and dry, and lift off speed is 86 knots. 
Based on the estimated weight of (3,970 pounds), pressure altitude of 705 feet, temperature 31 
degrees Celsius, and headwind component of 9 knots, the takeoff roll distance from a paved, 
level dry runway would have been 1,200 feet. The accelerate stop distance chart in the 
POH/AFM stipulates that takeoff power is applied, the flaps are retracted, the cowl flaps are 
open, the runway is paved, level, and dry, and the decision speed for all weights is 86 knots. 
Based on the estimated weight of (3,970 pounds), pressure altitude of 705 feet, temperature 31 
degrees Celsius, and headwind component of 9 knots, the accelerate stop distance from a 
paved, level, dry runway would have been 3,100 feet. Neither chart have notes indicating how 
to adjust the distances for a grass runway or flap extension.
The airplane Pilot™s Operating Handbook and FAA Approved Airplane Flight Manual 
(POH/AFM) indicates that during a preflight inspection, the fuel sumps in the left and right 
wheel wells, and also the fuel drains in each wing are to be drained. Section VIII of the 
POH/AFM indicates that to open on a daily basis the snap-type fuel drains to purge any water 
from the system.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Loss of engine power (total)
Initial climb
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 13 of 15ERA12FA262
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Private
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/30/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/10/2011
Flight Time:
1747 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N9448Q
Model/Series:
58 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
TH-204
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/09/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
5 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5542 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-C
Registered Owner:
Daniel J. Woosley
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
Daniel J. Woosley
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 14 of 15ERA12FA262
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OWB, 407 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1556 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
25°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 8500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 16 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.68 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Calhoun, KY (96KY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Madisonville, KY (2I0)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1600 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Woosley Field Airport (96KY)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
465 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
1800 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
37.550833, -87.276944
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
08/13/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Matthew J Galica; FAA/FSDO; Louisville, KY
Paul Yoos; Hawker Beechcraft Corporation; Wichita, KS
Chris Lang; Continental Motors, Inc.; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
08/13/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=83261
Page 15 of 15ERA12FA262
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
