Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Moss Hill, TX
Accident Number:
CEN16FA346
Date & Time:
09/03/2016, 1900 CDT 
Registration:
N787MW
Aircraft:
BELLANCA 7ECA
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot and a passenger were conducting a local flight and performing aerobatics. 
Witnesses observed the pilot conducting "flybys" and "tricks" in the area. One witness reported 
observing the airplane complete "flips and spins" for about 10 minutes before the accident. 
Ground-based video footage depicted the airplane flying over the river at low altitude. The 
airplane pitched up and entered a steep climb. As the airplane reached the top of the climb, it 
yawed to the left and entered a near- vertical descent and gradual left turn. Shortly before 
impacting the river, the gradual left turn reversed abruptly into a right, descending turn. The 
airplane then impacted the river. A post-accident examination of the airframe and engine did 
not reveal any anomalies consistent with a pre-impact failure or malfunction.
According to a friend, the pilot was competent in spins and had received instruction in 
aerobatic maneuvers. However, the lack of a formal logbook training record with respect to 
aerobatics, the investigation could not determine the pilot's level of proficiency in such 
maneuvers.
Toxicological testing on the pilot was positive for cocaine and its metabolites; cocaethylene, a 
metabolite formed when cocaine is ingested with alcohol; and levamisole, a drug commonly 
used to "cut" street cocaine, in urine. Cavity blood was positive for methamphetamine and its 
metabolites. The absence of cocaine in the pilot's blood suggested distant usage. Accordingly, 
the acute effects of the drug had likely dissipated. The level of methamphetamine in the pilot's 
blood sample was low. As a result, the presence of any residual effects of the drug could not be 
determined. Based on the available information, the investigation was unable to determine 
whether the pilot was impaired, if at all, at the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 7CEN16FA346
The pilot's loss of control attempting to recover from a low-level aerobatic maneuver. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's decision to attempt the low-level maneuver which 
significantly reduced any margin for error.
Findings
Aircraft
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Use of medication/drugs - Pilot
Page 3 of 7CEN16FA346
Factual Information
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Abrupt maneuver
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On September 3, 2016, about 1900 central daylight time, a Bellanca 7ECA airplane, N787MW, 
impacted the Trinity River while performing low-altitude aerobatic maneuvers near Moss Hill, 
Texas. The pilot and passenger sustained fatal injuries. The airplane was substantially 
damaged. The airplane was registered to a private individual and operated by the pilot as a 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the accident site and the flight was not operated on a flight plan. The local flight originated 
from a private airstrip in Cleveland, Texas, at an undetermined time.
Witnesses observed the pilot conducting "flybys" and "tricks" in the area. One witness reported 
observing the airplane complete "flips and spins" for about 10 minutes before the accident. 
Ground-based video footage depicted the airplane flying over the river at low altitude. The 
airplane pitched up and entered a steep climb. As the airplane reached the top of the climb, it 
yawed to the left and entered a nearly vertical descent and gradual left turn. Shortly before 
impacting the river, the gradual left turn reversed abruptly into a right, descending turn. The 
airplane impacted the river in a nearly vertical, nose-down attitude and came to rest inverted 
and partially submerged in the river.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
26, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
5-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/01/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/13/2015
Flight Time:
454 hours (Total, all aircraft), 330 hours (Total, this make and model), 301 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 99 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 27 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 7CEN16FA346
The pilot's initial logbook entry was dated March 14, 2015; it was denoted as an "orientation 
flight" and was conducted in the accident airplane. His primary flight training was completed 
in the accident airplane, as well as Cessna 152 and 172 airplanes. The pilot was issued a private 
pilot certificate on July 13, 2015. He received a tailwheel airplane endorsement on July 14, 
2015. The logbook also contained a stall awareness/spin competency endorsement dated 
January 5, 2016. The logbook did not contain any entries that specifically noted instruction in 
aerobatic maneuvers. However, a friend of the pilot's family stated that the pilot had received 
instruction and was competent in basic aerobatic maneuvers.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELLANCA
Registration:
N787MW
Model/Series:
7ECA 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1976
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Aerobatic; Normal
Serial Number:
1177-76
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/01/2016, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
12 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1946 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-235-C1
Registered Owner:
Patrick J Falterman
Rated Power:
115 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records revealed that the current owner purchased the 
airplane in November 2014. The exact airplane total time could not be determined because the 
recording tachometer was damaged consistent with impact forces.
Page 5 of 7CEN16FA346
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
6R3, 150 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
12 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1855 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
295°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.95 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 24°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Cleveland, TX (6R3)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Cleveland, TX (6R3)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
30.271111, -94.799167 (est)
The airplane came to rest inverted and partially submerged in the Trinity River about 1/3 mile 
south of Highway 105. A small beach area was located along the bank of the river immediately 
south of the highway overpass. Both river banks were lined with low trees in the immediate 
vicinity of the accident site.
A post-accident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies 
consistent with a pre-impact failure or malfunction. A detailed summary of the airframe and 
engine examinations is included with the docket material associated with this accident case.
Medical And Pathological Information
Page 6 of 7CEN16FA346
An autopsy of the pilot was conducted at Forensic Medical Management Services in Beaumont, 
Texas. The pilot's death was attributed to blunt force injuries sustained in the accident.
The FAA Bioaeronautical Research Sciences Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, conducted 
forensic toxicology report stated:
No Carbon Monoxide detected in Blood (Cavity);
No Ethanol detected in Vitreous;
2.067 (ug/ml, ug/g) Benzoylecgonine detected in Urine
0.049 (ug/ml, ug/g) Benzoylecgonine detected in Blood (Cavity)
Cocaethylene detected in Urine
Cocaethylene NOT detected in Blood (Cavity)
Cocaine detected in Urine
Cocaine NOT detected in Blood (Cavity)
Ecgonine Methyl Ester detected in Urine
Ecgonine Methyl Ester NOT detected in Blood (Cavity)
Ibuprofen detected in Urine
Levamisole detected in Urine
Levamisole NOT detected in Blood (Cavity)
0.032 (ug/ml, ug/g) Methamphetamine detected in Blood (Cavity)
Methamphetamine detected in Muscle
Benzoylecgonine and ecgonine methyl ester are inactive metabolites of cocaine; cocaethylene is 
a metabolite that is only formed when cocaine is co-ingested with ethanol. Levamisole is 
commonly used to cut street cocaine. Ibuprofen is an over-the-counter analgesic commonly 
marketed with the names Advil and Motrin. Methamphetamine is available by prescription for 
the short-term treatment of narcolepsy and obesity, but is also commonly available on the 
street.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy Sorensen
Adopted Date:
06/13/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Carl C Thomas; FAA -- Flight Standards; Houston, TX
John Butler; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
11/30/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93940
Page 7 of 7CEN16FA346
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
