Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Louisburg, KS
Accident Number:
CEN15LA294
Date & Time:
07/01/2015, 2030 CDT 
Registration:
N44SN
Aircraft:
BOEING A75N1 (PT17)
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Controlled flight into terr/obj 
(CFIT)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot had been demonstrating the airplane to a prospective buyer, and they took a break 
from flying to talk. The pilot reported that he returned to the airplane, started the engine, and 
taxied it to the south end of the airstrip. He did not perform an engine run-up and did not use 
carburetor heat. He further stated that, when the airplane was 20 to 30 ft above the ground 
about midpoint of the 2,000-ft-long dry, grass runway, "it became evident" that the engine 
power was insufficient because the airplane had stopped climbing. The pilot said that the 
engine was turning but that it was not producing ﬁas much power.ﬂ The airplane™s nose was 
high, and the pilot did not see the approaching power lines. The airplane struck and severed 
the power lines, nosed down, and impacted a cornfield at the north end of the field. 
At the time of the accident, the temperature and dew point were conducive for the 
accumulation of carburetor icing at glide and cruise power settings. When asked about the 
possibility of carburetor ice, the pilot said he did not believe it was likely to have been a factor 
because the hot engine had only been shut down for about 30 minutes and it had only idled for 
a couple of minutes before takeoff. Further, the engine was operating at takeoff power, so it is 
unlikely that carburetor icing caused the loss of engine power. No anomalies were noted during 
the examination of the airframe and engine.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined during postaccident 
examinations.
Findings
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Contributed to outcome
Wire - Contributed to outcome
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN15LA294
Factual Information
On July 1, 2015, about 2030 central daylight time, a Boeing A75N1 (PT17) airplane, N44SN, 
collided with power lines after taking off from Random Ranch Airstrip, Louisburg, Kansas. The 
pilot, the sole occupant on board, was not injured. The airplane was substantially damaged. 
The airplane was registered to a private individual in Dakota Dunes, South Dakota, and was 
being operated by Aircraft Sales, Kansas City, Kansas, under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time of the accident, and no flight plan had been filed. The flight was originating at the time 
of the accident, and was destined for Miami County Airport (K81) Paola, Kansas.
In a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board's duty officer, the 
pilot said the airplane was on consignment by the owner and he had been flying in and out of 
Random Ranch airstrip, a rural agricultural airstrip, located at 3400 W. 311th Coldwater Rd. 
He had been demonstrating the airplane to a prospective purchaser. He shut down the engine 
and he and his passenger disembarked and conversed for a short period of time. The pilot then 
boarded the airplane, started the engine, and taxied to the south end of the airstrip. He did not 
perform an engine run-up and did not use carburetor heat, and departed solo to the north. 
After liftoff and about the midpoint of the 2,000-foot long dry grass runway and at an altitude 
of 20 to 30 feet above the ground, "it became evident" power was insufficient as the airplane 
had stopped climbing. He said the engine was turning but it was not producing "as much 
power." The nose was high and the pilot did not see the approaching power lines. The airplane 
struck and severed the power lines, nosed down, and impacted a cornfield at the north end of 
the field.
At the time of the accident, the temperature and dew point recorded at Johnson County 
Executive Airport (KOJC), Olathe, Kansas, located about 20 miles north of the accident site, 
were 28 degrees and 24 degrees Celsius (C.), respectively. Plotting these values on the Federal 
Aviation Administration's (FAA) Special Aviation Information Bulletin (SAIB) CE-09-35 
"Carburetor Icing Prevention" chart, the data point lies at the intersection of the blue (icing at 
glide and cruise power) and green (serious icing at glide power) envelopes. When asked about 
the possibility of carburetor ice, the pilot said he did not believe it was likely to have been a 
factor because the hot engine had been shut down for about 30 minutes and it only idled for a 
couple of minutes before takeoff.
No anomalies were noted during the examination of the airframe and engine.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial)
Controlled flight into terr/obj (CFIT) (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 3 of 5CEN15LA294
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
46
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Balloon
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/23/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 8000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 100 hours (Total, this make and model), 100 hours 
(Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BOEING
Registration:
N44SN
Model/Series:
A75N1 (PT17) 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Aerobatic
Serial Number:
75-2763
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/03/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8403 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
W670-6N
Registered Owner:
James W. Miller
Rated Power:
220 hp
Operator:
James W. Miller
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN15LA294
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KOJC, 1096 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2037 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
350°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
200°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.78 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 24°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Random Ranch, KS (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Destination: 
Paola, KS (K81)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2030 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Random Ranch (NONE)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
1093 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2000 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
38.562500, -94.625278
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
11/05/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Richard Stevens; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
11/05/2015
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91497
Page 5 of 5CEN15LA294
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
