Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Galax Hillsville, VA
Accident Number:
ERA15LA257
Date & Time:
07/01/2015, 1704 EDT 
Registration:
N43503
Aircraft:
PIPER PA28
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The commercial pilot was conducting a cross-country personal flight and reported that the 
airplane was on the final approach leg of the traffic pattern when it impacted terrain short of 
the runway. The pilot stated that there were no mechanical malfunctions or failures with the 
airplane that would have precluded normal operation; however, he could not recall what 
occurred just before or during the accident sequence. The pilot-rated passenger noted that the 
airplane was low during the final approach and that he put his hand on the pilot's hand to add 
power but that the airplane impacted the ground about that time. 
Although the pilot indicated that he believed that the airplane might have descended due to a 
microburst, he noted that it was not raining at the time of the accident. Further, there was no 
evidence of any microburst activity within 10 miles of the accident site about the time of the 
accident and no indications of any outflow boundary or gust front.
An airplane performance study using GPS and reported wind data revealed that the pilot was 
slowing the airplane while on the downwind leg of the traffic pattern, and that, while turning 
onto the final approach leg of the traffic pattern, he continued slowing it while turning onto the 
base and final legs of the traffic pattern. While on the final approach leg of the traffic pattern, 
he allowed the airplane to slow to near the stall speed. It is likely that the airplane exceeded its 
critical angle-of-attack during the turn at low airspeed, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall 
and the airplane's subsequent impact with terrain short of the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 8ERA15LA257
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed while turning onto the final approach leg of 
the traffic pattern, which led to the airplane exceeding its critical angle-of-attack and 
experiencing an aerodynamic stall.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Attain/maintain not possible (Cause)
Angle of attack - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 8ERA15LA257
Factual Information
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On July 1, 2015, about 1704 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-151, N43503, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted terrain while on approach to Twin Country Airport 
(HLX), Galax Hillsville, Virginia. The commercial pilot sustained a minor injury and the pilot-
rated passenger was not injured. The airplane was privately owned and operated under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated from New 
River Valley Airport, Dublin, Virginia, about 1643, and was destined for HLX.
The pilot stated that after takeoff he flew towards HLX, and the wind direction favored landing 
on runway 19. He entered a midfield left downwind leg of the traffic pattern for runway 19, and 
when the airplane was "abeam the numbers," he lowered the flaps to the first notch (10 
degrees), went full rich on the mixture control, and descended 300 feet, but did not turn on 
carburetor heat. He turned onto the base leg and then onto a short final approach leg for 
landing. The airplane was 500 feet above ground level (agl) at an airspeed of 80 mph, and the 
next thing he knew they were on the ground. He indicated the engine was "running OK," and 
that it did not sputter or experience any type of power loss. He believed the airplane may have 
descended due to a microburst, and when asked if there was a rain shower nearby, he reported 
"no." He also indicated that when the airplane was low to the ground, the passenger put his 
hand on top of his, which was on the throttle control and added full power, but it was too late. 
He was asked if he stalled the airplane and reported that he did not. On the NTSB 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report form submitted by the pilot, he indicated 
there was no mechanical failure or malfunction with the airplane.
The pilot-rated passenger indicated that the pilot listened to the automated weather observing 
system (AWOS) prior to entering the traffic pattern and the winds were variable across the 
runway at 7 to10 mph. He indicated that the pilot entered the traffic pattern for runway 01 at 
3,400 feet mean sea level (msl) at an airspeed of 100 mph. The pilot then decided to fly across 
midfield to look at the windsock and elected to land on runway 19. The passenger indicated all 
seemed normal except for being lower than the traffic pattern altitude, but later reported that 
was typical for the pilot since he was a bush pilot in Alaska. The passenger became preoccupied 
with an I-pad as the flight continued, and noticed a drop in engine rpm as the pilot was turning 
onto the final approach leg of the traffic pattern. He looked up and saw terrain but did not see 
the runway. He looked quickly at the gauges and saw no irregularity and instantly grabbed the 
pilot's hand and pushed the throttle. He indicated that at almost the same time he felt a 
tremendous impact force. He and the pilot then exited the airplane after it came to rest.
A witness reported seeing the airplane fly over the runway at midfield in a steeper than normal 
left bank; the witness estimated the altitude to be between 200 and 250 feet agl. About 1 
Page 4 of 8ERA15LA257
minute later, the same witness was notified by an individual that the airplane may have 
crashed.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
70, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/26/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/28/2015
Flight Time:
21273 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model), 1 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N43503
Model/Series:
PA28 151
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1974
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
28-7415502
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2325 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3229 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320 Series
Registered Owner:
KEMPFER, ROGER L
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
KEMPFER, ROGER L
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 8ERA15LA257
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
HLX, 2694 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1655 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 4800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Unknown
Wind Direction:
240°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Unknown
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Dublin, VA (PSK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Galax Hillsvill, VA (HLX)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1643 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
An AWOS report taken at the accident airport at 1655, indicated the wind was from 240 
degrees at 7 knots, the visibility was 10 statute miles and broken clouds existed at 4,800, 
5,000, and 11,000 feet agl. The temperature and dew point were 25 and 16 degrees Celsius, 
respectively, and the altimeter setting was 30.00 inches of mercury. The AWOS observation 
did not detect any significant precipitation during the period. There was no indication of 
microburst activity (dry or wet) within 10 miles of the accident site, and no outflow boundaries 
were identified in the vicinity of the accident site.
The Roanoke/Blacksburg (RNK) morning and afternoon upper air soundings surrounding the 
period were also reviewed. The 1900 sounding depicted a destabilizing atmosphere with a 
Lifted Index of -3 and supported scattered thunderstorms and rain shower development during 
the afternoon period. The estimated cloud base was near 4,000 feet agl. Both soundings 
showed a light low-level wind shear environment below 800 feet agl with an approximately 15 
knots shear.
There were no pilot reports of low-level wind shear, but there was a report of moderate 
turbulence at 7,000 feet.
Page 6 of 8ERA15LA257
Airport Information
Airport:
Twin County Airport (HLX)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2694 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
19
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4204 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
36.772500, -80.821389 (est)
Additional Information
GPS Data
The airplane was equipped with a portable Garmin 396 GPS receiver, and although the pilot 
indicated he was not using it, the GPS receiver was retained and sent to the NTSB Vehicle 
Recorder Laboratory for read-out. The unit was downloaded and found to contain data 
covering the entire flight. Review of a plot of the GPS data points revealed the airplane 
proceeded to the destination airport and flew across the runway, then turned to the left and 
flew in a northerly direction east of the runway consistent with a downwind leg. While on the 
downwind leg of the traffic between 1703:07 and 1703:34, the groundspeed slowed from 80 
knots to 65 knots, or approximately 75 mph. The data indicated that the airplane turned onto 
the base leg of the traffic pattern and climbed slightly to 2,831 feet GPS altitude, or about 190 
feet above the runway elevation, then turned onto the final approach leg of the traffic pattern. 
It then descended to 2,618 feet (near ground level) and slowed to 62 knots groundspeed, or 
about 71 mph. The last data point with a valid groundspeed of 62 knots was at 1703:53; the 
airplane at that time was located about 470 feet from the approach end of runway 19.
Weight Information
Weight calculations were performed using the latest empty weight of the airplane provided by 
the pilot/owner (1477.2 pounds), and the weights of the pilot and pilot-rated passenger per 
Page 7 of 8ERA15LA257
their last medical examination of 174 and 261 pounds, respectively. The calculations also 
included the estimated fuel burn for the 21 minute flight subtracted from the full usable fuel 
load at takeoff, which resulted in a useable fuel load of approximately 272 pounds. The 
calculation indicated that at the time of the accident, the airplane gross weight was about 2,184 
pounds.
Stall Speed Information
According to the Pilot's Operating Manual (POM), based on the airplane's calculated weight at 
the time of the accident, the approximate power-off stall speed with no bank and flaps 
retracted was approximately 64 mph. The POM did not specify the stall speed at any flap 
setting other than retracted or fully extended.
Performance Study
According to the NTSB Performance Study which utilized data from the GPS receiver, and 
winds aloft of 7 knots from 240 degrees, the airplane was slowing on the downwind leg of the 
approach. At the last point before the airplane's turn onto the final approach leg of the traffic 
pattern, its equivalent airspeed with the winds was 65 mph. The next two calculated airspeeds 
showed the airplane continuing to slow through the turn. Based on the radius of turn between 
the downwind and final legs of the traffic pattern using 65 mph, the necessary bank angle was 
calculated to be about 27 degrees. Extrapolating stall speed based on a bank angle of 27 degrees 
resulted in 69 mph for flaps up and 62 mph for flaps down. The study indicated that the 
accident airplane was lighter than gross weight; therefore, the stall speed was estimated to be 2 
to 3 mph slower (67 and 60 mph), respectively.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
02/13/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Charles Monola; FAA/FSDO; Charleston, WV
Publish Date:
02/13/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91486
Page 8 of 8ERA15LA257
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
