Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Eden Prairie, MN
Accident Number:
CEN10LA188
Date & Time:
04/01/2010, 1440 CDT 
Registration:
N20FP
Aircraft:
BEECH 95
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that he had no recollection of the events leading up to the accident. The 
passenger reported that the airplanes' engines seemed to come up to full power during takeoff. 
The airplane lifted off about halfway down the runway; however, it didn't climb very well. The 
stall warning sounded just as the airplane was off the end of the runway, and the pilot's efforts 
to continue flight were unsuccessful. The right wing dropped, and the airplane descended and 
impacted the ground. A witness reported that the airplane's nose was pitched up 10 to 15 
degrees and the wings appeared to be level, as it was flying in ground effect about 10 feet agl. 
He noted that the engines seemed to be running without any obvious problems. A postaccident 
examination revealed a lack of compression on the right engine No. 4 cylinder. Further 
investigation determined that the intake valve spring on the cylinder had fractured. 
Metallurgical examination noted that the fracture surfaces exhibited features indicative of 
fatigue progression initiated by corrosion pitting. Corrosion pits and red rust deposits were 
observed on many areas of the spring. The fatigue initiation also coincided with longitudinal 
tooling marks consistent with the original forming of the spring. Maintenance records 
indicated the right engine had been overhauled nearly 2 years prior to the accident. The 
cylinders were replaced with new non-original equipment manufacturer (OEM) assemblies at 
that time. The replacement cylinder assemblies were furnished with the valves and valve 
springs installed. According to the pilot, the right engine had accumulated 18 hours since 
overhaul.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The fatigue failure of an intake valve spring on the right engine, which resulted in a partial loss 
of engine power on takeoff.
Page 2 of 6CEN10LA188
Findings
Aircraft
Recip eng cyl section - Failure (Cause)
Altitude - Attain/maintain not possible
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot
Page 3 of 6CEN10LA188
Factual Information
On April 1, 2010, about 1440 central daylight time, a Beech model 95, N20FP, impacted a 
flooded ravine about 2 miles south of Flying Cloud Airport (FCM), near Eden Prairie, 
Minnesota. The flight had departed from Runway 18 (2,691 feet by 75 feet, asphalt) at FCM. 
The pilot and passenger both sustained serious injuries. The airplane was registered to Fisher 
Air LLC, and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91, as a repositioning flight after avionics maintenance. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight, which was not operating on a flight plan. The flight was originating at 
the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that the purpose of the flight was to reposition the airplane from FCM to 
New Richmond Regional Airport (RNH), New Richmond, Wisconsin, after avionics work has 
been completed. He stated that he had no recollection of the events leading up to the accident.
The passenger stated that the engines seemed to come up to full power during takeoff. The 
airplane lifted off about halfway down the runway; however, it didn't climb very well. The stall 
warning sounded just off the end of the runway about 50 feet above ground level (agl). The 
pilot appeared to check the gear position and auxiliary fuel pump in an attempt to troubleshoot 
the problem. The pilot reduced the pitch attitude in an attempt to increase airspeed, but the 
airplane was unable to maintain altitude. The right wing dropped, and the airplane descended 
from an altitude of about 300 feet agl. It came to rest in a flooded area at the bottom of the hill 
off the end of the runway. 
A witness reported that the accident airplane's nose was pitched up about 10 to 15 degrees. The 
wings appeared to be level and it was flying in ground effect about 10 feet agl. He noted that the 
engines seemed to be running, and he did not recall hearing any sputtering or seeing any 
smoke. A hill dropped off past the end of the runway. The airplane came to rest upright about 
30 yards out into a flooded area. The wings were facing north and the fuselage was canted 
about 30 degrees relative to the wings. The nose section was separated from the remainder of 
the fuselage and the windshield was broken out. There did appear to be fuel present at the 
accident site.
Examination of the right engine revealed a lack of compression on the #4 cylinder. Further 
investigation determined that the #4 cylinder intake valve spring was fractured into 5 pieces. 
Metallurgical examination noted that some of the spring fracture surfaces had been damaged 
due to mechanical contact. However, the undamaged fracture surfaces exhibited features 
indicative of fatigue progression. Fatigue initiation was located at corrosion pits on the surface 
of the spring. Similar corrosion pits and red rust deposits were observed on many areas of the 
spring. The fatigue initiation also coincided with longitudinal tooling marks consistent with the 
original forming of the spring.
The accident airplane was a 1958 Beech model 95 (s/n TD-14). The airplane was powered by 2 
Lycoming O-360-A1A engines, each capable of developing 180 horsepower. According to the 
maintenance logs, an annual inspection was completed on October 15, 2009, at 7,078.1 hours 
total airframe time. The left engine (s/n L515-36) was overhauled in July 1990. The right 
engine (s/n L2076-36) was overhauled in June 2008. The logs indicated that at the time of the 
annual inspection, the left and right engines had accumulated 1,837.0 hours and 2.1 hours 
since overhaul, respectively. On the NTSB accident report, the pilot noted that the left and 
right engines had accumulated 1,940 hours and 18 hours since overhaul, respectively. 
Page 4 of 6CEN10LA188
A flight log, entitled "Fisher Air Œ N20FP," was provided to the NTSB with the aircraft 
documentation. The log included flight times dated January 7, 2010, through April 1, 2010; the 
date of the accident. The flight time noted in that log totaled 14.1 hours.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (partial)
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/25/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/11/2010
Flight Time:
11320 hours (Total, all aircraft), 55 hours (Total, this make and model), 11220 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6CEN10LA188
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N20FP
Model/Series:
95 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
TD-14
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/05/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7078 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O&VO-360 SER
Registered Owner:
Fischer Air LLC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Fischer Air LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FCM, 906 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.45 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Minneapolis, MN (FCM)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
New Richmond, MN (RNH)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1438 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Flying Cloud Airport (FCM)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
906 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2691 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 6 of 6CEN10LA188
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
44.827500, -93.458611 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy Sorensen
Adopted Date:
06/20/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Thomas A Hodnefield; FAA-Minneapolis FSDO; Minneapolis, MN
Publish Date:
06/20/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75643
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
