Page 1 of 4
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Stony River, AK
Accident Number:
ANC10TA028
Date & Time:
04/02/2010, 1600 AKD 
Registration:
N82732
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Public Aircraft
Analysis 
The private pilot was on a public use wildlife patrol in a ski-equipped airplane when the 
accident occurred. The pilot reported that he landed on a frozen lake to make contact with the 
owner of a wilderness lodge, and that while taxiing from landing the airplane slid off the taxi 
area and into trees. The pilot said that he attempted to determine wind conditions on the 
ground and elected to land upslope to the east. He reported that his landing slide was longer 
than anticipated and he thought about going around. After almost coming to a stop, he said 
that he steered the airplane to the right edge of the landing area and attempted to use power to 
blow the tail of the airplane around; however, when he added power the skis failed to catch and 
the left wing struck a tree. Upon exiting the airplane he realized that he had landed downwind 
and that the wind appeared to be about 6 knots. The pilot did not report any mechanical 
anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident. The pilot noted substantial damage to both 
wings.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during taxi from landing, 
which resulted in the airplane sliding into trees.
Findings
Aircraft
Directional control - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Snow/slush/ice covered surface - Contributed to outcome
Page 2 of 4ANC10TA028
Factual Information
On April 2, 2010, about 1600 Alaska daylight time, a ski-equipped Piper PA-18-150 airplane, 
N82732, sustained substantial damage when it collided with trees during taxi from landing on 
a frozen lake, about 30 miles east-southeast of Stony River, Alaska. The airplane was being 
operated by the State of Alaska, Department of Public Safety, as a visual flight rules 
(VFR)public use wildlife patrol under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred. The 
solo private pilot was not injured. The flight departed McCarthy, Alaska, about 1100.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) on 
April 5, a representative of the State of Alaska, said the pilot reported that he had landed on a 
frozen lake to make contact with the owner of a wilderness lodge. He said while taxiing from 
landing the airplane slid off the taxi area and into trees. The pilot reported substantial damage 
to both wings.
In a written report dated April 6, the pilot wrote that after attempting to determine wind 
conditions on the ground he elected to land upslope to the east. He reported that his landing 
slide was longer than anticipated and he thought about going around, but did not. He 
continued that after almost coming to a stop he steered the airplane to the right edge of the 
landing area, and attempted to use power to blow the tail of the airplane around, and taxi to a 
safe area to park. He said when he added power to blow the tail around and turn to the right, 
the skies failed to catch and the left wing struck a tree causing the airplane to pivot to the left 
and the right wing struck another tree. The pilot said upon exiting the airplane he realized he 
had landed downwind, and the wind appeared to be about 6 knots from the west. The pilot did 
not report any mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident.
History of Flight
Taxi-from runway
Loss of control on ground (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 3 of 4ANC10TA028
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N82732
Model/Series:
PA-18-150 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18-7709182
Landing Gear Type: 
Ski; Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/17/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6316 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C126 installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320 SERIES
Registered Owner:
STATE OF ALASKA
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
STATE OF ALASKA
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
Department of Public Safety
Operator Designator Code:
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
McGrath, AK (PAMC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Stony River, AK 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1100 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
61.563611, -156.230556
Page 4 of 4
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lawrence Lewis
Adopted Date:
07/01/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Steve Stewart; FAA FSDO-03; Anchorage, AK
Publish Date:
07/01/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75567
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
