National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: VALKARIA, FL
Accident Number: MIA97LA078
Date & Time: 02/01/1997, 1226 EST
Registration: N525V
Aircraft: RICHARDS VELOCITY 173 RG
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the engine lost power while maneuvering.
According to the pilot's statement, 'everything was operating normal, 2500 RPM, 155 knots...2,000 [feet] MSL.'
He then turned north and 'the engine quit abruptly...no sputtering or gradual loss of RPM.'
He attempted a force landing at a nearby airport 'in hopes of deadsticking [sic] it onto the runway.'
The flight landed about 1/2 mile short of runway 14, and impacted into palmettos and pine trees.
The airplane's engine was examined and run.
The examination and engine run did not reveal any discrepancies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: a loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On February 1, 1997, about 1226 eastern standard time, a homebuilt, Velocity 173 RG, N525V, registered to a private owner, was substantially damaged during a forced landing, near Valkaria, Florida.
The private-rated pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed in the vicinity, and no flight plan had been filed.
The local personal flight was being conducted in accordance with Title 14 CFR Part 91.
While maneuvering, the pilot stated the airplane's engine lost power.
The pilot attempted a forced landing back to the airport, and struck trees about 1/2 mile short of the runway.
According to the pilot's statement, after departure he turned towards a practice area near Valkaria Airport.
He stated that, "everything was operating normal, 2500 RPM, 155 knots...2,000 [feet] MSL."
He then turned north and contacted the ATC Tower at Melbourne Airport that he was inbound for landing, when "immediately the engine quit abruptly...no sputtering or gradual loss of RPM."
He turned the airplane back towards Valkaria Airport, "in hopes of deadsticking [sic] it onto the runway."
The flight landed short of runway 14, and impacted into palmettos and pine trees.
The engine from N525V was examined and run at a private hangar at the Melbourne Airport, under the supervision of the FAA, on February 12, 1997.
The examination and engine run did not reveal any discrepancies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
