National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: EL DORADO, KS
Accident Number: CHI97LA061
Date & Time: 02/01/1997, 1115 CST
Registration: N2898R
Aircraft: Cessna 182K
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that during the landing roll, the airplane veered to the right.
He stated he was unable to correct the direction of travel.
The airplane continued off the right side of the runway and into a 5 to 6 foot deep ditch located approximtely 30 feet from the edge of the runway.
Postaccident inspection of the brake system failed to reveal any mechanical failure/malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane.
A factor relating to the accident was: the ditch, which the airplane contacted.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On February 1, 1997, at 1115 central standard time, a Cessna 182, N2898R, operated by a private pilot collided with a ditch following a loss of directional control while landing on runway 16 at the El Dorado Thomas Airport, El Dorado, Kansas.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the pilot was not injured.
The flight originated from Ponca City, Oklahoma, at 1035 cst.
The pilot reported that after touching down on runway 16 the airplane began to veer to the right side of the runway.
He reported that he was unable to straighten the direction of travel.
The right main landing gear traveled off the side of the runway into soft terrain.
The pilot reported that it seemed as if the right wheel was sliding and that this action pulled the airplane even more to the right.
The airplane traveled into a ditch located approximately 30 feet off the side of the runway.
The ditch was described as being 5 to 6 feet deep.
The pilot reported the airplane heading was almost perpendicular with the ditch when it contacted it.
The airplane was removed from the ditch by an A&P/IA.
He stated that the wheels turned smoothly with no binding noted as the airplane was moved.
The A&P/IA further inspected the brake system and reported he was unable to find any mechanical discrepancies which would have resulted in the loss of directional control.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 56, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
