National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ORLANDO, FL
Accident Number: MIA97LA079
Date & Time: 02/01/1997, 1400 EST
Registration: N599T
Aircraft: Beech V35
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The flight instructor (CFI) and private pilot had reviewed airwork, turns, stalls, slow flight, take off and landings.
They elected to practice procedures for a simulated engine failure.
According to the CFI, 'on go-around, engine failed to produce power, resulting in forced landing....'  The FAA inspector stated that during the approach, they were at a fast landing speed and high on the approach.
At an altitude of about 100 feet above the ground, they attempted to go around and advanced the throttle, but the engine did not respond.
Subsequently, during the forced landing, the airplane collided with a tree.
The engine was removed from the airframe, and a test run was conducted under the supervision of the FAA.
The engine run revealed no discrepancies.
The private pilot did not submit a statement to explain her account of the events.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: loss of engine power for undetermined reason(s).
Trees in the emergency landing area were a related factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 1.
EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - SIMULATED 2.
GO-AROUND - INITIATED 3.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On February 1, 1997, about 1400 eastern standard time, a Beech V35, N599T, registered to a private owner, was substantially damaged while on approach, near Orlando, Florida.
The airline transport-rated pilot, certified flight instructor (CFI), and a private pilot were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed in the vicinity, and no flight plan had been filed.
The local training flight originated at 1300, and was being conducted in accordance with Title 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the CFI's statement he and the private pilot had reviewed "airwork, turns, stalls, slow flight, take off and landings."
On the accident landing he said, "...conducting simulated engine failure...on go-around, engine failed to produce power, resulting in forced landing...." The FAA inspector stated that on this approach they were at a "fast" landing speed, and "high" on the approach.
At an altitude of about 100 feet above the ground they attempted to go around, advanced the throttle, and landed in a tree.
The engine was removed from the airframe and shipped to Continental Motor's facilities, in Mobile, Alabama, where an engine test run was conducted under the supervision of the FAA, on March 16, 1997.
The engine run revealed no discrepancies.
The first pilot did not submit a statement pertaining to the facts in this accident, and her account of the events of the accident are not known.
According to the FAA they made several attempts to contact the pilot and were unsuccessful.
: 3400 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 1962 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Engine Model/Series: IO-520BB Registered Owner: IFF II INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
