National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WAXAHACHIE, TX
Accident Number: FTW97LA098
Date & Time: 02/01/1997, 1700 CST
Registration: N5598T
Aircraft: Cessna 172E
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The flight instructor and his student were practicing touch and go landings.
During climb out from the second touch and go, the instructor pilot informed the student that he 'had a simulated engine failure', and then reduced the throttle.
After the student turned toward a field, the instructor increased the throttle, but the aircraft 'developed an excessive sink.'
After the instructor maneuvered to avoid trees the aircraft impacted the ground.
The instructor pilot reported that he did not have 'very much time' to set up for the forced landing due to the low altitude and close proximity to trees.
He added that two pilots who flew the aircraft in the past told him that they had experienced 'similar' intermittent power loss problems with the aircraft.
After these events, mechanical examinations of the engine by the airframe and powerplant certificated instructor pilot did not reveal any defects.
During an examination of the engine, throttle and mixture linkages were intact and revealed no defects.
After cleaning mud deposits from the carburetor body (impact related), the engine was operated successfully while still mounted in the airframe.
The reported power loss could not be duplicated.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
A factors was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO LANDING AREA (EMERGENCY) Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On February 1, 1997, at 1700 central standard time, a Cessna 172E, N5598T, registered to and owned by the pilot, was destroyed upon impacting terrain shortly after take off near Waxahachie, Texas.
The certified flight instructor and student pilot received minor injuries.
The instructional flight was being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported to the investigator-in-charge, that he and his student were practicing touch and go landings at O'Brian Airport, Waxahachie, Texas.
During climb out from the second touch and go, the instructor pilot informed the student that he "had a simulated engine failure", and then reduced the throttle.
After the student turned toward a field, the instructor increased the throttle, but the aircraft "developed an excessive sink."
After the instructor maneuvered to avoid trees the aircraft impacted the ground.
The instructor pilot reported that he did not have "very much time" to set up for the forced landing due to the low altitude and close proximity to trees.
He added that two pilots who flew the aircraft in the past told him that they had experienced "similar" intermittent power loss problems with the aircraft.
After these events, mechanical examinations of the engine by the airframe and powerplant certificated instructor pilot did not reveal any defects.
The aircraft wreckage was recovered to Northwest Regional Airport, Dallas, Texas, where an engine examination was conducted under the supervision of an FAA inspector.
Throttle and mixture linkages were intact and revealed no defects.
After cleaning mud deposits from the carburetor body (impact related), the engine was operated successfully while still mounted in the airframe.
The reported power loss could not be duplicated.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial; Private Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
