National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SARASOTA, FL
Accident Number: MIA97LA080
Date & Time: 02/01/1997, 1300 EST
Registration: N64TD
Aircraft: Piper PA-30
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot had just landed at the private airport with the owner of the airplane.
After landing the owner told the pilot to taxi back on the runway to his place that was off the other end of the runway.
The pilot stated that he exited the runway on a grass taxiway that led into an 'aviation community.'
The owner advised the pilot of various obstacles such as mailboxes and trees.
When they got to the airplane owner's house/hangar, the owner got out, and pilot taxied back to the runway.
The pilot made a wrong turn and was attempting to maneuver around a mailbox on one side of the airplane when the wing on the other side struck a tree and separated from the spar.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain clearance from obstacles.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On February 1, 1997, about 1300 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-30, N64TD, registered to Raptor Leasing Inc., was substantially damaged while taxiing, near Sarasota, Florida.
The commercial-rated pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed in the vicinity, and no flight plan had been filed.
The personal flight originated at Lakeland, Florida, at 1230, and was being conducted in accordance with Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot had just landed at the private airport with the owner of the airplane.
After landing, the owner told the pilot to taxi back on the runway to his place that was off the other end of the runway.
The pilot stated that he exited the runway on a grass taxiway that led into an "aviation community."
The owner advised the pilot of various obstacles such as mailboxes and trees.
When they got to the airplane owner's house/hanger, the owner got out, and the pilot taxied back to the runway.
The pilot made a wrong turn and was attempting to maneuver around a mailbox on one side of the airplane, when the wing on the other side struck a tree and separated from the spar.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 42, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Engine Model/Series: IO-320-B1A Registered Owner: RAPTOR LEASING INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
