Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Aurora, OR
Accident Number:
WPR18LA057
Date & Time:
01/02/2018, 0905 PST 
Registration:
N2122S
Aircraft:
CESSNA T210L
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing gear collapse
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot was conducting a cross-country flight. He reported that, while on the 
downwind leg preparing to land, he activated the landing gear extension lever but that the 
green DOWN and LOCKED light did not illuminate. The pilot thought that the landing gear 
was down but performed a fly-by near the air traffic control tower so that the controller could 
verify the position of the gear. The controller told the pilot that the landing gear appeared to be 
down. The controller then cleared the pilot for a second downwind approach and landing. The 
pilot stated that, while preparing to land a second time, he attempted to raise and lower the 
landing gear, but the green DOWN and LOCKED light again did not illuminate. The pilot 
looked in the airplane's landing gear mirror and saw that the gear appeared to be in the down 
position. During the landing roll, the right main landing gear collapsed, which resulted in 
substantial damage on the right side of the airplane. The pilot indicated that he had forgotten 
to perform the alternate landing gear extension procedure before landing, which is used when 
the gear will not lock into the down position.
A postaccident examination of the landing gear system, which included multiple gear 
retraction and extension cycles with the gear locked, revealed no anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation. The right main landing gear collapsed because it did not lock into 
place, most likely due to the overcenter drag brace not fully attaining the overcenter position. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 6WPR18LA057
A collapse of the right main landing gear during the landing roll because the gear would not 
lock into place. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's failure to perform the alternate 
landing gear extension procedure before landing.
Findings
Aircraft
Main landing gear - Incorrect use/operation (Cause)
Gear extension and retract sys - Not used/operated (Factor)
Personnel issues
Forgotten action/omission - Pilot (Factor)
Use of checklist - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 6WPR18LA057
Factual Information
On January 2, 2018, about 0920 Pacific standard time, a Cessna T210L airplane, N2122S, was 
substantially damaged during landing following a right main landing gear collapse at Aurora 
State Airport (UAO), Aurora, Oregon. The private pilot was not injured. The airplane was 
registered to and operated by the pilot as a Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 
personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no 
flight plan was filed. The cross-country flight originated from Paine Field (PAE), Everett, 
Washington, about 0758, and was destined for Aurora. 
In a report submitted to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the pilot reported that while on downwind for runway 35 at UAO, he activated the 
landing gear extension lever, which was followed by the orange light going out, however, the 
green [down and locked] light did not illuminate. The pilot further reported that the gear 
appeared to be down. He then requested permission to perform a control tower fly-by, so the 
controller could observe the position of the landing gear; the controller confirmed that the 
landing gear appeared to be down, followed by clearing the pilot for a left downwind approach 
and landing. The pilot stated that while on downwind he attempted to raise and lower the 
landing gear, however, while the orange light would illuminate, the green light would not. The 
pilot opined that the gear appeared to be down as viewed from the airplane's landing gear 
mirror. Shortly after touchdown the right main landing gear collapsed, which was followed by 
the airplane swerving right and into the runway safety area. The airplane came to rest on its left 
main landing gear, nose gear and right wing tip. The right horizontal stabilizer and elevator 
sustained substantial damage. The pilot also mentioned that he forgot to perform the alternate 
landing gear extension procedure prior to landing.
Under the supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration aviation safety inspector, a 
postaccident examination of the landing gear system was performed on January 8, 2018, at the 
facilities of Willamette Aviation, Aurora State Airport, Aurora, Oregon. The results of the 
examination revealed the following:
The landing gear hydraulic lines, electrical wires, actuators, locks, valves and other landing 
gear system components were visually inspected, with no anomalies noted.
The hydraulic system fluid was visually inspected, with the level of the fluid above the ADD 
mark as indicated on the reservoir dip stick. There were no obvious hydraulic leaks observed 
from any specific hydraulic component.
The landing gear switch handle was in the GEAR DOWN position, and all three landing gear 
were visually and physically confirmed to be in the DOWN and LOCKED positions. The 
landing gear down lock actuators were both extended, and the locks themselves were over the 
lock pins in a position appropriate to "locked" in the down position, and with visually 
confirmed engagement.
Page 4 of 6WPR18LA057
With the airplane position on the ground and resting on its landing gear, the green GEAR 
DOWN indicator illuminated when the master switch was positioned to ON; the hydraulic 
power pack ran for about one (1) second before the light came on.
The airplane was jacked using tripod jacks, wing-mounted jack adapters, and a weighted tail 
stand. The landing gear was retracted and extended eight (8) cycles over a period of about 40 
minutes, and functioned as described in the Cessna T210L maintenance manual, with positive 
down lock engagement. A green GEAR DOWN light indication was followed by the hydraulic 
pump shutting off. Both retraction and extension cycles were completed in approximately eight 
(8) seconds. Each of the cycles resulted in a normal gear retraction and extension cycle 
completion, with only slight increases in cycle times when the landing gear was de-
synchronized by application of resistance to one or the other gear legs. The landing gear 
warning horn system was tested for proper operation, with no anomalies noted during the 
functionality check. All systems operated normally. The examination revealed no evidence of 
what precipitated the collapse of the right main landing gear during the landing roll. (For an 
in-depth description of the examination and testing, refer to the Aircraft and Landing Gear 
System Inspection/Function Report, which is appended to the docket for this report.)
History of Flight
Landing-landing roll
Landing gear collapse (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
78, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/02/2016
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/28/2017
Flight Time:
2201 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1673 hours (Total, this make and model), 2018 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 17 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6WPR18LA057
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N2122S
Model/Series:
T210L M
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1975
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
21061084
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/02/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
62 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4803.8 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental Motors, Inc.
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
UAO, 200 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0948 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.35 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Everett, WA (PAE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Aurora, OR (KUAO)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
0758 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Aurora State Airport (KUAO)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
200 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
35
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5003 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Page 6 of 6WPR18LA057
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
45.247222, -122.770000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Little
Adopted Date:
11/15/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Joseph Mollahan; Federal Aviation Administration; Hillsboro, OR
Darren K Vaughn; Federal Aviation Administration; Hillsboro, OR
Publish Date:
11/15/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=96547
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
