Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sedona, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX05LA002
Date & Time:
10/02/2004, 1025 MST 
Registration:
N43064
Aircraft:
Classic Aircraft Corp WACO YMF
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Other Work Use - Sightseeing
Analysis 
The engine lost partial power during flight, and the airplane collided with a vehicle during a 
forced landing on a road.  The pilot was performing a local for hire sightseeing flight for two 
passengers.  Approximately 15 minutes into the flight, a loud "popping" noise was heard 
coming from the engine.  The pilot was unable to maintain altitude and force landed on a city 
street.  During the landing roll, the right wing impacted a car on the road.  Post accident 
examination of the engine revealed that the number 7 cylinder exhaust valve rocker arm had 
failed in fatigue.  The surface fracture initiation marks were consistent with a grinding 
operation during manufacture.  The grinding operation is performed to remove any flash 
remaining at the mold parting line, after the casting operation, and is normally carried out by 
holding the part by hand and guiding it on a large grinding wheel.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
a loss of engine power due to the fatigue fracture of the number 7 cylinder exhaust rocker arm 
as a result of a grinding operation during manufacture.
Page 2 of 6LAX05LA002
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,ROCKER ARM/TAPPET - FATIGUE
2. (C) PROCEDURE INADEQUATE - MANUFACTURER
3. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,ROCKER ARM/TAPPET - FRACTURED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
4. OBJECT - VEHICLE
Page 3 of 6LAX05LA002
Factual Information
On October 2, 2004, at 1025 mountain standard time, a Classic Aircraft Corporation WACO 
YMF biplane, N43064, lost engine power and collided with a vehicle during a forced landing on 
a city street in Sedona, Arizona.  Solid Edge Aviation, d.b.a. Red Rock Biplane Tours/Safari Air 
Tours, was operating the for hire sightseeing flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The 
airline transport pilot and two passengers were not injured; the airplane sustained substantial 
damage.  The airplane departed from the Sedona Airport about 1000 for the local area 
sightseeing flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
According to the pilot, the tour was to be 30 minutes in duration.  After approximately 10 
minutes, the pilot heard a loud backfire and the airplane would not maintain altitude.  The 
pilot glided down to a city street and prepared for landing.  During the landing roll, the right 
wing struck a vehicle.
The airplane was equipped with an onboard video recording system that was used to provide 
customers with a video record of their sightseeing flight.  The video was sent to the National 
Transportation Safety Board Vehicle Recorder Division for review.  Two cameras were 
mounted under the left wing.  One was facing rearward with a view of the passengers, and the 
other camera had a view straight ahead of the airplane.  One camera view was recorded at one 
time, and the video switched between the views approximately every 12 seconds.  Audio was 
recorded through the airplane's intercom system.  Approximately 15 minutes into the video 
recording, the engine made "popping" sounds.  The pilot's narration of the flight ends mid-
sentence and his voice was not heard for the remainder of the flight.  The pilot proceeded 
toward a town [Sedona] and prepared for landing on a four-lane road with traffic.  The engine 
continued "popping" as the airplane touched down.  During the landing roll, the airplane 
appeared to strike an object, turned 90 degrees to the right, and then came to a full stop.
Post accident examination of the airplane's engine revealed that the number 7 cylinder exhaust 
valve rocker arm was fractured.  The rocker arm was sent to the Safety board Materials 
Laboratory for further examination.  The rocker is constructed of a boss, which contains a 
bearing into which a rocker shaft is inserted, into two arms.  One arm, identified as the 
pushrod arm, has a spherical seat into which the matching end of a pushrod is located, and the 
other arm, identified as the valve arm, has a roller that contacts the stem portion of the valve.  
The fracture was inboard of the pushrod arm portion where it connects to the rocker boss.  
Examination of the pushrod arm and boss portion displayed crack arrest marks of fatigue that 
matched each other.  The metallurgist determined that the fracture surface marks were 
consistent with a grinding operation used to remove extra material (commonly referred to as 
flash) that can occur at the mold parting line.  The mold parting line is the centerline of a part 
that is uniform on both sides of it.  The full metallurgical report is included in the docket.
Page 4 of 6LAX05LA002
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/01/2003
Flight Time:
3500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1300 hours (Total, this make and model), 3300 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Classic Aircraft Corp
Registration:
N43064
Model/Series:
WACO YMF 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
FS-062
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/2004, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
50 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2985 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Jacobs
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
R755-B2M
Registered Owner:
Dakota Territory Tours
Rated Power:
205 hp
Operator:
Solid Edge Aviation dba Red 
Rock Biplane Tours
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX05LA002
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PRC, 5045 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
32 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1053 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
69°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.27 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Sedona, AZ (SEZ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1000 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
34.852222, -111.795556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Kristi L Dunks
Adopted Date:
02/28/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
John Eller; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX05LA002
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
