Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fayetteville, AR
Accident Number:
CEN16LA026
Date & Time:
11/03/2015, 0950 CST 
Registration:
N857SW
Aircraft:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP SR22T
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
3 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During the enroute climb to cruise altitude, the low oil pressure warning light activated. The 
pilot notified air traffic control, received vectors to the nearest airport, and began a descent as 
the oil pressure continued to decrease. About 3 miles from the airport, the engine experienced 
a total loss of power. The pilot could not see the airport or runway due to a cloud layer below 
and elected to deploy the airplane parachute system. The airplane descended under canopy to a 
four-lane road, where a car impacted the left wing. A postaccident examination of the engine 
revealed a fatigue fracture of the oil cooler cross fitting, which resulted in oil starvation, 
internal damage to the crankcase, and a subsequent total loss of engine power.
About four months before the accident, the engine manufacturer released a critical service 
bulletin (CSB) for a known problem pertaining to the oil cooler cross fitting assembly. 
Although the airplane underwent scheduled maintenance about a month before the accident, 
the CSB was not completed due to time constraints. Although compliance was not mandatory, 
it is likely that the accident would have been prevented had the CSB been completed. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The fatigue failure of the oil cooler cross fitting, which resulted in engine oil starvation and a 
total loss of engine power.
Page 2 of 9CEN16LA026
Findings
Aircraft
Recip eng oil sys - Failure (Cause)
Recip eng oil sys - Design (Cause)
Recip eng oil sys - Not serviced/maintained
Page 3 of 9CEN16LA026
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
Enroute
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
On November 3, 2015, at 0950 central standard time, a Cirrus SR22T airplane, N857SW, 
experienced a total loss of engine power, descended under the canopy of the Cirrus Airframe 
Parachute System (CAPS) and landed on a road in Fayetteville, Arkansas. The private rated 
pilot, pilot rated passenger and one person on the ground received minor injuries. The 
passenger in the right rear seat was uninjured. The airplane sustained substantial damage. The 
airplane was registered to WG Aviation LLC, Rogers, Arkansas, and operated by a private 
individual under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and an instrument flight 
rules (IFR) flight plan was filed. The flight departed from Bentonville Municipal Airport (VBT), 
Bentonville, Arkansas, at 0934 and was en route to Waco Regional Airport (ACT), Waco, Texas. 
According to the pilot, after departure from VBT he leveled off around 10,000 ft mean sea level 
(msl) and was above a cloud layer. The pilot noticed that the crew alerting system (CAS) 
flashed an amber caution light for oil pressure and the engine was still producing normal 
power. The pilot notified air traffic control (ATC) of the oil pressure issue and received vectors 
to the nearest airport, Drake Field Airport (FYV), Fayetteville, Arkansas. The pilot descended 
and maneuvered toward FYV as the CAS illuminated a red warning light for oil pressure, which 
had dropped below 10 psi. The engine was producing inconsistent power as the airplane 
descended to 3,300 ft msl. The pilot notified ATC that he could not maintain altitude and ATC 
declared an emergency on his behalf. About 3 miles from FYV the airplane was still above the 
cloud layer and he could not see the airport or runway. The airplane slowed to 80 knots around 
1,000 ft above ground level (agl) and the stall warning horn sounded. He deployed the CAPS 
and the airplane descended to the ground under the canopy. The landing was very firm and the 
seatbelt airbags deployed. 
Page 4 of 9CEN16LA026
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/28/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/16/2015
Flight Time:
572 hours (Total, all aircraft), 175 hours (Total, this make and model), 349 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 31 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 19 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0.5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/20/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
The pilot, age 56, held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land and 
instrument airplane. On February 26, 2014, the pilot was issued a third class medical 
certificate with no limitations listed. 
The pilot rated passenger, age 47, held an airline transport pilot certificate. He also held a flight 
instructor certificate for single engine airplane and instrument airplane. On July 20, 2015, he 
was issued a first class medical certificate with one limitation: must wear corrective lenses. 
Page 5 of 9CEN16LA026
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP
Registration:
N857SW
Model/Series:
SR22T 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2014
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0816
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/30/2015, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
27.5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
232.4 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental Motors
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-550-K
Registered Owner:
WG AVIATION LLC
Rated Power:
315 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The Cirrus SR22T four seat, low wing, fixed tricycle landing gear airplane, serial number 0816, 
was manufactured in 2014. The airplane was powered by a 315-horsepower, turbocharged, 
Continental Motors TSIO-550-K engine, which drove a 3-bladed, composite, constant speed 
Hartzell propeller. 
A review of the airplane logbooks revealed that a 50 hour engine inspection was completed on 
September 30, 2015, at a total time of 232.4 hours and Hobbs meter time of 288.9 hours. 
A maintenance work order, opened September 24, 2015, and closed October 7, 2015, revealed 
under discrepancy 6 to comply with Continental Motors Critical Service Bulletin CSB15-2 Œ Oil 
Cooler Cross Fitting Replacement. The maintenance was deferred to a later date because the 
"owner was out of time to wait and requested" to complete the CSB during the next 
maintenance service. The work order also noted that the CSB was deferred due to the engine 
manufacturer being out of stock of oil cooler cross fittings. According to the maintenance 
facility inventory report, four oil cooler cross fittings were received from the engine 
manufacturer on September 29, 2015, immediately after they were back in stock. The pilot had 
already decided to defer this CSB, therefore it was not completed. 
Page 6 of 9CEN16LA026
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KFYV, 1259 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
3 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
175°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 17 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
190°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.11 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
16°C / 14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
BENTONVILLE, AR (VBT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
WACO, TX (ACT)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0934 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C; Class D; Class E
At 0953, the weather observation at FYV recorded wind from 190 at 9 knots, gusting to 17 
knots, 10 miles visibility, clear sky, temperature 61° F, dew point 57° F, and altimeter setting 
30.11 inches of mercury. 
Airport Information
Airport:
DRAKE FIELD (FYV)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1252 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
16
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6005 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
36.056667, -94.174444 (est)
Page 7 of 9CEN16LA026
The airplane landed on the east bound side of a four lane road in Fayetteville, Arkansas. The 
airplane impacted a moving vehicle, then a curb, and came to rest on the sidewalk with the 
nose facing east. The left landing gear had partially collapsed outward, the right landing gear 
was separated, and the nose landing gear had collapsed and separated. The left wing sustained 
leading edge damage near the wing tip. The right wing sustained damage to the leading edge 
near the wing root. The bottom of the fuselage was damaged. A black oily residue was observed 
from the bottom of the fuselage to the bottom tip of the rudder. The parachute was found on 
the ground behind the airplane.
A postaccident examination was conducted on November 4, 2015. During the examination 
there was no evidence of a breach in the crankcase or the oil sump; however, the nipple fitting 
that connected to the oil cooler cross fitting was separated and oil residue was observed in the 
engine compartment. The top spark plugs were removed and found to be in "normal condition" 
when compared to a Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug AV-27 chart. However, each of the top 
spark plugs exhibited a dark, sooty coloration indicative of a rich fuel air mixture. Each of the 
six cylinders were examined with a lighted borescope. The intake and exhaust valves were 
intact with normal coloration and combustion signatures. The damaged propeller was 
manually rotated revealing that the internal engine components were "tight" and not easily 
rotated. The oil dipstick was removed and the engine oil level appeared to be 1 to 2 quarts. All 
fuel system components remained intact and attached to the engine. The magnetos remained 
intact and in place with no apparent impact damage. All other engine accessories were intact 
and unremarkable. 
Engine Examination and Disassembly
The engine was disassembled at the engine manufacturer's facility on November 23, 2015, 
under the supervision of the NTSB. The examination revealed that the nipple fitting that 
connected to the oil cooler cross fitting had fractured. The cross fitting had several tool marks 
on the flat sides of the part. The engine exhibited mechanical damage signatures on all rod and 
main bearing journals. The Nos. 1 and 3 rods had released from the crankshaft and internal 
damage to the interior of the crankcase was noted. The oil pump was examined and there was 
no indication of hard particle passage noted. The oil sump contained metal fragments of the 
rod bearings from the released connecting rods. The remainder of the engine exhibited normal 
operating signatures, with the exception of the mechanical and thermal damage.
Additional Information
Recorded Flight Data Œ Cirrus Recoverable Data Module 
The airplane's recoverable data module (RDM) was removed and sent to the NTSB Vehicle 
Recorders Laboratory for download. The data revealed that the airplane departed and climbed 
at a constant speed with the oil pressure indicating about 50 psi. At 0943:30, as the airplane 
was climbing through 9,500 ft msl, the oil pressure began to decrease. The airplane reached a 
Page 8 of 9CEN16LA026
peak altitude of 9,830 ft msl. At 0944 the oil pressure had decreased to 36 psi and the airplane 
made a left turn and started to descend. The airplane descended for about 7 minutes as the oil 
pressure decreased about 0.5 psi per second until it reached about 3 psi. Engine RPM 
decreased to 0 as oil pressure decreased below 1 psi at 0950:30. 
Continental Motors Critical Service Bulletin CSB15-2 Œ Oil Cooler Cross Fitting Replacement
The CSB15-2 was originally published on July 2, 2015, and the purpose was to replace the old 
oil cooler cross fitting with a new enhanced cross fitting within the next 25 hours of engine 
operation or the next scheduled inspection or engine servicing, whichever occurred first." The 
bulletin noted "compliance necessary to maintain safety" and further stated "Continental 
Motors, Inc. (CMI) is aware of some occurrences in which the there was a loss of engine oil due 
to a fractured nipple fitting that connects the cross fitting to the pipe bushing at the oil cooler. 
Design improvements consolidate the oil cooler cross fitting stack-up into a single part, which 
significantly increases the strength and provides a simplified installation procedure for 
installing the oil cooler cross fitting found on specified TSIO-550 and TSIOF-550 engines." 
CSB15-2A Œ The bulletin was revised on October 30, 2015, with updated warranty information 
and updated illustrated parts catalog instructions. 
CSB15-2B Œ As a result of this accident investigation the bulletin was revised on November 6, 
2015, to update the engine models affected. 
Continental Motors Critical Service Bulletin CSB15-7 Œ Oil Cooler Cross Fitting Replacement
CSB15-7 Œ As a result of this accident investigation another critical service bulletin was issued 
on November 6, 2015. This bulletin was essentially the same as CSB15-2B, but was issued 
specifically for the accident engine model, TSIO-550-K. Additionally, the compliance time was 
updated from CSB15-2B and stated "Prior to further flight. A maximum of 5 hours flight time is 
authorized for aircraft repositioning in order to comply with this bulletin."
CSB15-7A Œ As a result of this accident investigation this bulletin was revised on November 10, 
2015, to include specific engine serial numbers affected. 
CSB15-7B Œ As a result of this accident investigation this bulletin was revised on April 26, 
2016, with an updated compliance time which stated "Prior to further flight. A maximum of 5 
hours flight time is authorized for aircraft repositioning in order to comply with this bulletin. 
An alternative method of compliance for hose and connection fittings may be available from 
the airframe manufacturer. Contact the airframe manufacturer for compliance alternatives 
under their authority."
Cirrus Aircraft Service Advisory SA15-04
Cirrus issued service advisories following the release of Continental Motors CSB15-2 and 
CSB15-7, informing Cirrus SR22T customers of the CSBs and issued mandatory compliance 
times. 
Page 9 of 9CEN16LA026
Federal Aviation Administration regulations do not require compliance with service bulletins 
for aircraft operating under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Tests And Research
Metallurgy Testing
The fractured nipple fitting surface was examined by the engine manufacturer's metallurgy 
laboratory. The examination revealed that the part separated in fatigue, which initiated at a 
thread root at the assembled intersection of the pipe nipple and bushing. 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joshua D Lindberg
Adopted Date:
12/12/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Brian Love; FAA; Little Rock, AR
Mike Council; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Brannon Mayer; Cirrus Aircraft; Duluth, MN
Publish Date:
01/31/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92272
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
