The engine lost partial power during flight, and the airplane collided with a vehicle during a 
forced landing on a road.  The pilot was performing a local for hire sightseeing flight for two 
passengers.  Approximately 15 minutes into the flight, a loud "popping" noise was heard 
coming from the engine.  The pilot was unable to maintain altitude and force landed on a city 
street.  During the landing roll, the right wing impacted a car on the road.  Post accident 
examination of the engine revealed that the number 7 cylinder exhaust valve rocker arm had 
failed in fatigue.  The surface fracture initiation marks were consistent with a grinding 
operation during manufacture.  The grinding operation is performed to remove any flash 
remaining at the mold parting line, after the casting operation, and is normally carried out by 
holding the part by hand and guiding it on a large grinding wheel.
a loss of engine power due to the fatigue fracture of the number 7 cylinder exhaust rocker arm 
as a result of a grinding operation during manufacture.
On October 2, 2004, at 1025 mountain standard time, a Classic Aircraft Corporation WACO 
YMF biplane, N43064, lost engine power and collided with a vehicle during a forced landing on 
a city street in Sedona, Arizona.  Solid Edge Aviation, d.b.a. Red Rock Biplane Tours/Safari Air 
Tours, was operating the for hire sightseeing flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The 
airline transport pilot and two passengers were not injured; the airplane sustained substantial 
damage.  The airplane departed from the Sedona Airport about 1000 for the local area 
sightseeing flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
According to the pilot, the tour was to be 30 minutes in duration.  After approximately 10 
minutes, the pilot heard a loud backfire and the airplane would not maintain altitude.  The 
pilot glided down to a city street and prepared for landing.  During the landing roll, the right 
wing struck a vehicle.
The airplane was equipped with an onboard video recording system that was used to provide 
customers with a video record of their sightseeing flight.  The video was sent to the National 
Transportation Safety Board Vehicle Recorder Division for review.  Two cameras were 
mounted under the left wing.  One was facing rearward with a view of the passengers, and the 
other camera had a view straight ahead of the airplane.  One camera view was recorded at one 
time, and the video switched between the views approximately every 12 seconds.  Audio was 
recorded through the airplane's intercom system.  Approximately 15 minutes into the video 
recording, the engine made "popping" sounds.  The pilot's narration of the flight ends mid-
sentence and his voice was not heard for the remainder of the flight.  The pilot proceeded 
toward a town [Sedona] and prepared for landing on a four-lane road with traffic.  The engine 
continued "popping" as the airplane touched down.  During the landing roll, the airplane 
appeared to strike an object, turned 90 degrees to the right, and then came to a full stop.
Post accident examination of the airplane's engine revealed that the number 7 cylinder exhaust 
valve rocker arm was fractured.  The rocker arm was sent to the Safety board Materials 
Laboratory for further examination.  The rocker is constructed of a boss, which contains a 
bearing into which a rocker shaft is inserted, into two arms.  One arm, identified as the 
pushrod arm, has a spherical seat into which the matching end of a pushrod is located, and the 
other arm, identified as the valve arm, has a roller that contacts the stem portion of the valve.  
The fracture was inboard of the pushrod arm portion where it connects to the rocker boss.  
Examination of the pushrod arm and boss portion displayed crack arrest marks of fatigue that 
matched each other.  The metallurgist determined that the fracture surface marks were 
consistent with a grinding operation used to remove extra material (commonly referred to as 
flash) that can occur at the mold parting line.  The mold parting line is the centerline of a part 
that is uniform on both sides of it.  The full metallurgical report is included in the docket.
