The accident glider was under tow for takeoff when the accident occurred. The glider lifted off 
before the tow airplane and then ascended to between 20 and 50 feet above the ground very 
quickly, and at a "high" angle of attack. The glider then yawed to the left and the left wing 
dropped before it began a slow roll to the right. The glider continued to roll right until it 
reached an attitude where the wings were perpendicular to the ground. It then sank down until 
the right wing impacted the ground. The glider "cart wheeled" onto its nose before coming to 
rest inverted. Examination of the glider revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical 
anomalies, and that the tow rope disconnected at the glider end at some point during the 
accident sequence. Toxicological testing of the pilot revealed the presence of a prescription 
antidepressant. The extent to which the drug may have affected the pilot, if at all, could not be 
determined.
The pilot's inability to maintain control of the glider for undetermined reasons.
On July 1, 2007, about 1600 eastern daylight time, a Burkhart Grob Flugzeugbau Speed Astir II 
glider, N176SS, was substantially damaged when it impacted the runway while under tow for 
takeoff from Centre Airpark (N16), Centre Hall, Pennsylvania. The certificated private pilot was 
fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the 
flight, destined for Mifflin County Airport (RVL), Reedsville, Pennsylvania. The personal flight 
was conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the pilot of the tow airplane, the purpose of the accident flight was to tow the 
glider aloft so that the glider pilot could return to RVL. The tow pilot conducted a preflight 
briefing with the glider pilot on tow procedures prior to the takeoff, and the glider was 
connected to the tow airplane without any difficulties.
After establishing radio contact, the glider pilot and the tow pilot agreed to start the takeoff 
from runway 6. The tow pilot watched the glider in his mirror, and initially it appeared to be in 
a wings level attitude and directly behind the tow airplane, during the takeoff roll. After raising 
the tow airplane's tailwheel off the ground, the tow pilot felt a slight yaw, but did not feel this 
was unusual given the wind conditions. He then felt a distinct loss of drag, which he felt was 
consistent with a disconnect or breakage of the tow rope. The airplane's main wheels remained 
on the ground during these events. As he could no longer see the glider in the mirror with the 
tailwheel raised, he elected to continue the takeoff in order to clear the runway. Upon returning 
to the airport, he observed that the glider was lying inverted on the runway.
Two members of a radio control aircraft club were at the airport when they witnessed the 
accident flight. They both recounted a similar series of events during a telephone interview. 
According to the witnesses, the glider was connected to the tow airplane during the takeoff roll. 
The glider lifted off before the tow airplane and then ascended to between 20 and 50 feet above 
the ground very quickly, and at a "high" angle of attack. The glider then yawed to the left and 
the left wing dropped before it began a slow roll to the right. The glider continued to roll right 
until it reached an attitude where the wings were perpendicular to the ground. It then sank 
down until the right wing impacted the ground. The glider "cart wheeled" onto its nose before 
coming to rest inverted.
Both witnesses reported that there was a direct crosswind present at the time of the accident, 
and estimated that the velocity was around 10 knots. One of the witnesses added that there 
were routinely crosswinds at the airport, and that it was not uncommon to see gliders being 
towed in crosswinds up to 17 knots. 
Following the accident, the tow airplane pilot and one of the witnesses inspected the tow cable 
and attach fittings and found that they were intact and undamaged.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the wreckage following the 
accident. According to the inspector, the glider came to rest inverted, with the right wing 
separated from the fuselage. All structural components of the glider were accounted for, and 
were located at the accident scene.
Flight control continuity was established from the cockpit controls to the elevators, rudder, and 
left aileron. Continuity to the right aileron could not be established from the fuselage to the 
flight control surface due to impact damage. The right wing attachments and aileron control 
mechanism exhibited signatures consistent with overload at impact. The pitch trim control was 
found in the extreme nose up position, but pitch trim continuity could not be established due 
to impact damage. The wing flaps were set to the "-3" degree position. The speed brake, and its 
respective cockpit control, were found in the retracted position. 
The tow cable attachment mechanism and controls were in working order. There was no 
evidence of damage to the tow hook or release mechanism. 
The pilot and aircraft logbooks were not recovered.
The glider pilot held a private pilot certificate with ratings for glider and airplane single engine 
land. Her most recent application for an FAA third-class medical certificate was dated 
February 7, 2005, and on that date she reported 130 total hours of flight experience.
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicological testing on the pilot. The testing revealed the presence of the following 
drugs: Desmethylvenlafxine in the blood and urine; Venlafaxine in the urine, liver, and gastric; 
and 2.754 ug/ml, ug/g of Venlafaxine in the blood.
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Centre County Coroner, Bellefonte, 
Pennsylvania. The "Final Summary Note" of the report indicated, in part: "...The patient's 
postmortem Venlafaxine blood level is 1600 ng/mL (1.6 mg/L)...although the o-
Desmethylvenlafaxine level of 270 ng/mL is within the therapeutic range, the Venlaflaxine 
level is clearly above the therapeutic range...clearly not at the level which could cause 
death...not in the toxic or overdose range....The patient landed her glider and was clearly well 
enough to contact a pilot to be towed back up into the air. The pilot did not relate any visible 
symptoms of nausea, vomiting, dizziness, nervousness, anxiety, tremor, or reported blurred 
vision."
Review of the pilot's most recent application for an FAA third-class medical certificate revealed 
that she answered "No" to the question "Do You Currently Use any Medication."
The weather conditions reported at University Park Airport (UNV), State College, 
Pennsylvania, about 8 nautical miles west of the accident site, at 1600, included winds from 
330 degrees at 5 knots, 10 statute miles visibility, scattered clouds at 8,000 feet, temperature 
23 degrees Celsius, dew point 10 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.12 inches of 
mercury.
