National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Tulsa, OK
Accident Number: DFW07LA052
Date & Time: 01/02/2007, 1140 CST
Registration: YV-2045
Aircraft: Fairchild Merlin SA-226-T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 9 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The twin pressurized turboprop airplane veered to the left and departed the runway during landing on runway 19R.
Runway 19R was reported to be a 5,102-foot long by 100-foot wide asphalt runway.
The airplane came to rest on the grass between runway 13 and taxiway Juliet.
The pilot reported that following a normal full-flap landing, the airplane started to veer to the left as soon as the nose wheel tires touched down on the runway.
The pilot was not able to compensate for the uncommanded drift as result of the nose wheel steering mechanism.
The airplane sustained structural damage to the nose section & nose wheel assembly.
The 7 passengers and 2 crewmembers egressed the airplane normally and sustained no injuries.
The reason for the uncommanded left drift could not be determined.
A completed NTSB Form 6120.1 was not received from either one of the pilots nor the operator.
The weather was reported as calm winds, 10 statute miles visibility, clear skies, temperature 45 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 28 degrees Fahrenheit, and a barometric pressure setting of 30.41 inches of Mercury.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of control as result of the malfunction of the nose wheel steering mechanism during landing for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - UNCOMMANDED 2.
DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) LANDING GEAR,STEERING SYSTEM - FAILURE ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - COLLAPSED Factual Information On January 2, 2007, at 1140 central standard time, a twin-engine Fairchild Merlin SA-226-T airplane, Venezuelan registration YV-2045, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while landing at the Richard L. Jones Jr. Airport (KRVS) near Tulsa, Oklahoma.
The airplane was owned and operated by a private individual in Caracas, Venezuela.
The airline transport rated pilot, the commercial pilot functioning as first officer, and the 7 passengers were not inured.
Visual meteorological conditions for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 business flight.
The flight originated at the Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport (KFXE), near Fort Lauderdale, Florida, at 0740, with KRVS as its intended destination.
Tower personnel reported that the twin-engine airplane veered to the left and departed the runway during the landing roll on Runway 19R.
Runway 19R was reported to be a 5,102-feet long, by 100-feet wide asphalt runway.
The airplane came to an abrupt stop in the grassy area between Runway 13 and Taxiway Juliet, after the nose landing gear assembly dug into the soft ground and collapsed.
The pilot reported that following a "normal" full-flap landing, he was unable to maintain directional control of the airplane due to the failure of the nose wheel steering mechanism.
The airplane entered an uncommanded left drift which he could not compensate for.
The airplane departed the left side of the runway.
Examination of the pressurized twin-turboprop airplane revealed structural damage to the lower portion of the nose section, as well as damage to the support structure for the nose landing gear assembly.
All propeller blades were damaged upon ground contact.
None of the 4 main tires were blown and the wheel brakes appeared to be functioning and in good condition.
There was no fire.
The 7 passengers and 2 crewmembers were able to egress the airplane normally and  were not injured.
The reason for the uncommanded nose wheel steering deflection could not be determined.
A completed NTSB Form 6120.1/2 was not received from either the operator or the pilot.
The weather was reported as calm winds, visibility 10 miles, clear skies, temperature 45 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 28 degrees Fahrenheit, and a barometric pressure setting of 30.41 inches of Mercury.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
