Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Durango, CO
Accident Number:
CEN14LA277
Date & Time:
06/01/2014, 1426 MDT 
Registration:
N583KM
Aircraft:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP SR22
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The student pilot was conducting a solo flight from his home airport on the coast to an airport 
located in the mountains. Just before landing, the airplane encountered a ﬁstrong downward 
gust,ﬂ likely due to a combination of high-wind conditions (the local weather was wind at 16 
knots gusting to 24 knots about the time of the accident) and a steep terrain dropoff near the 
approach end of the runway. The pilot attempted a go-around, but the engine did not respond 
with full power. He subsequently lost control of the airplane, which then impacted left of the 
runway. The pilot reported that the mixture might have been ﬁtoo richﬂ during the go-around 
attempt.
Examination of the engine revealed excessive sooting on the spark plugs, which is indicative of 
an over-rich mixture condition; this condition likely resulted in the partial loss of engine power 
during the go-around attempt. The student pilot had not flown into the mountain airport 
before and had not been cleared to fly the route by a flight instructor.  
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The student pilot™s decision to fly solo into an unfamiliar, mountain airport during high-wind 
conditions. Contributing to the accident was a partial loss of engine power during the 
attempted go-around, which was caused by an over-rich mixture setting.  
Page 2 of 6CEN14LA277
Findings
Aircraft
Mixture control - Incorrect use/operation (Factor)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
High wind - Decision related to condition (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN14LA277
Factual Information
On June 1, 2014, at 1426 mountain daylight time, a Cirrus SR22 airplane, N583KM, impacted 
terrain on approach to the Animas Air Park (00C), Durango, Colorado. The airplane was 
substantially damaged and the student pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured. The airplane 
was registered to and operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Day visual meteorological conditions existed at 
the time of the accident and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated from Santa Monica 
Municipal Airport (SMO), Santa Monica, California at 1116. 
The student pilot was conducting a solo slight from his home airport on the coast to an airport 
located in the mountains. Just prior to landing on Runway 01, he encountered a "strong 
downward gust (dust devil)." The pilot applied power to go around, but perceived that the 
engine did not respond normally. The airplane subsequently impacted the ground to the left of 
the runway and the left and right leading edges of the wing and the vertical stabilizer were 
damaged after colliding with ground obstacles. The pilot reported that the mixture might have 
been "too rich" during the go-around attempt. 
The weather observation station at Durango-La Plata County Airport (DRO), Durango, 
Colorado, located about 6 miles southeast of 00C reported the following conditions at 1353: 
wind 270 degrees at 16 knots, with gusts to 24 knots, visibility 10 miles, clear skies, 
temperature 27 degrees Celsius (C), dew point minus 14 degrees C, altimeter setting 30.08. 
Density altitude for 00C at the time of the accident was calculated to be 9,376 feet.
Terrain rises quickly to the west of 00C and a significant drop in elevation occurs just prior to 
the approach end of Runway 01. Because of this topography, large sink rates often occur near 
the threshold of Runway 01 when strong westerly winds are present, according to the airport 
manager. 
The student pilot's home airport was SMO and he flew nearly all of his 183 hours of flight 
training in the southern California area. He was not cleared for a solo flight to 00C, nor had he 
ever flown into 00C prior to the accident. His flight instructor had written "all solo flights 
require instructor release" in the endorsements section of his logbook. 
Review of recorded engine data revealed that the engine remained running during the event, 
but the fuel flow may have been too high for the field elevation/density altitude. Examination 
of the engine following the event revealed that all of the sparkplugs were covered in thick, black 
soot, consistent with carbon fouling and a mixture that was too rich. Examination of the 
cylinders via borescope revealed no anomalies with the pistons, cylinder barrels, cylinder 
heads, valves and valve seats. However, all of the components were covered in dark soot.
The sparkplugs were cleaned and replaced in their respective cylinders and the engine was test 
run utilizing the airplane's fuel supply system from the left fuel tank's outlet line and a 
substitute fuel tank. The engine ran normally throughout various power settings, including full 
power, with no anomalies noted.
Page 4 of 6CEN14LA277
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Turbulence encounter
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Approach-VFR go-around
Loss of engine power (partial)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
52
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/04/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/27/2014
Flight Time:
183 hours (Total, all aircraft), 151 hours (Total, this make and model), 24 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 24 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP
Registration:
N583KM
Model/Series:
SR22 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0332
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/16/2013, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
169 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1296 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550 SERIES
Registered Owner:
BUCKSBAUM ROBERT
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
BUCKSBAUM ROBERT
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN14LA277
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KDRO, 6685 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
102°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
16 knots / 24 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Terrain-Induced
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / -14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Santa Monica, CA (KSMO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Durango, CO (00C)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
1116 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
ANIMAS AIR PARK (00C)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
6684 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
01
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5010 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.198611, -107.871667 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael J Folkerts
Adopted Date:
02/04/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Mark Rushton; Federal Aviation Administration; Salt Lake City, UT
Nicole Charnon; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Brannon Mayer; Cirrus Aircraft; Duluth, MN
Publish Date:
02/04/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89377
Page 6 of 6CEN14LA277
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
