National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: VICTORIA, MS
Accident Number: MIA96LA199
Date & Time: 08/01/1996, 1308 CDT
Registration: N737DK
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated he was in cruise flight at 4,000 feet in radio contact with Memphis Tower, when the engine quit.
He informed Memphis Tower that he had run out of gas.
He made a forced landing to an open field.
The airplane collided with trees on final approach, nosed over, and came to rest inverted.
The left and right fuel tanks were not ruptured.
About 1 1/2 gallons of fuel was present in the right fuel tank, and about 3 quarts of fuel was present in the left fuel tank.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper fuel management resulting in a total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a visual rules flight plan was filed.
The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the pilot reported minor injuries.
The flight originated from Columbia, Mississippi, 2 hours 26 minutes before the accident.
The pilot stated he initially departed New Orleans, Louisiana, en route for Olive Branch, Mississippi, and diverted into Columbia, Mississippi due to weather.
He obtained a weather briefing and departed for his destination airport.
He was in cruise flight at 4,000 feet, in contact with Memphis  tower, when the engine quit.
He informed Memphis  tower that he had run out of gas.
He made a forced landing to an open field.
The airplane collided with trees on the final approach, nosed over, and came to rest inverted.
Examination of the airframe, flight controls, and engine assembly revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
The left and right fuel tanks were not ruptured.
About  1 1/2 gallons of fuel was drained from the right fuel tank, and about 3 quarts of fuel was drained from the left fuel tank.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
