National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MAYERSVILLE, MS
Accident Number: ATL96LA116
Date & Time: 08/02/1996, 1530 CDT
Registration: N7362
Aircraft: Grumman G-164A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot stated that he was turning right and looking behind the airplane to line up for his last swath run, when his right main landing gear hit the cab of a truck.
The landing gear separated from the airplane, and the operator of the truck received minor injury.
The pilot then landed at a nearby grass airstrip.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to maintain adequate clearance from an object (vehicle) on the ground.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
OBJECT - VEHICLE 2.
The commercial pilot was not injured, and the driver of the vehicle received minor injuries.
The airplane was being operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137 by Gator Flying Service.
Visual meteorological conditions existed at the time, and no flight plan had been filed.
The estimated departure time of the flight was 1500.
The pilot stated that he was turning right and looking behind the airplane to line up for his last swath when his right main landing gear hit the cab of a truck.
The landing gear separated from the airplane, and the pilot landed at a nearby grass airstrip.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
