National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WAINWRIGHT, AK
Accident Number: ANC96LA114
Date & Time: 08/02/1996, 1349 AKD
Registration: N20752
Aircraft: Cessna 185
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The pilot reported she was attempting to land at an off airport beach site with a load of cargo.
The airplane bounced on the initial touchdown.
On the following touchdown, the pilot said she became concerned about the proximity of the water at the end of the landing area and applied the brakes.
The airplane decelerated, and then nosed over.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's excessive application of the brakes during the landing roll.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
The solo airline transport certificated pilot was not injured.
The 14 CFR Part 135 cargo flight operated in visual meteorological conditions.
The flight originated at Barrow, Alaska, about 1300.
According to a written statement issued by the pilot, she said she was landing on hard sand in light and variable wind conditions.
The airplane bounced on landing, and touched down again in a tail low attitude.
She then applied the brakes because she was concerned about the water in front of her.
The tail of the airplane rose, and the airplane nosed over onto the sandy landing surface.
The Director of Operations for the operator described the landing area as a section of leveled beach situated behind sand dunes.
: 3350 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 81 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 4040 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-520-D Registered Owner: CAPE SMYTHE AIR SERVICE, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
