The pilot had successfully performed three takeoffs and landings with his instructor earlier that 
day; no discrepancies were reported with the engine during the 30-minute flight. The pilot was 
signed off for his solo flight, and he began the flight with 6 gallons of fuel. The engine quit at 
the departure end of the runway when the airplane was about 400 feet above ground level. 
Witnesses, including the pilot™s flight instructor, reported observing the airplane pitch down 
consistent with the wing stalling. The airplane impacted the ground hard, which resulted in 
substantial damage to the airplane and serious injury to the pilot. The examination of the 
airframe revealed no discrepancies with the flight controls. The examination of the engine 
revealed no evidence of piston scoring, which would occur if the engine had seized. Further, no 
issues with the air induction system were found; the carburetors were not inspected. The 
reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
The pilot's inadvertent stalling of the wing following a total loss of engine power for reasons 
that could not be determined during postaccident examinations, which resulted in a hard 
landing. 
On October 3, 2013, about 0833 eastern daylight time, an Airborne Edge Executive weight shift 
control aircraft, N927H, registered to and operated by a private individual, was landed hard 
during a forced landing shortly after takeoff from Mid Florida Air Service Airport (X55), Eustis, 
Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for 
the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 instructional flight from X55. The airplane 
sustained substantial damage and the pilot, the sole occupant sustained serious injuries. The 
flight originated about 1 minute earlier from X55.
The pilot had successfully performed 3 takeoff's and landing's earlier that day with his 
instructor and was then signed off for solo flight. He departed with about 6 gallons of fuel and 
about the departure end of the runway at 350 feet above ground level, the engine suddenly 
quit. He turned to the right towards a field then back to the left to line up for the field, and just 
before touchdown he reported he over-flared. The airplane then hit, bounced 20 feet into the 
air, cleared a 3 foot-tall fence, then touched down and came to rest. 
The pilot's flight instructor reported that the previous 3 takeoff's and landings during a 30 
minute flight were uneventful; there were no discrepancies with the engine during the flight. 
He witnessed the accident flight and noted that when the flight was at the departure end of the 
runway, he observed the aircraft bank hard to the left then saw the nose pitch down. He did not 
witness the impact but went to the site. Upon arrival the pilot was out of the aircraft, conscious. 
He asked the pilot what happened and he said the engine quit. He (flight instructor) reported 
that he was too far away to hear the engine. Following the accident he recovered the aircraft.
A witness reported hearing the engine "cut-out" then observed the aircraft climbing, followed 
by the engine "shut down again." The witness reported seeing the aircraft climb to 40 feet, then 
reported the engine, "cut out completely and [the] aircraft nose dived at that point."
The accident occurred during the Federal Government shutdown in October 2013; therefore, 
there was no federal inspection of the accident site, aircraft, or engine by FAA and/or NTSB 
Personnel. Additionally, the aircraft was sold before being investigated by NTSB.
The pilot's flight instructor reported inspecting the airframe and engine following recovery and 
stated there was nothing wrong with the flight controls. He also noted the fuel lines were full of 
fuel but the sight level was empty; he attributed that to be because it was broken at the bottom 
of the fuel tank. He looked into the exhaust port of the cylinders and did not see any scoring of 
the piston; he reported the cylinders looked perfect. He did not inspect the carburetor bowls, 
and reported they remained attached. The engine controls remained connected, and he did not 
observe any issues with the air induction system. He reported that the mast and base tube were 
broke in half, and one blade of the three bladed composite ground adjustable propeller was 
broken. No determination was made as to the reason for the reported loss of engine power.
The pilot did not return the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report that was 
sent to him via e-mail.
