National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Coeur d'Alene, ID
Accident Number: SEA08LA041
Date & Time: 12/02/2007, 1845 PST
Registration: N551GF
Aircraft: CESSNA 551
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 8 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane was landing at night on a runway contaminated with 2.5 inches of slush and a 60- degree left crosswind at 16 knots, gusting to 22 knots.
After the airplane touched down, it immediately began hydroplaning to the right.
The pilot attempted to correct by adding power to the right engine to regain directional control; however, the nose landing gear struck a concrete pad, which was supporting a lighted runway sign.
The landing gear separated from the airplane and struck the leading edge of the left wing, which created an indentation and hole.
The nose landing gear wheel well was structurally deformed, and required a major repair to rectify.
Prior to landing, a vehicle had tested the runway™s braking action, and the pilot was informed that it was "POOR."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during landing roll out.
Contributing to the accident was the slush contaminated runway and the crosswind weather conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - SLUSH COVERED 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 4.
LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT Factual Information On December 2, 2007, approximately 1845 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 551, N551GF, departed the runway during the landing roll at Coeur d'Alene Air Terminal (COE), Coeur d'Alene, Idaho.
The airline transport pilot, airline transport second pilot, and six passengers were not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
CCM Aviation L.L.C.
was operating the airplane under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country personal flight that originated from Henderson, Nevada, approximately 3 hours before the accident.
An instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed and activated.
The pilot reported to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that he landed on runway 23.
He said upon touchdown the airplane began hydroplaning to the right.
He added power to the right engine to try and stay on the centerline, and regain directional control.
The airplane continued drifting right until it struck a concrete pad that was supporting a lighted runway sign.
The airplane came to rest approximately 90 degrees to the centerline, and 10 to 15 feet off the runway.
Post accident examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that the nose landing gear separated from the airplane and impacted the leading edge of the left wing, which created an indentation and hole.
Additionally, the nose gear wheel well was structurally deformed, which required a major repair to rectify.
The pilot said that on approach to the airport, he was told that there was 3/4 inch of snow on the runway, and the wind was from 170 to 190 degrees at 16 knots, gusting to 22 knots.
He was also told that braking had been tested by a vehicle, and was reported to be "NIL" on runway 01/10 and "POOR" on runway 05/23.
After landing, he discovered that the runway had 2 1/2 inches of slush on it.
: 12700 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Turbo Fan Airframe Total Time: 4673 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Pratt and Whitney ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: JT15D-4 Registered Owner: CCM Aviation L.L.C.
Rated Power: 2500 lbs Operator: CCM Aviation L.L.C.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
