National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Talladega, AL
Accident Number: NYC08LA050
Date & Time: 12/01/2007, 1310 CST
Registration: N95CH
Aircraft: Bell 206-L4
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Air Medical (Medical Emergency)
 Analysis The pilot performed an off-airport landing in the helicopter, to pick up a patient for transport to a nearby hospital.
During the subsequent takeoff, the helicopter's tail rotor struck a wire that was located about 30 feet above the ground, oriented perpendicular to its flight path.
The pilot immediately landed without further incident.
Neither the pilot, nor the crew were previously informed of the wire, which was not observed until just prior to contact.
The helicopter sustained damage to the tail rotor, vertical stabilizer, and left aft storage compartment door.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate visual lookout, which resulted in an in-flight collision with a wire.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
OBJECT - WIRE,STATIC 2.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On December 1, 2007, about 1310 central standard time, a Bell 206-L4 helicopter, N95CH, was substantially damaged when it struck a wire during takeoff from a field in Talladega, Alabama.
The certificated commercial pilot, two crew members, and a passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a company visual flight rules flight plan was filed for the planned flight to a hospital in Ironton, Alabama.
The air ambulance flight was conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.
According to the operator, the flight previously departed from Anniston, Alabama, and the pilot performed an off-airport landing to pick up a patient for transport to a nearby hospital.
During the subsequent takeoff, the helicopter's tail rotor struck a wire that was located about 30 feet above the ground, oriented perpendicular to its flight path.
The pilot immediately landed without further incident.
Neither the pilot, nor the crew were previously informed of the wire, which was not observed until just prior to contact.
The helicopter sustained damage to the tail rotor, vertical stabilizer, and left aft storage compartment door.
The pilot did not report any mechanical problems with the helicopter.
He reported 11,166 hours of total rotorcraft flight experience, which included 480 hours in the same make and model as the accident helicopter.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
