Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
ANVIK, AK
Accident Number:
ANC01LA066
Date & Time:
06/02/2001, 0930 AKD 
Registration:
N25BA
Aircraft:
Helio H-391B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business
Analysis 
The private certificated pilot was departing a river in a float-equipped airplane.  During the 
takeoff run, the airplane came up on-step, but started to veer to the left.  The pilot was holding 
full right rudder, but the airplane continued to turn left.  He aborted the takeoff, but the left 
float collided with the bank of the river, and the right wing struck a tree.  The airplane received 
damage to the left float assembly, the fuselage at the forward left float attach point, and the 
leading edge wing slat of the right wing.  The float assembly was installed the previous month, 
11.5 hours before the accident under a Supplemental Type Certificate (STC).  Since the float 
installation, the pilot said he had trouble obtaining full right rudder travel of the aerodynamic 
rudder.  After the accident, a mechanic found an incorrect set of springs, as part of the water 
rudder/aerodynamic rudder rigging, installed on the airplane.  An FAA airworthiness inspector 
reviewed the tail spring concerns raised by the pilot.  She found that the float installation STC 
specified the use of D-376 water rudder steering springs.  Due to the lack of immediate 
availability, the installer used Scott 3200 tailwheel steering springs.  The installer told the FAA 
inspector that due to the similarity of the two spring sets, he has utilized Scott 3200 tailwheel 
springs in the past on other float installations, utilizing FAA field approvals, and substitution of 
the springs have been widely used in the floatplane industry.  In this case, the installer did not 
obtain an FAA field approval.  The installer told the FAA that when the floats were installed on 
the accident airplane, the rigging of the water and aerodynamic rudders allowed proper 
movement of each assembly.  The installer reported that the difference in the two spring 
assemblies, as measured by applying a 40 pound weight to each set, was 3/8 inch further 
extension of the D-376 springs.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's continued operation of the accident airplane with known equipment deficiencies, 
and an improper installation of the float assembly by maintenance personnel.  A factor in the 
accident was the pilot's delay in aborting the takeoff.
Page 2 of 6ANC01LA066
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN
Findings
1. (C) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. LANDING GEAR,FLOAT ASSEMBLY
3. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - DIRT BANK/RISING EMBANKMENT
5. (F) ABORTED TAKEOFF - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6ANC01LA066
Factual Information
On June 2, 2001, about 0930 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Helio H-391B airplane, 
N25BA, sustained substantial damage during an aborted takeoff from the Anvik River, about 21 
miles northwest of Anvik, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) cross-country business flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  
The airplane was operated by Aurora Ventures Inc., dba Anvik River Lodge.  The private 
certificated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on June 11, 2001, the pilot reported he was planning to fly to 
Anvik to pick up cargo for the lodge.  He said the float assembly was installed in May 2001, 11.5 
hours before the accident under a Supplemental Type Certificate (STC), and since the float 
installation, he had trouble obtaining full right rudder travel of the aerodynamic rudder.  The 
water rudders appeared to have sufficient travel.  On the accident flight, the pilot said he was 
departing the Anvik River that was running about 4 knots of current.  During the takeoff run, 
the airplane came up on-step, but started to veer to the left. He said he was holding full right 
rudder, but the airplane continued to turn left.  He aborted the takeoff, but the left float 
collided with the bank of the river, and the right wing struck a tree.  The airplane received 
damage to the left float assembly, the fuselage at the forward left float attach point, and the 
leading edge wing slat of the right wing.
The pilot reported that after the accident, he asked a mechanic from Anvik to inspect the 
airplane.  The mechanic indicated an incorrect set of springs, as part of the water 
rudder/aerodynamic rudder rigging, was installed on the airplane.  The mechanic installed the 
correct springs on June 12, 2001.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector, Anchorage Flight Standards 
District Office, reviewed the tail spring concerns raised by the pilot.  She found that the float 
installation STC specified the use of D-376 water rudder steering springs.  Due to the lack of 
immediate availability, the installer used Scott 3200 tailwheel steering springs.  The installer 
told the FAA inspector that due to the similarity of the two spring sets, he has utilized Scott 
3200 tailwheel springs in the past on other float installations, utilizing FAA field approvals, 
and substitution of the springs have been widely used in the floatplane industry.  In this case, 
the installer did not obtain an FAA field approval. The installer told the FAA that when the 
floats were installed on the accident airplane, the rigging of the water and aerodynamic 
rudders allowed proper movement of each assembly.  The installer reported that the difference 
in the two spring assemblies, as measured by applying a 40 pound weight to each set, was 3/8 
inch further extension of the D-376 springs.
According to the Pilot/Operator Report (NTSB form 6120.1/2) submitted by the pilot, the pilot 
indicated he had accrued 126.3 hours total time, of which 101.8 hours were accrued in the 
previous 90 days.  The pilot accrued 66.1 hours in the accident airplane make and model, with 
59.8 hours accrued in the previous 90 days.
Page 4 of 6ANC01LA066
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/08/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/14/2001
Flight Time:
126 hours (Total, all aircraft), 66 hours (Total, this make and model), 78 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 102 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Helio
Registration:
N25BA
Model/Series:
H-391B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
011
Landing Gear Type: 
Float
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/11/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
67 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2225 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
G-0435C2B2-6
Registered Owner:
CLIFFORD HICKSON
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
AURORA VENTURS INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
ANVIK RIVER LODGE
Operator Designator Code:
Page 5 of 6ANC01LA066
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
ANVIK, AK 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
ANVIK, AK (K40)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0930 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
62.869444, -160.742778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
SCOTT ERICKSON
Adopted Date:
02/20/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
SILVIA VILLA; FAA-AL-ANC FSDO 03; ANCHORAGE, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC01LA066
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
