The pilot/owner flew the experimental amateur-built amphibious airplane with a pilot-rated passenger on 
a long cross-country flight to a land-based airport, the day prior to the accident. The purpose of the trip 
was to begin training for a seaplane rating, which was to be conducted in another airplane type, at a 
nearby lake. While en route, the airplane™s transponder malfunctioned, and the purpose of the accident 
flight was to fly to another airport to have the transponder replaced at a maintenance facility. The 
airplane departed from a 4,301-foot-long, asphalt runway. The airplane experienced a total loss of 
engine power shortly after takeoff, stalled, and descended into the rooftop of a supermarket located 
about 1 mile from the departure end of the runway, where it was consumed by a postcrash fire. 
 
The pilot-rated passenger reported that there were no problems with the airplane™s takeoff roll and initial 
climb. As the pilot turned crosswind, the engine suddenly quit. He was also not able to recall the point at 
which the airplane lifted off the runway, the altitude the engine lost power, or any instrument 
indications. His next recollection was rolling on the floor of the supermarket. A pilot at the departure 
airport reported that the accident airplane rotated about 500 feet prior to the end of the runway, and 
began a shallow climb, while mostly maintaining a high pitch angle. Shortly thereafter, he observed the 
airplane stall and enter a descending left spin, before it disappeared behind a tree line. 
 
Postaccident examination of wreckage did not reveal any catastrophic preimpact malfunctions; however, 
the condition of the wreckage precluded the ability to functionally check the engine, its associated 
components and fuel system. In addition, it could not be determined if debris found in the airplane™s fuel 
system was present prior to the postcrash fire. While the logbooks for the engine were not located, the 
investigation noted that the engine was installed on an airplane that was involved in a fatal accident 
about 19 years prior to the accident. The engine was overhauled about 10 years 6 months prior to the 
accident and at the time of the accident, appeared to have been rebuilt with parts from several engines. 
The pilot recently purchased the airplane, which had undergone a period of not being flown for about 3 
years prior to the purchase.
Page 2 of 13ERA12FA265
A loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined due to the postaccident condition of the 
airframe and engine, which resulted in an inadvertent stall and subsequent collision with a building. 
