The flight instructor was providing a demonstration/instructional flight to the passenger the 
day after the powered parachute had been setup as a static display at an air show. After 
performing a preflight inspection and arranging the parachute, the flight instructor briefed the 
passenger that they would approach the runway from the northwest, and then depart along the 
runway to the south. The flight instructor then started the engine, ﬁkitedﬂ the parachute, and 
proceeded southeast toward the runway and the 75-foot-tall trees along its eastern edge. Upon 
reaching the western edge of the runway, the flight instructor increased the engine power, and 
the powered parachute lifted off from the ground; however, it was still oriented at an angle to 
the runway, and it continued on its southeasterly track toward the trees ahead. The flight 
instructor attempted to use the steering controls of the parachute to steer the vehicle to the 
right away from the trees but found them to be ineffective. He then attempted to pull on both 
of the steering lines to give the parachute additional lift, but the vehicle then impacted the tops 
of the trees and fell to the ground. A postaccident examination revealed a noticeable relative 
difference in the adjusted length of the left and right steering lines, which was also evident in 
an onboard video of the accident flight. According to published FAA guidance regarding 
takeoffs in powered parachutes, ﬁThe takeoff surface should be firm, free of debris, and not 
have any obstructions along the takeoff path.ﬂ
The flight instructor™s failure to ensure an obstruction-free takeoff path prior to initiating the 
takeoff and his inadequate preflight inspection of the powered parachute™s flight controls, 
which resulted in a collision with trees during the takeoff.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2012, about 0800 eastern daylight time, an Powrachute LLC Airwolf 912ULS, 
N415BA, incurred minor damage when it struck trees and terrain during an attempted takeoff 
from Blackwater Creek Ultralight Flightpark (9FD2), Plant City, Florida. The certificated sport 
pilot/flight instructor incurred minor injuries and the passenger was seriously injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local instructional 
flight, which was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91.
According to the flight instructor, he was conducting an introductory powered parachute flight 
with the passenger. The powered parachute had been on static display at an air show the 
previous day, so the flight instructor had taken "extra care" in conducting his preflight 
inspection. During the inspection the flight instructor noted that the throttle was in the full 
open position, the keys were missing, and the battery was disconnected. After completing the 
preflight inspection and briefing the passenger, the flight instructor prepared to depart, and 
made one final check of the parachute lines and layout. The flight instructor had set up the 
powered parachute adjacent to a turf runway, with the powered parachute oriented toward the 
southeast, and eventually planned to depart to the south.
After starting the engine, the flight instructor "kited" the parachute, checked to ensure that it 
had properly inflated, and checked for other traffic inbound to the turf runway. The flight 
instructor then increased engine power for takeoff, and began pushing on the foot bars in order 
to turn the powered parachute away from the oncoming trees that ran parallel to the runway. 
Once the powered parachute™s wheels left the ground, the flight instructor continued to push 
the foot bars to turn the vehicle away from the trees; however, since the steering lines were 
fully extended, the flight instructor was unable to change the shape of the parachute enough to 
turn to the right, away from the trees.
The flight instructor then attempted to ﬁpumpﬂ the steering lines in an attempt to fill the 
parachute with more air, and increase its climb performance. The vehicle then struck the tops 
of the trees, stopping its forward travel, and after remaining momentarily suspended in the 
trees, the vehicle fell and impacted the ground resulting in serious injury to the passenger. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The flight instructor held a sport pilot certificate with an endorsement for powered parachute 
land. He also held a flight instructor certificate with a sport rating and an endorsement for 
powered parachute land. He reported 314 total hours of flight experience, all of which were in 
the accident powered parachute make and model.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather conditions reported a Plant City Airport (PCM), Plant City, Florida, located about 
8 nautical miles south of the accident site, at 0755, included 7 statute miles visibility, scattered 
clouds at 1,700 feet, calm winds, a temperature and dewpoint of 17 degrees Celsius (C), and an 
altimeter setting of 29.96 inches of mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The Blackwater Creek Ultralight Flightpark was comprised of a single 2,300-foot-long by 150-
foot-wide turf runway oriented in a 17/35 configuration. An area for aircraft parking was 
located on the west side of the runway and extended from about the runway mid-point about 
300 feet to the north and south. Trees about 75 feet tall ran parallel to the runway along its 
eastern edge.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who responded to the scene following the 
accident, identified the area where the flight instructor had set up the powered parachute in 
preparation for the flight as about 300 feet west of the runway centerline, at roughly the 
runway midpoint.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector examined the wreckage at the scene following the 
accident. According to the inspector, all of the parachute canopy and trim lines were secure 
with no anomalies noted. The engine appeared intact and exhibited no obvious signs of damage 
or pre-impact failure, and one of the three propeller blades was missing its tip. Several of the 
support tubes comprising the frame of the vehicle were broken consistent with impact.
After viewing video of the accident flight, the inspector returned to examine the wreckage on 
April 4, 2012. Inspection of the trim and steering lines revealed that the left trim line exhibited 
noticeably more slack that the right side trim line.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Manufacturer™s Preflight Checklist
The airframe manufacturer™s pilot operating handbook, Preflight Checklist (Detailed), provided 
a suggested preflight inspection routine that included the inspection of both the on-ground and 
in-flight directional steering systems. With regard to the in-flight steering system, the checklist 
specifically advised, ﬁCheck that the foot bar is secure, pivots freely, steering line in good order, 
[sic] pullies in good order and trim system secure, moves freely and in proper takeoff position.ﬂ
FAA Guidance
The FAA Powered Parachute Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-9) described the procedures 
necessary for a successful takeoff, and described that ﬁThe takeoff surface should be firm, free 
of debris, and not have any obstructions along the takeoff path. The takeoff surface should have 
sufficient length to permit the powered parachute to quickly accelerate to normal flight speed.ﬂ
Accident Video
Videos depicting the accident flight were by the passenger™s spouse, who was standing at the 
mid-point of the runway at its eastern edge, and a video camera installed on the powered 
parachute. Review of the exterior video showed the powered parachute as it began rolling 
toward the runway and the parachute began to inflate. During this time, the engine sound 
remained relatively constant, as did the vehicle™s speed across the ground. Just before reaching 
the runway™s western edge the engine sound increased, consistent with an increase in engine 
power, and the powered parachute began accelerating. Just after crossing the runway™s western 
edge, the nosewheel of the powered parachute left the ground, followed by the main landing 
gear about 1 second later. As the powered parachute left the ground, it continued to track 
southeasterly, down the runway and towards its eastern edge. The camera then panned away 
from the vehicle as it disappeared behind the trees.
The video taken onboard the powered parachute depicted a similar series of events, and 
confirmed the FAA inspector™s observation of the relative slack between the left and right 
steering lines.
