The pilot stated that he departed the airport with six parachutists for a jump flight. As the 
airplane approached 1,000 feet above ground level, he noticed that the airplane wasn™t 
climbing. He checked the engine gauges and noticed that the engine analyzer was flashing 
ﬁCHTﬂ and the cylinder head temperature was 454 degrees F. As the pilot pitched the nose 
down and turned back to the airport, he heard a muffled ﬁthudﬂ sound and saw white smoke 
pour from the engine. As he prepared for a forced landing, four of the parachutists jumped 
from the airplane. The pilot then performed a forced landing in a field, coming to a stop near a 
dirt berm. An examination revealed a hole in the engine crankcase, near the No. 4 cylinder. 
Various pieces of metal, including part of a ﬁquick oil drain plugﬂ were found in the engine oil 
sump. The No. 4 connecting rod journal appeared distorted and displayed extensive heat 
signatures. The crankshaft journals on either side of the No. 4 rod journals did not appear to be 
distorted or to contain the same heat signatures and were coated with engine oil. The rod and 
crankshaft bearings were scored. The signatures on the engine were consistent with the loss of 
lubricant to the No. 4 connecting rod journal. A reason for the loss of engine oil to the journal 
was not found.
The loss of oil pressure to the No. 4 connecting rod journal and the subsequent loss of engine 
power.
On April 1, 2012, about 1515 central daylight time, a Cessna U206B airplane, N3830G, 
experienced a loss of engine power shortly after departure from the Winterset Municipal 
Airport (3Y3), Winterset, Iowa. The commercial rated pilot and six passengers were not injured 
and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The airplane was registered to and operated by 
Des Moines Skydivers, LLC, Des Moines, Iowa under the provision of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulation Part 91 as a parachute jump flight. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and the airplane was not on a flight plan.
 
The pilot reported that he departed the airport on a jump flight and turned crosswind, and 
headed north. When the airplane was about 1,000 feet above ground level, the airplane seemed 
to stop climbing, so he looked at the engine gauges and everything seemed normal. However, 
as he turned back to the engine analyzer, the analyzer was flashing ﬁCHTﬂ and the cylinder 
temperature read 454 degrees F. The pilot then pitched the airplane™s nose down to cool the 
engine, and turned back towards the airfield. The pilot heard a muffled ﬁthudﬂ sound and white 
smoke poured from the engine. The pilot pulled the mixture control, turned the ignition and 
master switches off.  He then yelled for the jumpers to get out, and four of the parachutists 
were able to exit the airplane. He performed a forced landing in a plowed field and the airplane 
came to stop near a dirt berm.
  
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector reported that the airplane 
sustained extensive firewall damage, when the nose landing gear was torn from the airplane 
during the forced landing. The inspector also noted that there was a hole in the engine™s 
crankcase near the number four cylinder.
The engine was removed from the airframe and sent to Continental Motor™s engine test facility, 
in Mobile, Alabama. The engine was examined under the supervision of the NTSB Investigator 
in Charge, and technical representatives from Continental Motors.
 
A visual exam of the engine confirmed the hole in the crankcase near the number four cylinder; 
the engine was then disassembled. Various pieces of metal, including part of a ﬁquick oil drain 
plugﬂ was found in the engine oil sump. The number four connecting rod journal appeared 
distorted and had displayed extensive heat signatures. The crankshaft journals on either side of 
the number four rod journals did not appear distorted nor contain the same heat signatures 
and were coated with engine oil. The rod and crankshaft bearings appeared scored. The 
crankcase and crankshaft oil galleys appeared open. A reason for the loss of engine oil to the 
journal was not found.
A review of the engine maintenance log book revealed that the engine had approximately 3,233 
total hours and about 1,730 hours since major overhaul.
