Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lumberport, WV
Accident Number:
ERA14FA138
Date & Time:
03/01/2014, 1215 EST 
Registration:
N7203E
Aircraft:
BEECH F33
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot was conducting a local personal flight. Radar data indicated that the airplane 
took off from its home airport and flew westbound for about 23 minutes and then reversed 
course back toward the airport. Radar data indicated no major course deviations after the turn, 
but the data did indicate that the airplane™s altitude deviated many times. Toward the end of 
the flight, the airplane started to descend, and the last two recorded altitudes indicated that the 
airplane reached a descent rate of 9,600 ft per minute. The airplane subsequently impacted a 
ridgeline, during which the airplane was highly fractured, with debris coming to rest on the 
downslope beyond the ridgeline. No preexisting mechanical anomalies were found that would 
have precluded normal operation, and propeller blade signatures were consistent with the 
engine producing power at the time of impact. 
The pilot had a history of hypertension, depression, and anxiety and had experienced a stroke 
6 years before the accident. His personal physician at that time, who was also a Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) designated aviation medical examiner (AME), prescribed 
multiple medications for these conditions during visits for personal medical care 5 and 6 years 
before the accident, including two medications the FAA considered disqualifying for use by 
pilots. Neither the pilot nor the AME reported these conditions or their treatment to the FAA 
when the pilot obtained aviation medical certificates 4 and 2 years before the accident. The 
AME only provided medical records up to 5 years before the accident.
The pilot™s autopsy was limited by the degree of damage to his body. The local medical 
examiner identified mirtazapine and ethanol in the muscle, and subsequent testing at the FAA 
Civil Aerospace Medical Institute identified amlodipine, mirtazapine, and valsartan but no 
ethanol. 
Mirtazapine is an antidepressant whose mechanism is unknown. Although the pilot had been 
diagnosed and treated for depression and anxiety, there were no available records describing 
the effectiveness of the treatment or the extent of the pilot™s symptoms around the time of the 
accident. Although mirtazapine can be sedating, the pilot had apparently been using it for 
several years. The family reported that the pilot had planned to travel in the weeks following 
Page 2 of 8ERA14FA138
the accident, and there were no reports of new or increased stressors. The ethanol identified by 
the medical examiner likely resulted from postmortem production rather than ingestion and 
did not contribute to the accident. Amlodipine and valsartan are used to lower blood pressure, 
and although the pilot™s hypertension and its treatment likely did not contribute directly to the 
accident, it increased his risk of recurrent stroke or other cardiovascular event. 
There were no records provided nor any reports from the family about who prescribed the 
pilot™s current medications or who might have been treating him in the 5 years before the 
accident if not his personal physician/AME. Current recommendations for treatment following 
strokes are designed to decrease the likelihood of a recurrent event. Guidelines include ongoing 
treatment with antiplatelet medications, such as aspirin or clopidogrel, evaluation and 
aggressive treatment of cholesterol, and careful management of hypertension and diabetes. 
However, there was no evidence from available records or the toxicology results indicating that 
the pilot was using antiplatelet medication or a cholesterol-lowering agent.
If the pilot and his AME had fully reported the pilot™s medical conditions and medications to 
the FAA, additional testing, such as brain imaging and neuropsychiatric and neurocognitive 
testing, would have been required for FAA issuance of a medical certificate. Without further 
testing, the extent of any impairment from the pilot™s illnesses or their treatment could not be 
determined. According to the available evidence, the pilot™s stroke risks were inadequately 
treated and put him at a high risk for a recurrent stroke or a cardiovascular event. These risks 
likely led to the pilot™s acute impairment or incapacitation, which resulted in his flight into 
terrain.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A stroke or cardiovascular event, which resulted in the pilot™s acute impairment or 
incapacitation and his subsequent flight into terrain. 
Findings
Aircraft
Altitude - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Cardiovascular - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 8ERA14FA138
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 1, 2014, about 1215 eastern standard time, a Beech F33A, N7203E, was destroyed 
when it collided with trees and terrain near Lumberport, West Virginia. The private pilot was 
fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the 
local personal flight, which departed Fairmont Municipal Airport (4G7), Fairmont, West 
Virginia, and was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
A witness, who was standing in a valley just beyond a small mountain where the accident 
occurred, stated that he did not see the airplane prior to the accident, but heard an engine 
sputtering, then go to full power. He subsequently heard trees and branches breaking, and 
metallic sounds, then looked up to see trees and branches falling and airplane debris 
descending down the side of the mountain. The witness then proceeded up the side of the 
mountain where he saw the remnants of the airplane.
Radar information revealed that the airplane departed 4G7, elevation 1,032 feet msl, about 
1140. It subsequently headed west-southwest, initially climbing to cruising altitudes of 3,500 to 
3,600 feet msl by 1143, but after 1148, continued outbound at 3,300 to 3,400 feet.
At 1203, and nearing the Ohio border, the airplane turned right and reversed course, tracking 
eastbound, back toward 4G7 and almost directly over the outbound course. It generally 
maintained altitudes between 3,300 feet and 3,400 feet until 1210, when it climbed to 3,500 
feet. By 1211:40, the airplane had climbed to 4,000 feet, and by 1212:51, it had descended to 
3,100 feet. The airplane then climbed again, to 3,500 feet by 1213:52, but then descended and 
maintained between 3,400 feet and 3,200 feet until 1214:49, when it had climbed again to 
3,600 feet. It subsequently began a final descent; at 1215:08, the airplane was at 2,800 feet, at 
1215:12, it was at 2,600 feet, and at 1215:17, at last radar contact, the airplane was at 1,800 feet.  
There were no major course deviations noted during the airplane's descent.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 68, held a private pilot certificate with airplane single engine land and 
instrument-airplane ratings. His latest FAA third class medical certificate was issued on 
November 1, 2012. At the time, the pilot indicated 1,550 total hours of flight time, with 30 
hours in the previous 6 months. No logbook was located at the accident site, and the logbooks 
provided to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) by the pilot's family only listed flights 
through 1997.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The single engine metal airplane was powered by a Continental IO-520-series engine driving a 
three-bladed metal propeller. The latest annual inspection was completed on January 4, 2014. 
At the time, the airplane had operated 1,995.7 hours, and the engine 897.0 hours since new.
METEROROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather, recorded at an airport 9 nm to the south, included winds from 040 degrees true 
at 15, gusting to 24 knots, overcast skies at 7,500 feet, 10 miles visibility, temperature 45 
degrees F, dew point 27 degrees F, and an altimeter setting of 30.18 inches Hg.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Page 4 of 8ERA14FA138
The impact sequence commenced in trees just west of a ridgeline in the vicinity of 39 degrees, 
25.44 minutes north latitude, 080 degrees 26.78 minutes west longitude at an elevation of 
about 1,370 feet. Severed hardwoods, some up to 18 inches in diameter, were sheared in an 
approximately 15-degree descending path after the first tree strikes. The downward path, 
heading about 130 degrees magnetic, ended in a large ground scar on the ridgeline. Beyond the 
ground scar, and descending beyond the ridgeline, were the scattered remnants of the highly 
fractured airplane, with the largest piece, part of the cabin roof attached to the right wing, 
wrapped around a tree about 100 feet below the ridgeline. The most distant object, the engine, 
came to rest about 150 yards from the initial impact point, and 150 feet below the ridgeline.
The majority of the airplane was accounted for at the accident the site; however, due to an 
incoming winter storm, documentation was suspended. Prior to departure, all three propeller 
blades were located separate from the propeller hub, with one exhibiting torsional bending, 
leading edge damage and a separated tip, one exhibiting torsional bending and leading edge 
damage near the tip, and the last exhibiting a lesser degree of bending. The separated panel 
containing the three engine controls was also located; the mixture was in, and the propeller 
rpm and throttle were mostly pulled out; however, due to the extent of damage to the airplane, 
the actual control positions at impact could not be determined.
The wreckage was recovered after sufficient snow melt and was taken to a storage facility for 
further documentation. There, evidence of all flight controls surfaces was confirmed. Flight 
control continuity could not be completely determined due to the fractured nature of the 
wreckage. The rudder control cables were continuous from the cockpit to the aft rudder 
bellcrank that was separated. The aileron flight control cables were continuous from the 
cockpit to each respective wing aileron outboard bellcrank, but the left and right aileron pull 
cables were separated from their respective aileron control bellcrank, separated in the cockpit 
area, and the aileron balance cable was separated at the right aileron outboard bellcrank and at 
the rear spar carry-through. The cable separations exhibited splayed ends and individual 
filaments consistent with tensile overload. Elevator flight control cable continuity could not be 
determined.
The engine was severely impact damaged, and the exhaust system exhibited bending and 
folding, consistent with heat having been applied at impact. Crankshaft continuity was 
confirmed, and top spark plugs were gray in color. Neither magneto was recovered.
The fuel pump was rotated freely by hand. The fuel manifold valve diaphragm was intact. The 
retaining nut and plunger were tight and secure. The fuel screen exhibited a minor amount of 
dirt and the fuel manifold valve cavity had impacted dirt. Three of the fuel nozzles were 
fractured or bent, and could not be removed. The other three were removed and noted to be 
free of debris.
The throttle body/metering unit exhibited impact damage. The throttle and mixture control 
arms were bent but moved freely by hand from stop to stop. The throttle plate was moved 
freely by hand, and the fuel screen was free of debris.
The oil pump was disassembled with no preexisting anomalies were noted, and the internal 
element oil filter was absent of metal.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Page 5 of 8ERA14FA138
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at West Virginia University, Morgantown, West 
Virginia, where the cause of death and manner of death were noted as "Undetermined." The 
autopsy was limited by the degree of damage to the body; specifically, no heart or brain was 
available for examination.
Toxicological testing was hampered by a lack of blood or other body fluids available for testing. 
Initial testing by the medical examiner revealed the presence of mirtazapine and ethanol in 
muscle at 0.07%.
Subsequent toxicological testing was performed at the FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, where amlodipine, mirtazapine, and valsartan were found, but no 
ethanol in tissue specimens.
A Medical Factual Report was produced by the NTSB Chief Medical Officer. The basis for the 
report included the pilot's medical certification file, the accident's FAA medical case review, the 
pilot's toxicology results, autopsy report, personal medical records, and witness statements and 
observations from the investigator in charge. The complete report can be found in the public 
docket for this accident investigation.
Personal medical records were subpoenaed from the pilot's physician, who was also the pilot's 
FAA-designated Aviation Medical Examiner (AME), and who produced only five pages of 
records through October 12, 2009. In summary, the pilot had a history of hypertension, 
depression, and anxiety, and had suffered a stroke in 2008. The physician prescribed multiple 
medications for those conditions during visits for personal medical care in 2008 and 2009, 
including two medications the FAA considered disqualifying for use by pilots. Neither the pilot 
nor the AME reported these conditions or their treatment to the FAA when the pilot obtained 
aviation medical certificates from the same physician/AME in 2010 and 2012.
As noted in the Medical Factual Report, "In a study that followed patients after a stroke that 
left them with no or minimal disability, the risk of recurrent major stroke was 14% and the risk 
of death from any cause was 32% by 10 years later. Recurrent minor stroke, diabetes, heart 
attack, and hypertension significantly increased the risk of recurrent major stroke. In a more 
recent study, the combined risk of recurrent stroke or death from any cause was 10% at one 
year, 26% at five years, and 45% at 10 years following a stroke. These rates are about double 
the risk of the stroke-free population. Risk of both stroke and death was increased by having 
had a heart attack, diabetes, or hypertension.
Current recommendations for treatment following transient ischemic attacks and ischemic 
strokes are designed to decrease the likelihood of a recurrent event. Guidelines include ongoing 
treatment with antiplatelet medications such as aspirin or clopidogrel, evaluation and 
aggressive treatment of cholesterol, and careful management of hypertension and diabetes."
There were no records provided or any indication from the family as to who prescribed the 
pilot's current medications, or who might have been treating him if not the personal physician 
/AME.
Witnesses also reported that the pilot was slurring his speech within the 2 weeks preceding 
accident. Witnesses further indicated his possibly having suffered mini-stokes at that time, but 
family members denied any knowledge of them. They also noted that the pilot had recently 
retired and was looking forward to moving south in the near future.
Page 6 of 8ERA14FA138
History of Flight
Enroute
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
not used
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
68, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/04/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1550 hours (Total, all aircraft), 50 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N7203E
Model/Series:
F33 A
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
CE-1041
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/04/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3412 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1995 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
C91A installed, activated, 
did not aid in locating 
accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-BB
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8ERA14FA138
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CKB, 1203 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
130°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 7500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 24 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
240°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.18 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / -3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Fairmont, WV (4G7)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Fairmont, WV (4G7)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1140 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.423889, -80.446389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
05/16/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Jerry Morgan; FAA/FSDO; Charleston, WV
Ernest Hall; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Chris Lang; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
05/16/2016
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88863
Page 8 of 8ERA14FA138
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
