Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Rosamond, CA
Accident Number:
WPR16LA047
Date & Time:
01/02/2016, 1430 PST 
Registration:
N133SV
Aircraft:
KEVIN METZLER Velocity STD RG
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Shortly after departure on the local flight, the private pilot observed that the engine 
temperature was higher than it had been on the previous day's flight. After reducing power, the 
engine began to surge, which prompted the pilot to return to the airport. Unable to maintain 
altitude, the pilot elected to land in a vacant field. The left wing sustained substantial damage 
during the landing. A postaccident examination of the engine revealed that the No. 1 
connecting rod assembly had failed. Although the reason for the failure could not be 
determined, the fracture surfaces exhibited signatures of fatigue consistent with a malfunction 
of the connecting rod bearing, such as improper bearing size, rotation of the bearing during 
service, or operation of a severely worn bearing. Such conditions would result in higher-than-
normal operating stress, and likely contributed to the propogation of the fatigue cracking.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power due to failure of the No. 1 connecting rod as a result of multiple 
fatigue cracks for reasons that could not be determined during on postaccident examination. 
Findings
Aircraft
Recip engine power section - Failure (Cause)
Recip eng cyl section - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR16LA047
Factual Information
On January 2, 2016, about 1430 Pacific standard time, a Kevin Metzler Velocity STD RG 
experimental amateur-built airplane, N133SV, was substantially damaged following a loss of 
engine power and subsequent forced landing about 1 mile northwest of the Rosamond Skypark 
Airport (L00), Rosamond, California. The private pilot, who was the owner and sole occupant 
of the airplane, was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, 
which was being operated in accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, and a 
flight plan was not filed. The local flight departed L00 about 5 minutes prior to the accident.
In a report submitted to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the pilot reported after taking off he climbed with the engine rpm set at about 
4,500, "–which was well below the engines rated redline of 5,400 rpm." The pilot stated that 
when he reached an altitude of 7,000 ft, he noticed that the [engine] temperature was much 
higher than it had been the previous day, which prompted him to level off and reduce power. 
Shortly after the power reduction the engine began to surge; at this time the pilot decided to 
return to the departure airport, about 10 miles to the east of his location. The pilot reported 
that he attempted to maintain as much altitude as possible, and while en route the engine 
began to lose power, which made altitude more difficult to maintain. The pilot opined that 
when he realized that he would not be able to make it to the airport, he elected to land in a 
vacant field about one and one-half miles west of L00. After landing with the gear retracted, 
the airplane came to rest in an upright position.
The airplane, which was equipped with a Subaru EG-33 engine, serial number 007708, rated at 
230 horsepower, had accumulated a total of 6.8 hours since its most recent overhaul; the total 
engine time was unknown. The pilot reported that the most recent condition inspection was 
performed on December 1, 2015, at a total airframe time of 66.8 hours.
An initial postaccident examination of the engine revealed that the No. 1 connecting rod 
assembly had failed, which resulted in the loss of power. The NTSB IIC took possession of the 
connecting rod assembly, in addition to two pieces that had separated from the assembly. The 
retained parts were shipped to the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, D.C., for 
examination and analysis by a Senior Metallurgist. As a result of his examination, the 
metallurgist reported that the connecting rod assembly had fractured in four areas. An 
attachment bolt and nut remained attached to a fractured piece of the arm and cap portion. 
The second attachment bolt, a portion of the second arm, and a portion of the cap had 
separated from the connecting rod assembly, however, were not recovered during the 
investigation. Additionally, examination of the fracture faces revealed fatigue cracks emanated 
from multiple origins at the machined cut out area adjacent to the through-hole for each 
attachment bolt. Fatigue cracks with multiple origins where also observed on the mating 
fracture faces. The fatigue crack origin areas were aligned and parallel to circumferential 
machine marks. The rough texture of the fatigue crack features was consistent with a fatigue 
crack that had propagated under high stress. The fatigue crack in each mating fracture 
propagated through at least 50% of the wall. Further, the fracture faces outside of the fatigue 
regions exhibited rough dimple texture features consistent with overstress separation. The 
round surfaces that corresponded to the location of the bearings showed evidence of rough 
Page 3 of 5WPR16LA047
circumferential gouge marks, but no evidence of heat tinting was observed. (Refer to the NTSB 
Materials Laboratory factual report, which is appended to the docket for this accident.)
On January 26, 2016, under the supervision of the NTSB IIC, an examination of the engine was 
performed at the facilities of Outfront Motorsport, located in Santa Ana, California. With the 
exception of the engine's No. 1 connecting rod assembly which had failed, and the stuck piston 
of the pressure relief valve on the oil pump, there were no anomalies observed with the engine 
that would have precluded normal operation. According to the Outfront Motorsport general 
manager, during normal operations the pressure relief valve opens to relieve oil pressure when 
it is too high, and remains closed in order to build and sustain oil pressure. When observed 
during the postaccident examination, the piston portion of the valve was stuck closed. When 
the component was liquid tested to check for leakage past the piston, the valve retained liquid, 
which indicated that the valve was not stuck in the open position. After the piston was forced to 
the open position, debris was observed in the component which had kept it closed. The debris 
was consistent with bearing material that had invaded the area subsequent to the engine 
failure.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of engine power (partial)
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/28/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/25/2014
Flight Time:
847 hours (Total, all aircraft), 67 hours (Total, this make and model), 807 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5WPR16LA047
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
KEVIN METZLER
Registration:
N133SV
Model/Series:
Velocity STD RG 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2014
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
SFE-012
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/01/2015, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
7 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
66.8 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Subaru
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
EG-33
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
WJF, 2351 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1455 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
185°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
60°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.11 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / -11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Rosamond, CA (L00)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Rosamond, CA (L00)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1425 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
34.884167, -118.211667
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Little
Adopted Date:
03/06/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Anthony Miller; Federal Aviation Administration; Van Nuys, CA
Publish Date:
03/06/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92533
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
