Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Newman Lake, WA
Accident Number:
WPR16LA045
Date & Time:
01/01/2016, 1530 PST 
Registration:
N2684A
Aircraft:
PIPER PA18
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot performed two low passes to the snow-covered airstrip, during which the 
airplane's flaps were extended and carburetor heat was on. After completing the second low 
pass, the pilot retracted the wing flaps, turned off the carburetor heat, and applied engine 
power to go around. The engine subsequently experienced roughness and a partial loss of 
power. The pilot turned the carburetor heat back on, but engine power was not restored. 
Unable to maintain altitude, the pilot elected to land on the airstrip he had been overflying. 
During the landing, the airplane nosed over due to the depth of the accumulated snow, which 
resulted in substantial damage.
A postaccident examination of the carburetor revealed full control continuity to the carburetor 
heat/air box, the butterfly valve reached full travel, and full control continuity from the cockpit 
throttle and mixture controls to the carburetor was confirmed. An engine run revealed no 
anomalies. Although the airplane was operating in conditions that were conducive to a serious 
risk of carburetor ice accumulation at a descent power setting, the engine was operating at a 
takeoff/go-around power setting at the time of the loss of power, and it is unlikely that 
carburetor ice would have accumulated during this time. Therefore, the reason for the partial 
loss of engine power could not be determined. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation.
Page 2 of 6WPR16LA045
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6WPR16LA045
Factual Information
On January 1, 2016, about 1530 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA18-150, N2684A, was 
substantially damaged during a precautionary landing to a private dirt airstrip following a 
partial loss of engine power near Newman Lake, Washington. The private pilot, the sole 
occupant of the airplane, was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
local flight, which was being operated in accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulation Part 
91, and a flight plan was not filed. The local flight departed Felts Field (SFF), Spokane, 
Washington, about 1500, with the destination being a private airstrip about 13 nautical miles 
northeast of SFF.
In a statement submitted to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge, 
the pilot reported that after departing SFF, his intention was to make several slow, low passes 
over the private airstrip, which was located about 13 nautical miles northeast of SFF. He 
initially climbed to 6,000 ft mean sea level, cycled the carburetor heat while on descent to the 
airstrip, then made an initial low pass with full flaps and carburetor heat applied, followed by a 
go-around with carburetor heat off. The pilot opined that he subsequently made a second low 
pass in the same configuration, but during the go-around experienced engine roughness, a loss 
of power, the engine backfiring, and a loss of engine rpm from 2,400 to 2,200. He then applied 
carburetor heat, but there was no increase in rpm. Unable to maintain altitude, the pilot 
elected to make a precautionary landing on the private airstrip, which was covered with what 
the pilot described as covered with snow. Upon touchdown the airplane nosed over, which 
resulted in substantial damage to both wing struts and the rudder.
A postaccident examination of the airplane and engine overseen by a Federal Aviation 
Administration aviation safety inspector, which included an engine run, revealed no preimpact 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. During the examination 
the inspector noted that the carburetor heat/air box had full continuity, the butterfly valve 
reached full travel, and full continuity of control was confirmed from the throttle and mixture 
controls in the cockpit to the carburetor.
At 1450, the weather reporting facility located at SFF reported wind calm, visibility 10 miles, 
sky clear, temerature -7 C, dew point -9 C, and altimeter reading of 30.52 inches of mercury.
The carburetor icing probability chart from the FAA Special Airworthiness Information 
Bulletin (SAIB), CE-09-35 Carburetor Icing Prevention, indicated that the airplane was 
operating in an area associated with a serious risk of carburetor ice accumulation at descent 
power.
Page 4 of 6WPR16LA045
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Landing-landing roll
Nose over/nose down
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
18, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/22/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/08/2014
Flight Time:
313 hours (Total, all aircraft), 193 hours (Total, this make and model), 195 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 45 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 16 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0.5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N2684A
Model/Series:
PA18 150
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1952
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
18-2190
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/19/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
64 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4346.31 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320 A2B
Registered Owner:
Blake McKinley Jr.
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6WPR16LA045
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SFF, 1957 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1450 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
210°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.52 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-7°C / -9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Spokane, WA (SFF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Spokane, WA (SFF)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
Warners Airstrip (N/A)
Runway Surface Type:
Dirt; Snow
Airport Elevation:
3550 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Snow
Runway Used:
01
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2500 ft / 25 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
47.776667, -117.095000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Little
Adopted Date:
05/23/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Tichnor; Federal Aviation Administration; Spokane, WA
Phillip W Griffis; Federal Aviation Administration; Spokane, WA
Publish Date:
05/23/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92520
Page 6 of 6WPR16LA045
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
