Shortly after the private pilot and flight instructor took off on a local training flight several 
witnesses reported seeing the airplane's wings rocking back and forth just before the airplane 
struck power lines and then terrain. None of these witnesses reported hearing a loss of engine 
power. Neither of the pilots recalled the events leading up to the accident or the accident itself.
Witness marks on the airplane and propeller were consistent with an impact with power lines. 
Signatures on the propeller were consistent with little to no engine power at the time of the 
impact with the power lines; however, investigators were unable to determine if the pilot 
reduced engine power, or if the engine lost power, before impact. An examination of the 
airframe and engine revealed no preimpact anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation. 
The airplane was determined to be 100 lbs over gross weight (about 2,751 lbs) at the time of 
takeoff. Calculations using the airplane's performance charts and the weather conditions that 
existed at the time of the accident indicated that the airplane had sufficient runway available to 
clear a 50-ft obstacle at a gross weight of 2,600 pounds. It is unknown how significantly the 
airplane's overweight condition would have impacted the airplane's climb performance.
The impact with power lines for reasons that could not be determined based on the available 
information.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 2, 2015, about 1015 central daylight time, a Beech B35 airplane, N5176C, was 
substantially damaged when it collided with a powerline and then the ground shortly after 
takeoff from Orange County Airport (KORG), Orange, Texas. The private pilot and flight 
instructor were seriously injured.  The airplane was registered to Webb Real Estate 
Investments Inc. and operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 as an instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight plan. The local flight was originating at 
the time of the accident.
According to one witness at the airport, the airplane taxied out and conducted an engine run-
up. The witness estimated that the airplane was on the ground for 30 to 45 minutes. He did not 
hear anything abnormal during the run-up Œ the witness did not see the takeoff.
Several witnesses, located to the east of the airport, observed the airplane wings "rocking" back 
and forth just prior to the impact with the power lines and terrain. None of these witnesses 
reported hearing anything unusual.
The airplane impacted terrain ½ mile from the departure end of runway 4.
In a telephone conversation with the pilot immediately following the accident, he stated he did 
not recall anything about the accident flight. Despite several attempts by the Investigator in 
Charge, the pilot did not return the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB 6120.1/2 form. The flight instructor did not 
recall anything from the accident flight. His NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, 
NTSB 6120.1/2 form was received on July 27, 2015.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Private Pilot
The pilot, age 64, held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single engine land rating. His 
most recent third class airman medical certificate was issued on December 2, 2014. The 
certificate contained the limitation "Must wear corrective lenses."
The private pilot's flight logbook was located in the airplane. The logbook contained flight 
entries from March 26, 2011, through April 19, 2015. The last page with logged flight time had a 
carryover total time of 885.3 hours. Four flights were logged with a total of 6.3 hours; three 
flights (5.8 hours) were logged in the accident airplane under dual instruction. He had logged 
0.7 hours of ground instruction in "propeller systems, gear systems, and emergency 
procedures" on April 17, 2015. The pilot had successfully completed the requirements of a flight 
review on August 23, 2013, and had logged 5 landings within the previous 90 days.
Flight Instructor
The flight instructor, age 66, held an airline transport pilot certificate with an airplane 
multiengine land rating, and commercial pilot certificate with airplane single engine land, and 
rotorcraft helicopter ratings, a flight instructor certificate with airplane single, multiengine, 
and instrument ratings, advanced and instrument ground instructor certificate, and an 
airframe and power plant mechanic certificate . His most recent second class airman medical 
certificate was issued on January 20, 2015. The certificate contained the limitation "Must wear 
corrective lenses."
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records he had logged no less than 15,620 
hours. The flight instructor did not provide his total time, time in the make and model of the 
accident airplane, or the date of his last flight review. The entries in the private pilot's logbook 
indicated that the flight instructor had provided the previous instruction in the accident 
airplane to the private pilot.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane, a Beechcraft  B35 (serial number D-2375), was manufactured in 1950. It 
was registered with the FAA on a standard airworthiness certificate for normal operations. A 
Continental E-225-8 engine rated at 225 horsepower at 2,650 rpm powered the airplane. The 
engine was equipped with a 2-blade Beechcraft 215-107 propeller.
The airplane was maintained under an annual inspection program. A review of the 
maintenance records indicated that an annual inspection had been completed on November 12, 
2014, at an airframe total time of 6,099.17 hours.
This airplane was equipped with a pressure-type carburetor. In this design the fuel did not flow 
across the throttle plate, therefore the system was not susceptible to carburetor icing. The 
airplane was not equipped with carburetor heat Œ only alternate air in the event that the filter 
iced over.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest official weather observation station was Orange County Airport, Orange, Texas 
(KORG). The elevation of the weather observation station was 13 feet mean sea level (msl). The 
routine aviation weather report (METAR) for KORG, issued at 1015, reported, wind 340 
degrees at 3 knots, visibility 10 miles, sky condition clear, temperature 25 degrees Celsius (C), 
dew point temperature 12 degrees C, altimeter 30.11 inches.
Calculations of relevant meteorological data revealed the density altitude was 1,143 feet.
A review of the carburetor icing probability chart, located in the FAA's Special Airworthiness 
Information Bulletin CE-09-35, dated 6/30/2009, revealed that the airplane was operating in 
an area favorable for the formation of serious carburetor icing at glide power. The plotted point 
was not near the threat area for icing in pressure-type carburetors.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
KORG is a public uncontrolled airport located 3 miles southwest of Orange, Texas, at a 
surveyed elevation of 13.2 feet. The airport had 2 open runways, runway 4/22 (5,500 feet by 75 
feet, asphalt), and runway 13/31 (3,000 feet by 50 feet, turf).
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The accident airplane was equipped with an Electronics International MUX-8A (serial number 
079179). The unit was not damaged and the non-volatile flash memory was extracted normally, 
at the National Transportation Safety Board Vehicle Recorders Laboratory, following the 
manufacturer's procedures. The data extracted spanned from November 23, 2005, through 
May 2, 2015. Data consistent with the accident flight were sampled once every six minutes and 
included two sets of data.
The first set of data was recorded at 0957 and provided the following readings:
EGT1 - 950EGT2 - 977EGT3 Œ 927EGT4 Œ 1015EGT5 Œ 1000EGT6 - 967
CHT1 - 236CHT2 - 237CHT3 Œ 246CHT4 - 242 CHT5 Œ 234 CHT6 - 219
The second set of data was recorded at 1003 and provided the following readings:
EGT1 - 1073EGT2 - 1152EGT3 Œ 1032EGT4 Œ 1130EGT5 Œ 1112EGT6 - 1065
CHT1 - 333CHT2 - 335CHT3 Œ 347CHT4 - 332 CHT5 Œ 307CHT6 Œ 323
According to Continental Motors, the exhaust gas temperature (EGT) numbers did not 
approach typical full power temperatures.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The accident site was located in level terrain vegetated with grass. The accident site was at an 
elevation of 16 feet msl and the airplane impacted on a magnetic heading of 040 degrees.
The main wreckage included the right wing, the left-wing, the fuselage, and the engine and 
propeller assembly. Both wings remained attached to the fuselage. The engine partially 
separated at both upper engine mounts.
The cabin of the airplane was impact damaged and the occupiable space of the cabin was not 
compromised or reduced except for at the floorboard rudder pedals. The forward wind screen 
was broken on the left side and was impact damaged. The throw over single control yoke was 
impact damage and separated.  The damage was consistent with the yoke being on the pilot's 
side at the time of impact and separation. The instrument panel was impact damaged. The turn 
coordinator glass was impact damaged. The magneto key was found in the "both" position. The 
throttle control was about 1 inch out. The propeller control was impact damaged and the 
mixture control was full rich.
The leading edge of the right wing was crushed, torn, and wrinkled. A 4-foot section of the 
leading edge of the wing about mid span was torn and separated. The right aileron separated at 
the outboard hinge and was bent and wrinkled. The inboard trailing edge of the right flap was 
bent up. The right main landing gear was retracted and secured within the wheel well. Control 
continuity for the aileron was confirmed from the flight control inboard to the control yoke. 
The outboard bottom portion of the right wing contained witness marks consistent with a wire 
strike.
The left-wing was bent up and diagonally wrinkled about mid span. The skin along the leading 
edge was crushed and wrinkled. The inboard trailing edge of the flap was torn. The left aileron 
remained attached and was wrinkled. Control continuity for the aileron was confirmed from 
the flight control inboard to the control yoke. Discoloration on the leading edge of the left wing 
was consistent with arcing.
The empennage was partially separated from the airframe. A small section was cut for recovery 
purposes. The emergency locator transmitter was in the "On" position and was shut off by the 
airport manager following the accident. The elevator/rudder control continuity was confirmed 
from the separation point aft to the control surfaces. The separation points on all but one of the 
control cables were consistent with overload and impact damage. One cable was cut during the 
recovery process.
The upper and lower skin on the left elevator/rudder was wrinkled. The flight control was 
unremarkable.  The right elevator/rudder was unremarkable. The skin on the fuselage from the 
separation point to the empennage was wrinkled on both sides.
The propeller assembly remained attached to the engine at the propeller flange. The upper and 
lower cowling and firewall were wrinkled and torn. One lead on the right magneto harness was 
impact damaged. Fuel was observed in the lines up to the fuel pump. The upper bank of spark 
plugs were removed and appeared new. No external catastrophic damage was observed on the 
engine.
The propeller blades were arbitrarily labeled "A" and "B" for identification purposes in the 
report. Blade A was bent aft about 90° about 12 inches outboard from the propeller hub.
The face of the propeller blade at the bend was abraded. The propeller was otherwise 
unremarkable.  The spinner of the propeller was crushed on the bottom. Blade B was bent aft 
slightly and exhibited witness marks along the face of the blade consistent with a wire strike. 
There was no rotational scoring evident on the face or edge of either blade.
Two 25-pound gym weights and an air conditioner cooler flow in-line blower were located in 
the back of the airplane. The cooler was full of 8 one half gallon plastic bottles of water. They 
were frozen at the time of the accident. The weight of the cooler and water was 49.4 pounds.
No preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures were found that would have precluded 
normal operation.
The mechanic who assisted in recovering the airplane following the accident reported that the 
fuel tanks were full. The left fuel tank contained 15.5 gallons, the right fuel tank contained 16 
gallons, and the auxiliary tank contained 8 gallons.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The engine was relocated to Mobile, Alabama, for further examination.
The accessory case, alternator, engine mount, and carburetor were impact damaged. The 
mounting point on the accessory case for the starter was repaired and an exemplar carburetor 
was mounted for engine run purposes only.
The engine was fitted with exhaust tubing, thermo couplings, pressure lines, and test pads for 
test purposes only, and was relocated to the engine test cell. The engine was mounted to the 
test cell for operation and a test club propeller for the engine was attached at the propeller 
flange. A pre-engine run compression test was performed with the following results: Cylinder 1 
Œ 2, cylinder 2 Œ 7, cylinder 3 Œ 63, cylinder 4 Œ 10, cylinder 5 Œ 22, and cylinder 6 Œ 7. Master 
orifice level prior to the test was 39.
The engine started and ran through a series of rpm increases for 20 minutes without any 
hesitation, stumbling, or interruption in power. Cylinder temperature, manifold pressure, oil 
temperature, oil pressure, fuel pressure, and fuel temperature were monitored and recorded at 
varying engine rpms. A post-engine run compression test was performed with the following 
results: Cylinder 1 Œ 60, cylinder 2 Œ 40 (exhaust), cylinder 3 Œ75, cylinder 4 Œ 40 (exhaust), 
cylinder 5 Œ 52 (exhaust), and cylinder 6 Œ 40 (exhaust).
The carburetor was impact damaged and could not be functionally tested. The mixture arm was 
bent, and the casing for fuel metering valve and case for the throttle valve were impact 
damaged. The fuel screen was free of visible contamination. The carburetor was disassembled 
Œ no anomalies were noted that would have precluded normal operation.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Weight and Balance
According to the most recent weight and balance, dated November 23, 2005, the basic empty 
weight of the airplane (including engine oil) was 1,835.7 pounds. According to the FAA Type 
Certificate Data Sheet, the airplane's maximum weight was 2,650 pounds. Fuel receipts and 
entries in the pilot's logbook indicated the last flight was on April 19, 2015, and the airplane 
was serviced with 12 gallons of fuel on April 25, 2015. It was reported that the two main fuel 
tanks and auxiliary fuel tank were full (39.5 gallons of fuel recovered). The useful fuel weight 
was 252 pounds. The combined weight of the pilot and flight instructor was 564 pounds (based 
upon their weights reported during medical certificate application). The weight of the gym 
weights and cooler of ice was 99.4 pounds. The estimated weight of the airplane at takeoff was 
at least 2,751.1 pounds.
According to a weight and balance calculation document found in the wreckage, the empty 
weight of the airplane was 1,670 pounds, the weight of the occupants was estimated at 520 
pounds, baggage and cargo was estimated at 200 pounds, and 10 pounds of fuel was deducted 
for engine start, taxi, and takeoff allowances. The total fuel weight was 264 pounds and the sub 
total takeoff weight was calculated at 2,644 pounds.
Takeoff Performance
According to the takeoff distance chart located in the Beechcraft B-35 pilot operating 
handbook, performance section, the airplane should have required between 700 (no obstacle) 
and 1,300 feet (50-foot obstacle). The conditions for this performance include takeoff power, 
flaps up, landing gear retracted, and mixture leaned to maximum rpm at full throttle. A 
temperature of 25 degrees C, a weight of 2,600 pounds, and a headwind of 3 knots were also 
factored.
