The private pilot of the gyrocopter stated that, after reducing engine power to descend, the 
engine experienced a total loss of power due to carburetor ice and that there was nowhere to 
land. The gyrocopter subsequently impacted 30-ft high power lines and the ground. 
Examination of the wreckage showed that the rotor blades were coned upward consistent with 
low rotor rpm at ground impact. Given the weather conditions in the area about the time of the 
accident, the aircraft would have been operating in conditions conducive to moderate 
carburetor icing at cruise power and serious icing at descent power. Thus, it is likely that the 
engine lost power due to carburetor icing.
A total loss of engine power due to carburetor icing. 
On May 1, 2015, about 1225 central daylight time, a homebuilt gyrocopter, N5606X, registered 
to the pilot/owner, was destroyed when it collided with power lines after a loss of engine power 
while maneuvering in the vicinity of Ravenna, Michigan. The private pilot, who was the sole 
occupant, sustained serious injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed in the vicinity 
and a flight plan was not filed. The local flight was being conducted under the provisions of 
Federal Code of Regulations Part 91. The flight originated from Riverview, Michigan, about 
1125.
One witness reported that she heard a loud noise of a plane flying north. She further stated that 
she heard a loud booming sound and she looked up and saw black smoke. Another witness 
reported that he received a call from the pilot stating that he would be doing a slow fly-by in the 
area, about noon. The witness stated that he was outside several minutes after noon and that 
he heard the gyrocopter flying toward his home, looked up to the southeast, and saw the 
aircraft gliding toward the ground. 
The FAA inspector who examined the accident site and wreckage, reported that the wreckage 
was resting in a deep ditch on the north side of Sherman Road near the intersection of Wunsch 
Road in Moorland Township near Ravenna, MI. Evidence at the accident site showed that the 
gyrocopter had impacted 30-foot high power lines, consequently breaking two of the lines. A 
power line pole on the north side of Sherman Road was broken and unattached to its base. The 
pilot's headgear showed thermal damage to the face shield and soot was evident inside of the 
shield and around the face relief of the helmet, consistent with electrical arcing. The helmet 
was found in a ditch just west of Wunsch Road about 40 feet from the wreckage. 
The gyrocopter's rotor mast was broken off, about seat height. The rotor blades were coned 
upward consistent with low RPM and high loading. The trailing edges of the blades exhibited 
buckling between fasteners. One rotor blade had scuff marks on the bottom side. The other 
blade had buckling failure in the aft direction. One of the propeller blades of the pusher 
propeller was separated and was found about 50 yards beyond the wreckage. The broken blade 
leading edge exhibited leading edge marks consistent with contact with the broken power line 
wires. 
The Volkswagen engine appeared to be mostly intact. The crank would rotate by hand, but was 
limited due to adjacent impact damage. Automotive gasoline was present in the fuel filter and 
some gas was dripping out of the carburetor when first responders arrived. The broken ends of 
the power lines showed some broom straw signatures, some cut failures, and some right angle 
bending near the wire failures. The wires consisted of five aluminum wires wrapped about a 
steel core.
The pilot stated on NTSB Form 6120 that as he slowed the engine to lower his altitude, he "got 
carb ice killing the engine [and] ran out of a place to land." The nearest weather reporting 
facility, located about 12 miles to the west of the accident site, reported a temperature of 16 
degrees C and dew point of 4 degrees C, about 30 minutes prior to the accident. According to 
the Carburetor Icing Probability Chart, the aircraft would have been operating in conditions for 
moderate icing at cruise power and serious icing at descent power.
