National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Port Townsend, WA
Accident Number: SEA06LA112
Date & Time: 06/01/2006, 0830 PDT
Registration: N606KA
Aircraft: de Havilland DHC-3T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 11 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
 Analysis The airplane was on a company activated visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan over ocean water.
The pilot said the weather conditions deteriorated with a lowering ceiling and visibility.
He said that the water condition was glassy smooth with no visual definition, and this condition made it increasingly difficult to be sure he was maintaining forward visibility.
He began to turn back to better VFR conditions, but conditions worsened; he believed that he inadvertently entered a fog bank.
He elected to perform a precautionary landing on the water.
He said that with no visual definition, he misjudged his altitude, and landed hard.
The airplane's fuselage was bent/deformed, the fuselage skin was wrinkled, and the dorsal stabilizer was bent/wrinkled.
The pilot reported that at the time of the attempted landing, the visibility was zero, the wind condition was zero, and the ceiling was zero.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's misjudgment of the airplane's height above the water during a precautionary landing which resulted in a hard landing.
Contributing factors were glassy water conditions, fog, and the pilot's inadvertent VFR flight into IMC.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO REVERSE DIRECTION Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - FOG 2.
(F) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 3.
PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER,GLASSY 5.
(C) DISTANCE/ALTITUDE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On June 1, 2006, at approximately 0830 Pacific daylight time, a de Havilland DHC-3T (Otter) floatplane, N606KA, was substantially damaged during a precautionary landing in the Puget Sound near Port Townsend, Washington.
The airline transport pilot and his 10 passengers were not injured.
The flight was being operated by Kenmore Air Harbor, Seattle, Washington, under Title 14 CFR Part 135.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed for the on- demand air taxi, international flight which had originated approximately 20 minutes before the accident from Kenmore Air Harbor Seaplane Base (W55), Seattle, Washington.
The flight was being flown on a company activated visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan with a destination of Victoria, British Columbia.
The pilot said that as he approached Port Townsend, Washington, weather conditions deteriorated with a lowering ceiling and visibility.
He said that the water condition was glassy smooth with no visual definition.
He said "this condition made it increasingly difficult to be sure I was maintaining forward visibility."
The pilot said that he began to turn back to better VFR conditions, but conditions worsened; he believes that he inadvertently entered a fog bank.
He elected to perform a precautionary landing on the water.
He said that with no visual definition, he misjudged his altitude, and landed hard.
He was unsure of the airplane's structural condition, so he taxied it to Port Townsend, Washington.
The airplane's fuselage was bent/deformed, the fuselage skin was wrinkled, and the dorsal stabilizer was bent/wrinkled.
The pilot reported that at the time of the attempted landing, the visibility was zero, the wind condition was zero, and the ceiling was zero.
: 8367 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 65 Hours Engines: 1 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time: 10564 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Pratt & Whitney Canada ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: PT6-135 Registered Owner: Kenmore Air Harbor, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
