National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Faribault, MN
Accident Number: CHI06LA146
Date & Time: 06/02/2006, 1900 CDT
Registration: N63790
Aircraft: Piper PA-23-250
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane veered off the runway during landing and impacted a ditch.
The pilot stated that he attempted to correct to the left when the airplane veered hard to the right upon touchdown.
Examination of the accident site revealed two sets of skid marks on the runway and two sets of tire marks through the adjacent grass area that preceded the airplane.
Both tire skids/marks were similar.
None of the tires had flat spotting and all of the tires were in good condition.
The airplane came to rest about 57 feet from the left side of the runway, facing about 180 degrees opposite to runway 30.
Operation of the brake system showed no anomalies.
The steering system linkage was found to be operative to the nose gear trunnion.
The nose landing gear and right main landing gear were collapsed.
All components of the landing gear system were present and associated breakage was consistent with impact damage.
.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Directional control not obtained/maintained by the pilot during landing.
A contributing factor was the ditch.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT OBTAINED/MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH 3.
LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - OVERLOAD 4.
LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - OVERLOAD Factual Information On June 2, 2006, at 1900 central daylight time, a Piper PA-23-250, N63790, piloted by a private pilot, received substantial damage upon impact with terrain when the airplane veered off runway 30 at Faribault Municipal Airport (FBL), Faribault, Minnesota.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot and passenger were not injured.
The flight originated from Marshfield Municipal Airport, Marshfield, Wisconsin, at 1745 and was en route to FBL.
The pilot stated that after landing on runway 30 (4,254 feet by 72 feet, asphalt), the airplane veered "hard" to the right even after attempting to correct towards the left.
The airplane then traversed the runway and impacted a ditch.
The pilot stated that the propellers struck the ground when the airplane impacted the ditch.
Examination of the accident site by the Federal Aviation Administration revealed two sets of skid marks on the runway and two sets of tire marks through the adjacent grass area that preceded the airplane.
Both tire skids/marks were similar.
None of the tires had flat spotting and all of the tires were in good condition.
The airplane came to rest about 57 feet from the left side of the runway, facing about 180 degrees opposite to runway 30.
The nose landing gear and main landing gear were collapsed.
Operation of the brake system showed no anomalies.
The steering system linkage was found to be operative to the nose gear trunnion.
All components of the landing gear system were present and associated breakage was consistent with impact damage.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
