National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Mena, AR
Accident Number: DFW06CA153
Date & Time: 06/02/2006, 1530 CDT
Registration: N950RM
Aircraft: Piper PA-23-250
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While executing a visual approach to runway 35, the 7,600-hour private pilot confirmed that the landing gear was extended.
The pilot reported, that immediately after touching down on the 5,000-foot long, by 75-foot wide asphalt runway, he noticed a lower than usual nose attitude and applied aft pressure on the yoke which resulted in the airplane becoming airborne.
The pilot added that "upon settling back onto the runway" the nose landing gear collapsed and the airplane veered to the left.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who examined the twin-engine airplane, the pilot "made a hard nose wheel landing which caused the airplane to bounce back into the air."
The FAA inspector added that, "Upon another hard landing the nose wheel blew out and the left main gear collapsed."
The pilot reported having accumulated approximately 300 hours in the same and model aircraft.
The wind at the time of the mishap was reported as light and variable.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper landing flare resulting in a hard landing and his improper recovery procedures for a bounced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
PORPOISE/PILOT-INDUCED OSCILLATION - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
