Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Ugolny Airport, Unknown
Incident Number:
ENG13IA033
Date & Time:
07/02/2013, 1026  
Registration:
HL8275
Aircraft:
BOEING 777
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
N/A
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 129: Foreign
Analysis 
On July 2, 2013, a Korean Air Lines (KAL) Boeing 777-300ER, registration number HL8275, 
powered by two General Electric (GE) GE90-115B turbofan engines, experienced a No. 1 engine 
(left) in-flight shutdown (IFSD) while crossing the Bering Sea.  The pilots diverted the airplane 
to Ugolny Airport (DYR), in Siberia, Russia where an uneventful single engine landing was 
made.  The Korean ARAIB requested delegation of the investigation and the NTSB accepted 
responsibility for investigating this incident.  Post landing examination of the No. 1 engine 
revealed that the radial gearshaft within the transfer gearbox housing was fractured.  
Metallurgical examination of the radial gearshaft found an 0.049-inch axial crack with 
striation features indicative of fatigue propagation and a morphology consistent with initial 
fatigue initiation occurring under a torsional and/or biaxial stress condition.  This axial crack 
was considered the primary crack and the fracture origin area.  Microhardness tests near the 
fracture origin revealed a reduction in near surface hardness (lower hardness values than 
required).  GE concluded that the near surface low hardness was attributable to 
decarburization due to marginal (thin or detached) copper plating existing on the gearshaft 
surface during the hardening process.  Through computer modeling and testing of the radial 
gearshaft, GE concluded that the initiation of the axial crack was likely the result of a 
combination of high residual tensile stresses produced by local decarburization coupled with 
the operating stresses experienced at the outer diameter surface. To address the manufacturing 
process deficiency, GE issued seven service bulletins to remove, inspect, and repair the suspect 
radial gearshafts.  To expedite the removal of the suspect radial gearshafts, the Federal 
Aviation Administration issued three separate Airworthiness Directives (AD).  According to 
GE, all affected radial gearshafts addressed by the various FAA ADs have been removed from 
service. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The failure of the transfer gearbox resulting from the fracture and separation of the radial 
gearshaft from fatigue cracking as a result of a combination of high residual tensile stresses 
produced by local decarburization during the manufacturing process coupled with the normal 
Page 2 of 6ENG13IA033
operating stresses. 
Findings
Aircraft
Accessory drives - Failure (Cause)
Accessory drives - Design (Factor)
Page 3 of 6ENG13IA033
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On July 2, 2013, a Korean Air Lines (KAL) Boeing 777-300ER, registration number HL8275, 
powered by two General Electric (GE) GE90-115B turbofan engines, experienced a No. 1 engine 
(left) in-flight shutdown (IFSD) while crossing the Bering Sea (60°4'16.32"N/178°40'33.60"W) 
en route to Seoul, South Korea.  The pilots diverted the airplane to Ugolny Airport (DYR), a 
mixed-used military and civil airport in Siberia, Russia.  An uneventful single engine landing 
was made and no injuries were reported.  The incident flight was a 14 Code of Federal 
Regulation Part 129 regularly schedule international flight from O'Hare International Airport 
(ORD), Chicago, Illinois, to Incheon International Airport (ICN), Seoul, South Korea.  The 
Korean Aviation and Railway Accident Investigation Board (ARAIB) initially opened an 
investigation into this incident and provided the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
as the state of manufacturer of the engines and airplane an initial notification in accordance 
with International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Annex 13.  The Korean ARAIB 
subsequently requested delegation of the investigation and the NTSB accepted responsibility 
for investigating this incident.
TRANSFER GEARBOX DAMAGE 
Post landing examination of the No. 1 engine revealed that the transfer gearbox (TGB) housing 
was fractured and the internal gears were damaged.  The No. 1 engine was removed from the 
airplane and shipped to the GE-Wales facility in Cardiff Wales for removal of the TGB.  
Removal of the TGB revealed a separated radial bevel gearshaft (subsequently referred to as 
radial gearshaft) within the TGB.  TGB hardware, included the separated radial bevel gearshaft 
were sent to GE-Aviation facility in Evendale, Ohio for metallurgical examination. 
TEST AND RESEARCH
Visual examination of the radial gearshaft found three X-shaped cracks in the short shaft side 
outer diameter at the shaft-to-web transition radius, with one of the X-shaped cracks 
(associated with fractured and missing material) linked to a 0.049-inch axial crack.  The axial 
crack was considered the primary crack and the fracture origin area.  Scanning Electron 
Microscope (SEM) examination of the axial fracture region revealed striation features 
indicative of fatigue propagation but did not exhibit morphology typical of axial-axial induced 
fatigue fracture surfaces, such as interpretable flow lines pointing back to a single origin 
location, but instead was more consistent with initial fatigue initiation occurring under a 
torsional and/or biaxial stress condition.  Published literature for fatigue cracking under 
torsional and/or biaxial loading conditions was consistent with the X-shaped cracking 
observed on the fractured radial gearshaft.  GE subjected several steel test bars made from the 
required material to various biaxial fatigue loading conditions in an attempt to reproduce 
fracture features observed within the axial fracture.  The results of the testing indicated biaxial 
loading conditions could reproduce features observed in axial fracture.  
Microhardness tests of the short shaft revealed a reduction in near surface hardness (lower 
hardness values than required) while the core hardness met the part drawing requirement.  
Other than the near surface hardness loss, the material was determined to be consistent with 
properly processed material in accordance with the part drawing requirement.  No evidence of 
Page 4 of 6ENG13IA033
any obvious material inclusions or other discrepancies was observed within the initial axial 
fracture (origin region) or on the outer diameter surface adjacent to the initial axial fracture.  
During the manufacturing of the radial gearshaft, the gear teeth and splines are case hardened 
using a process called 'carburization' which adds a layer of carbon to the outer surface of low 
carbon steels via a diffusion process by heating the steel in a carbon-rich environment.  A 
carburized surface increases the surface hardness improving wear resistance and fatigue 
strength.  Surfaces of the radial gearshaft not requiring carburization are copper plated prior to 
the carburization cycle.  The area of cracking in the shaft region is not case hardened and, thus, 
would have been copper plated.  After the carburization process, the copper plating is stripped.  
The entire part is then re-copper plated prior to the hardening cycle (austenization heat treat) 
to prevent decarburization, a depletion of surface carbon, from occurring on all surfaces.  GE 
concluded that the near surface low hardness values measured on the radial gearshaft were 
attributable to decarburization due to marginal (thin or detached) copper plating existing on 
the gearshaft surface and an hardening atmosphere which was prone to causing 
decarburization.  Through computer modeling and various testing of the radial gearshaft, GE 
concluded that the axial crack was the initial crack and was likely the result of a combination of 
high residual tensile stresses produced by local decarburization coupled with the operating 
stresses experienced at the outer diameter surface.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Corrective Actions 
Having determined that the cause of the radial gearshaft cracking was due to a manufacturing 
process deficiency, GE issued four service bulletins (SBs) to remove suspected radial gearshafts 
from service, one SB to provide a specific crack detection inspection, and two SBs to repair and 
toughen the radial gearshafts.  To expedite the removal of the suspect radial gearshafts, the 
Federal Aviation Administration issued three Airworthiness Directives (AD), two of which were 
emergency ADs requiring compliance within 5 days of receipt.  According to GE, all effected 
radial gearshafts (186 in total) addressed by the various FAA ADs have been removed from 
service. 
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Engine shutdown
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
Page 5 of 6ENG13IA033
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BOEING
Registration:
HL8275
Model/Series:
777 300ER
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
37651
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
General Electric
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
GE90-115B
Registered Owner:
KE Export Leasing (2013-B)
Rated Power:
Operator:
KOREAN AIR LINES COMPANY 
LTD
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Foreign Air Carrier (129)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
KALF
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Unknown
Condition of Light:
Not Reported
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Chicago, IL (ORD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Seoul, FN (ICN)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
N/A
Latitude, Longitude:
60.071111, -178.676111
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jean-Pierre M Scarfo
Adopted Date:
05/14/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Publish Date:
05/14/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=87474
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
