Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Praire Du Sac, WI
Accident Number:
CEN11LA050
Date & Time:
11/01/2010, 1415 CDT 
Registration:
N448WM
Aircraft:
MCFARLAND BILL CHALLENGER II
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aircraft structural failure
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane impacted the ground following an in-flight separation of the left wing during 
cruise flight. The pilot, who was the sole occupant, was fatally injured. Witnesses reported 
seeing the airplane traveling north, about 300-500 feet above ground level, when one wing 
suddenly separated from the airplane. One of the witnesses stated that the other wing 
separated shortly after the first one. Postaccident examination confirmed that both wings were 
completely separated from the airplane with the exception of the right wing aft spar and 
aileron. Examination of the fractures in the wing attachment fittings revealed signatures 
consistent with overload failure with the exception of one fitting that had no perceptible 
damage due to deformation or fracture. The attachment bolt for the fitting that showed no 
perceptible overload damage was not recovered during the investigation; however, the relative 
lack of damage to the strut fitting indicates that the attachment bolt either failed, or its 
corresponding nut had loosened and separated during the flight. A portion of wing fabric 
retained for testing showed that the fabric met the minimum performance requirements as set 
forth in regulations. No preaccident defects were found with regard to the components 
examined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The separation of the fuselage-mounted wing strut attachment fitting for an undetermined 
reason, which resulted in the separation of the left wing of the airplane.
Findings
Aircraft
Wing attach fittings (on fus) - Failure (Cause)
Wing structure - Failure (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 6CEN11LA050
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On November 1, 2010, about 1415 central daylight time, an amateur-built McFarland 
Challenger II airplane, N448WM, was substantially damaged when it impacted the ground 
following an in-flight separation of the left wing during cruise flight. The pilot, who was the 
sole occupant, was fatally injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not on a flight plan. The flight 
originated about 1400 from the Sauk Prairie Airport, Prairie Du Sac, Wisconsin, and was en 
route to the Merrill Municipal Airport, Merrill, Wisconsin.
Witnesses reported seeing the airplane traveling north when one wing suddenly separated 
from the airplane. One of the witnesses stated that the other wing separated shortly after the 
first one. The witnesses estimated that the airplane was 300 to 500 feet above the ground prior 
to the first wing separation. The airplane subsequently impacted a corn field.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with helicopter and instrument helicopter ratings. 
The pilot™s most recent second class airman medical certificate was issued on February 17, 
2010. On the pilot™s application for the medical certificate, he reported 6,000 total flight hours. 
The pilot did not have a rating for fixed wing single engine airplanes. A friend of the pilot 
reported that the pilot had taken several hours of flight instruction in the accident airplane. 
The pilot™s flight logbook was not available for review during the course of the investigation.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a high wing, tricycle gear kit aircraft with a frame structure built from 
aluminum alloy tubing fastened with bolts and rivets and covered with fabric. The airplane was 
fitted with amphibious floats and could carry 2 occupants in a tandem seat arrangement. The 
65-horsepower Rotax 582 engine was mounted in pusher configuration. According to Federal 
Aviation Administration records, the airplane was initially certified in the experimental 
amateur-built category on July 14, 2004. The airplane was sold to the pilot by the widow of the 
original builder on August 20, 2010.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A review of recorded data from the Baraboo Wisconsin Dells Airport automated weather 
observation station, elevation 979 feet, revealed that at 1415 the weather conditions were: calm 
wind; 10 miles visibility; scattered clouds at 3,200 feet above ground level; temperature 8 
degrees Celsius; Dew Point 0 degrees Celsius; altimeter setting 30.42 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted a harvested cornfield. The components came to rest in 3 major 
groupings; the left wing, right wing, and fuselage. The fuselage structure was upright with the 
lower fuselage crushed upward. The rudder and vertical stabilizer remained attached to the aft 
fuselage of the airplane. The right horizontal stabilizer and elevator had separated from the 
airplane and were found next to the left wing. The left horizontal stabilizer and elevator were 
separated from the airplane but were located next to the aft fuselage at approximately their 
Page 3 of 6CEN11LA050
normal installed position. 
Both wings were completely separated from the airplane with the exception of the right wing 
aft spar and aileron. The internal structure of the right wing remained attached to the forward 
spar. The right wing aft spar and control surfaces remained attached to the fuselage. The 
forward right wing attach fitting was fractured. The left wing was separated from the fuselage 
and both wing attachment fittings were fractured. The fabric covering was torn and a large 
portion of the lower wing fabric covering was found a short distance away. The left rear spar 
and control surfaces exhibited uniform bending along the entire span that resulted in an 
upward curvature. 
Components retained for further examination included 9 wing attachment fittings that 
exhibited deformation or fracture at the accident scene. Examination of the wing fittings by a 
specialist in the National Transportation Safety Board's Materials Laboratory revealed 
signatures consistent with overload failure on all parts exhibiting fractures. The parts that were 
not fractured exhibited evidence of plastic deformation, with the exception of one fitting that 
had no perceptible damage due to deformation or fracture. That fitting was the left-rear-lower 
wing strut attachment fitting that connected the wing strut to the fuselage. The attachment bolt 
for this fitting was not recovered.
A piece of fabric covering material from the left wing was also retained for testing. A portion of 
the fabric was sent to a commercial laboratory to perform the ASTM D 5035-08 Breaking 
Strength of Textile Fabrics (1" Cut Strip Method). The results of this test indicated an average 
breaking strength of 67.75 pounds.
Federal Aviation Administration minimum performance standards for new intermediate grade 
fabric are specified in TSO-C14B ﬁAircraft Fabric Intermediate Gradeﬂ and indicate a minimum 
of 65 pounds as the requirement when applicable.
No preaccident defects were found with regard to the components examined.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An autopsy of the pilot was performed on behalf of the Sauk County Coroner by the University 
of Wisconsin School of Medical and Public Health, on November 2, 2010. The pilot™s death was 
attributed to injuries received in the accident.
Toxicology testing was performed by the FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute. Testing results 
were negative for all substances in the screening profile.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Aircraft structural failure (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 4 of 6CEN11LA050
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/17/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
6000 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MCFARLAND BILL
Registration:
N448WM
Model/Series:
CHALLENGER II 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
CH2-1002-2263
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/16/2010, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
BOMBARDIER
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
ROTAX (ALL)
Registered Owner:
MCFARLAND WILLIAM H
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN11LA050
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DLL, 979 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1415 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 3200 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.42 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Prairie Du Sac, WI (91C)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Merrill, WI (RRL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1400 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
43.346389, -89.753333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John M Brannen
Adopted Date:
08/07/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Darrell McCullion; FAA - Milwaukee FSDO; Milwaukee, WI
Publish Date:
08/07/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77712
Page 6 of 6CEN11LA050
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
