Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Chicago, IL
Accident Number:
CEN11LA051
Date & Time:
11/02/2010, 1027 CDT 
Registration:
N709BR
Aircraft:
BOMBARDIER INC CL-600-2B19
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Ground collision
Injuries:
37 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
The airplane was stopped on the ramp when it was struck by an unoccupied ground service 
pickup truck. The truck was previously driven and parked nose first against the terminal 
building. The driver reported that he put the truck into Park, exited it with the engine running, 
and did not apply the parking brake. Surveillance video shows the airplane on the ramp as the 
pickup truck went towards the terminal and disappeared from view. Approximately 18 seconds 
later, the truck is seen moving in reverse from the terminal building and across the ramp, 
passing about 100 to 150 feet in front of the airplane. The video also revealed that, while still 
moving in reverse, the truck made a 180-degree turn and headed towards the airplane. The 
airplane, which was moving, stopped just prior to the truck impacting the forward left side of 
the airplane. 
A postaccident inspection of the truck revealed that the transmission shift cable was out of 
adjustment, which allowed the transmission to slip into reverse; the parking brake cable had 
also been disconnected.  Additionally, the truck™s required maintenance inspection was 83.7 
hours past due according to the truck's hour meter. Airline and airport procedure manuals 
state that vehicles are not to be left unattended with the engine running and that the parking 
brake must be set when a vehicle is parked. In addition, vehicles are required to be backed into 
designated parking spaces near buildings. Furthermore, the driver had not accomplished a 
complete user check of the truck at the beginning of his shift, as required by airline policy.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pickup truck driver™s failure to follow airport and company policies regarding ground 
vehicle operations, which allowed for the unattended truck to collide with the airplane. 
Contributing to the accident were the truck's misadjusted shift lever and disconnected parking 
brake.
Page 2 of 9CEN11LA051
Findings
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Scheduled/routine maintenance - Maintenance personnel
Environmental issues
Ground vehicle - Not specified (Factor)
Page 3 of 9CEN11LA051
Factual Information
On November 2, 2010, at 1027 central daylight time, a Bombardier CL-600-2B19, N709BR, 
operated by SkyWest Airlines as flight 1020, was struck by an unoccupied United Airlines 
pickup truck at the O'Hare International Airport (ORD), Chicago, Illinois. There were no 
injuries to the 2 cockpit crew members, 1 cabin crew member, and 34 passengers. The airplane 
sustained substantial damage to four stringers and the forward bulkhead. The flight was 
operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed. The planned destination for 
the flight was Quad City International Airport (MLI), Moline, Illinois.
The airplane had pushed back from gate F2 and stopped on the ramp when the crew was 
informed that they were blocking a gate. As the crew began to move the airplane they saw the 
pickup truck moving "rapidly" in reverse on the ramp, so they stopped. The pickup truck, 
which was unoccupied, then impacted the left side of the nose of the airplane.
The pickup truck was previously driven to the terminal building at gate F2D. The driver stated 
that he put the truck in park, and exited the truck with the engine running. He stated he was 
only going to be a short time, so he did not think it was necessary to turn the ignition off. He 
also stated that he did not apply the parking brake. When he returned to where he left the 
truck, it was gone. The driver stated he then saw the truck under the nose of the airplane. 
Surveillance cameras at ORD captured the accident from two different vantage points. The 
videos both show the airplane stopped on the ramp between the F and G concourses. The blue 
pickup truck then crossed the ramp from right to left heading toward the F concourse prior to 
it going out of view. Approximately 18 seconds later, the truck can be seen backing away from 
the terminal building. The video revealed that the truck crossed about 100 to 150 feet in front 
of the airplane. While still traveling in reverse, the truck made a 180 degree turn and headed 
toward the airplane. The airplane stopped just prior to the impact with the pickup truck.
According to United Airlines personnel, other than turning off the ignition, nothing was 
changed inside the truck after the accident. Photographs taken at the accident site show the 
gear shift lever was positioned between P (park) and R (reverse). 
The truck was towed from the accident site for a postaccident inspection. The truck was a 2001 
Ford Ranger standard cab pickup which was owned and operated by United Airlines. The 
United Airlines identifier for the truck is PI1574. The truck odometer reading was 35,211 miles 
and the United Airlines hour meter installed in the truck indicated 3,816.7 hours. 
The truck was hoisted off the ground for the initial inspection and testing. The gear shift lever 
remained as it was found; between park and reverse. When the ignition key was turned on the 
rear wheels could be turned by hand, the back-up lights were not illuminated, and the engine 
could not be started, indicating the truck was not in park. The gearshift lever was moved 
toward the parked position and after several attempts, the transmission went into park, locking 
up the drive train and allowing the engine to be started. 
The truck was then lowered to the ground and the engine was started. The vehicle was driven a 
short distance and stopped. The gearshift lever was moved to park, and the brakes were 
released. The vehicle remained stationary for 2 to 3 seconds then it began to move in reverse. 
This occurrence was repeated several times.
Page 4 of 9CEN11LA051
The shift cable adjustment procedure as outlined in the 2001 Ford Ranger Service Manual was 
performed. Following the procedure resulted in a 3/16 of an inch adjustment to the shift cable 
length. Following the adjustment the transmission functioned reliably in park, reverse, neutral, 
and drive, but could not be placed in either 1st or 2nd.
The inspection also revealed the parking brake cable was disconnected where the cable splits 
from one actuating cable to two, one for each rear wheel. The inspection also found that the 
right front tire was excessively worn along its inside edge. 
The pickup truck driver, a United Airlines employee, stated that he performed a user check on 
the truck which consisted of starting the engine, and checking the brakes and lights. He added 
that the vehicle was operational and that he had driven it earlier in his shift. The driver said 
that to his knowledge there was nothing wrong with the gear shift lever. He stated that 
employees were not required to perform user checks on the vehicles at the beginning of their 
shift. He also stated that it was standard operating procedure to leave the vehicles running in 
the winter and that the proper way to park a vehicle outside the terminal was to back the 
vehicle in toward the building.
United Airlines Ground Equipment PM Program Detail and Task List states that ground 
vehicles must undergo a B Check every 12 months or 500 hours. It also states, "Safety items 
found during preventative maintenance will not be deferred. Work and repair items must be 
accomplished before equipment is returned to service and must be recorded on a separate 
work order." Among the items listed on the B check are:
ŁShifter must lock into detent
ŁUnit must not move when shifter is in park or neutral
ŁParking brake must hold in drive while idling
According to work order 7431, the last B check on the truck was completed on April 26, 2010. 
The meter reading at that time was 3,233.0 hours, 583.7 hours prior to the accident. 
Comments listed on the work order were "B/CK/COMPLETE." Work order 6095 listed the 
items that were addressed during the B check. Items listed on work order 6095 were:
ŁBad brakes/Replace rear brakes-replace wheel cylinders-bleed and
        adjust
ŁNo start-weak battery/Replace battery-drill out old broken hold 
        down bolt
ŁUpper and lower ball joints bad-both sides/remove 
        spindles/Replace upper control arms
ŁStabilizer link broke/Replace both links
ŁTires worn/Replace tires
ŁSpark plugs worn/Replace plugs
ŁFront brakes worn/Replace pads-rotors-pack bearings
ŁRear brake cables froze/replace rear cables
ŁRight front corner light inop/Remove headlight assy/Replace bulb
Page 5 of 9CEN11LA051
ŁUpper brake light inop/Replace bulbs
ŁCut Drums and inspect....Complete
UNITED AIRLINES RAMP OPERATIONS MANUAL
United Airlines Ramp Operations Manual addresses the operation of their ground vehicles. 
Page 8.1.2 of the manual states, in part:
Park motorized equipment, not in use, in designated areas.
-       Place the unit in neutral;
-       Set the parking brake;
-       Turn lights off;
-       Lower or stow platforms and booms; and
-       Turn off the engine or electric power.
Under the Anti-Idling Policy it states:
ŁNo motorized vehicle shall be left running while unattended.
Pages 8.1.3 and 8.1.4 of the manual address User Checks. This section states, in part:
Motorized Equipment
Check motorized equipment units at least once a shift. Keep local records of these checks for at 
least one month. Note: When equipment is not used on a daily basis or when equipment was 
not in use during the previous shift, it must be checked before returning it to service.
Brakes
Check primary brakes for pedal travel and to ensure the pedal has a non-slip foot pad.
Check parking brake for holding action. Check with the engine running at idle speed by placing 
the unit in both forward and reverse gears.
Tires
Check visually for proper inflation and sufficient tread.
Controls/Shift Quadrants
Check for excessive wear on the plate, looseness of control handle and placards.
O'HARE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT PROEDURES
The Chicago Airport System, Ground Motor Vehicle Operation Regulations Manual, is the 
operations manual for those who operate ground vehicles in the airport operations area. The 
manual states, in part:
11.  OPERATIONS NEAR AIRCRAFT
   C. When on the airfield, all vehicles must back into designated parking area, including spaces 
adjacent to and perpendicular to buildings.
12.  VEHICLE OPERATION ON THE AIRFIELD
   H. No vehicle will be left unattended with its motor running, unless weather or operational 
Page 6 of 9CEN11LA051
conditions dictate otherwise.
19. SAFETY EQUIPMENT
    B. Ground Vehicle Brakes
        2. All vehicles must be equipped with a properly functioning parking brake. In the event a 
vehicle operator must leave their vehicle unattended, they must engage the parking brake. 
             
Persons approved to operate drive vehicles within the airport operation area are required to be 
tested on the information in the Chicago Airport System, Ground Motor Vehicle Operation 
Regulations Manual. The truck driver passed the test on November 21, 2008.
As a result of this accident, United Airlines conducted an inspection off all their ground 
vehicles at ORD. The inspection resulted in 8 out of 111 vehicles being taken out of service for 
repairs. In addition, United Airlines instituted the following changes:
1) Developed a service vehicle user check audit program at ORD.
2) Developed a user check audit program at ORD to ensure compliance with company policy of 
performing user checks on ground service vehicles.
3) Instituted a Maintenance Management Program (MMP) to analyze what service vehicle 
parts are failing and at what frequency. The objective is to replace parts prior to them failing. 
4) Created a Maintenance Planner position to track and monitor the maintenance program for 
ground service vehicles, and to assure maintenance is being done in a timely manner.
5) All ground vehicle user checks at ORD were reviewed and revised as needed.
6) Continual evaluation of area to park and store ground service vehicles.
7) Directed all United Airline ORD departments to enforce the policy of setting the parking 
brake whenever a vehicle is left unattended.
History of Flight
Standing
Ground collision (Defining event)
Page 7 of 9CEN11LA051
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/12/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/29/2010
Flight Time:
6997 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3156 hours (Total, this make and model), 4099 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/25/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/11/2010
Flight Time:
4814 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2208 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 8 of 9CEN11LA051
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BOMBARDIER INC
Registration:
N709BR
Model/Series:
CL-600-2B19 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
7850
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
50
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/01/2010, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
53000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
17567 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
GE
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
CF34 SERIES
Registered Owner:
SKYWEST AIRLINES INC
Rated Power:
9140 lbs
Operator:
SKYWEST AIRLINES INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
S2YA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ORD, 672 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1051 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 25000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.46 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Chicago, IL (ORD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Moline, IL (MLI)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
O'Hare International (ORD)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
672 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 9 of 9CEN11LA051
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
37 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
37 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.978611, -87.904722 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Pamela S Sullivan
Adopted Date:
10/03/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Cy Rosit; FAA-ORD-FSDO; Des Plaines, IL
Michael Eisenstat; SkyWest Ailrlines; St. George, UT
Jeff Plantz; United Airlines; Elk Grove Village, IL
Christine Clarida; United Airlines; Rlk Grove Village, IL
Publish Date:
10/03/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77726
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
