Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Davenport, IA
Accident Number:
CEN12LA602
Date & Time:
09/01/2012, 1330 CDT 
Registration:
N139GS
Aircraft:
AERO VODOCHODY L39C
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Air Race/Show
Analysis 
The accident airplane was one of three airplanes in an airshow performance. After overflying 
the spectators and while flying away from the flight line, the airplanes executed a ﬁcrossover 
breakﬂ maneuver, at the beginning of which the accident airplane was in the left wing position. 
As planned, the lead airplane would climb while the left wing position airplane would enter a 
right turn and the right wing position airplane would enter a left turn with adequate 
longitudinal spacing. During the maneuver, the accident airplane entered the right turn as 
planned, but then descended and impacted the terrain. A postimpact fire ensued. No evidence 
of an in-flight collision with either of the other airplanes was observed. Witnesses reported that 
they did not observe any movement of the airplane's flight control surfaces before the airplane 
impacted terrain, which would be inconsistent with the pilot attempting to recover from the 
descent. The postaccident examination did not reveal any preaccident mechanical 
malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of airplane control for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded operation.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6CEN12LA602
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 2012, approximately 1330 central daylight time, an Aero Vodochody L39C 
single-engine turbo-jet airplane, N139GS, was destroyed when it impacted terrain while 
maneuvering during an air show performance at the Davenport Municipal Airport (DVN), 
Davenport, Iowa. The commercial pilot sustained fatal injuries. The airplane was registered to 
the Warbird Education Foundation, Frisco, Texas, and operated by the pilot under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an air show flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed. The flight originated from 
DVN approximately 1315.
Video and witness information documented the flight of three L-39 airplanes during their air 
show performance. According to the lead pilot, the three airplanes were traveling in a westerly 
direction away from the spectators and were executing a crossover break maneuver, which the 
accident airplane was in the left wing position. During the crossover break maneuver, the lead 
airplane first entered a climbing maneuver, the left wing position airplane entered a right turn 
and then the right wing position airplane entered a left turn with adequate longitudinal 
spacing. During the maneuver, the accident airplane entered the right turn, descended, and 
impacted the terrain. A post-impact fire ensued. No evidence of any in-flight collision with the 
other airplanes was observed. No communication or distress call were received by either the 
lead or right wing position pilot from the accident pilot.
Witnesses reported that they did not observe any movement of the airplane's flight control 
surfaces prior to the airplane impacting terrain.
Review of several videos showed that after the crossover break maneuver turns were 
performed, the lead and right wing position airplanes turned off their smoke and the left wing 
position airplane's smoke continued to remain on until the impact. According to a team 
representative, the right wing position airplane pilot calls for the break and smoke on/off. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 59, held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land, airplane 
single-engine sea, airplane multi-engine land, and instrument airplane ratings. The pilot held 
type ratings for L-39, Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15 and MiG-17 airplanes.
His most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) second class medical certificate was 
issued on May 29, 2012, without limitations.
The pilot's logbooks were not located during the investigation. According to a friend of the 
pilot, he had accumulated approximately 2,500 total flight hours and 600 hours in jet 
airplanes.
Friends of the pilot reported he was in excellent health, rarely consumed alcohol, and exercised 
regularly. 
A friend noted the pilot had a history of G-tolerance issues. The friend reported the pilot 
blacked out momentarily during a formation flight and may have experienced G-related issues 
on two other occasions. The pilot attended ground school training on G awareness and also 
reviewed United States Air Force documentation on G training.
Page 3 of 6CEN12LA602
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Aero Vodochody L-39 Albatross was a high-performance tandem seat jet trainer aircraft 
serial number 432833, manufactured in 1984. The airplane was powered by a single turbo fan 
Ivchenko AI-25TL 3,792-lb thrust engine. 
The airplane was issued an experimental exhibition special airworthiness certificate on 
January 14, 2009. The airplane was registered to the owner on December 31, 2008.
The airplane logbooks were not located during the investigation. The most recent inspection 
and total aircraft times could not be determined. According to friends of the pilot, the airplane 
was in immaculate condition and there were no recent maintenance issues. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1347, the DVN automated surface observing system reported the wind from 070 degrees at 
14 knots, visibility 9 miles, decreasing rain, scattered clouds at 2,300 feet, sky overcast at 
4,000 feet, temperature 22 degrees Celsius, dew point 20 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter 
setting of 29.97 inches of Mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site by Federal Aviation Administration inspectors showed the 
airplane was severely fragmented and consumed by fire. The main wreckage came to rest 1.2 
miles from DVN in a field. The airplane was recovered from the field and brought to a secure 
location for further examination.
Examination of the airplane by FAA inspectors and representatives familiar with L-39 
airplanes revealed several disconnects in the flight control system due to impact and 
postaccident thermal damage. All major components of the airplane were accounted for at the 
accident site and no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures were noted with the 
airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
Two small video recorder devices were found at the accident site. The recorders were recovered 
and sent to the NTSB Vehicle Recorders laboratory in Washington, DC, for data extraction. 
Due to damage, no information was recovered from the video recorder devices.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On September 3, 2012, an autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Iowa Office of the State 
Medical Examiner, Ankeny, Iowa. The pilot's death was attributed to multiple blunt force and 
thermal injuries.
Toxicological testing was performed by the FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI), 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The report revealed that testing for carbon monoxide and cyanide 
was not performed. Ethanol was detected in the liver, spleen, muscle, and heart. N-Propanol 
was detected in the spleen. These volatiles were consistent with postmortem production of 
alcohols.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
On February 29, 1984, the FAA released Advisory Circular 91-61, A Hazard In Aerobatics: 
Effects Of G Forces On Pilots. The document stated in part:
"...One little known, but important, aspect of tolerance of G's is the effect of rapid changes from 
Page 4 of 6CEN12LA602
+Gz to -Gz, or vice versa. Because aerobatics induce such rapid changes, tolerance to changes 
could be highly significant. It is known, for example, that when one is subjected to -Gz, blood 
pressure receptors in the head and chest respond to the increased pressure and cause a reflex 
slowing of the heart. A rapid change to +Gz (for example, when the pilot executes a half-roll 
during a maneuver) would suddenly drop blood pressure in these receptors and there would be 
a rapid speeding up of the heart to maintain pressure; but because the reflex system requires 
some time to sense the need, the heart could be delayed in responding to this demand and 
blood flow to the brain might suddenly decrease...anything that reduces blood volume or 
cardiovascular response may reduce G tolerance. Dehydration, excessive sweating, severe 
sunburn, low blood pressure, prolonged standing or sitting, hypoxia, infection (even minor 
illnesses), and medications all lower G tolerance. Alcohol and hangovers will reduce your 
ability to perform aerobatic maneuvers. Make sure you are as fit as your aircraft...."
G Induced Loss of Consciousness (GLOC)
The average threshold of a pilot to blackout is 4.7 g's and laps in to unconsciousness at 5.4 g's. 
The rate of g on-load is a significant factor in establishing the amount of g load a pilot can 
withstand (AC-91-61).
History of Flight
Maneuvering-aerobatics
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Private
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/29/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 600 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 5 of 6CEN12LA602
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AERO VODOCHODY
Registration:
N139GS
Model/Series:
L39C 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
432833
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Jet
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
IVCHENKO
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
AL-25TL
Registered Owner:
WARBIRD EDUCATION 
FOUNDATION
Rated Power:
3792 lbs
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DVN, 751 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1347 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2300 ft agl
Visibility
9 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 4000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
70°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 20°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - In the Vicinity - Rain
Departure Point: 
Davenport, IA (DVN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Davenport, IA (DVN)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1315 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
41.610278, -90.588333 (est)
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Aaron M Sauer
Adopted Date:
01/13/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Harrison McNaughton; Federal Aviation Administration; Des Moines, IA
Publish Date:
01/13/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=84919
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
