About 25 minutes into a cross-country flight, the airplane lost all engine power, and the pilot 
made an emergency landing in a field. The airplane collided with a power line pole and was 
consumed by a postcrash fire. Disassembly and examination of the engine revealed that the 
crankshaft separated at the forward end of the No. 2 connecting rod journal. According to 
laboratory analysis, the fatigue fracture of the crankshaft was due to bearing wear and bearing 
shift.  The maintenance records were destroyed by the postcrash fire, and no other history on 
the engine was obtained.
The total loss of engine power due to a fatigue fracture of the crankshaft resulting from worn 
bearings.
On March 3, 2010, about 1435 eastern standard time, a Cessna P210N, N4797K, was 
substantially damaged after a loss of engine power and forced landing near the city of Arcadia, 
Florida. The commercial pilot received minor injuries and the passenger was seriously injured. 
The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The flight 
originated from Buckingham, Fort Myers, Florida, about 1400.
The pilot stated that approximately 25 minutes into the cross-country flight, he noticed that the 
engine had lost power and the manifold pressure had decreased to 18 inches of pressure. This 
was followed by a grinding noise and a decrease in oil pressure to zero. He then heard a loud 
bang and the engine began to run rough. Consequently, he was unable to maintain altitude and 
made an emergency landing in a field. During the emergency landing, the airplane hit a power 
line pole and came to a complete stop. A power line broke away from the pole and started a 
brush fire. The pilot and his passenger exited the airplane, as the airplane was engulfed by fire.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
that the airframe was totally consumed by the post crash fire. An examination of the flight 
control system components revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction. The 
airplane was removed from the field for further examination of the engine and system 
components. According to the pilot, all of the maintenance logbooks were in the airplane and 
were destroyed by the post crash fire.
The engine and its components were sent to Teledyne Continental Motors for examination 
under the supervision of a NTSB investigator and a FAA inspector. During the examination of 
the engine, it was noted that the engine was heavily fire damaged and exhibited thermal 
discoloration. As the engine was disassembled, two quarts of oil were drained from the oil 
sump. The oil was dark in color and contained parts of the connecting rod bolts, connecting rod 
bearings and fragments of the number 2 crankshaft main bearings. The number 2 crankshaft 
main bearings were fragmented and extruded from the bearing support. The fragments 
exhibited mechanical damage. The crankshaft and counterweight assembly exhibited 
separation and mechanical damage concentrated at the number 2 connecting rod journal 
forward cheek. The number 2 main bearing support diameter exhibited displaced material and 
mechanical damage consistent with bearing rotation and extrusion. The number 2 main 
bearing support lock-slot was elongated. The number 1 connecting rod assembly exhibited 
mechanical damage, and the crankshaft bearings exhibited mechanical damage. The number 1 
main bearing support diameter exhibited displaced material and mechanical damage 
consistent with bearing displacement. The number 1 main bearing support lock-slot was 
elongated. The number 1 main bearing support exhibited a fracture from the bearing support 
surface to the number one cylinder deck area. The camshaft was bent, and exhibited 
mechanical damage concentrated on the crown of the number 2, 3, 5, and number 6 lobe areas. 
The engine oil pump was removed and disassembled, and the oil pump drive was intact. The oil 
pump cavity walls contained radial scoring and hard particle passage signatures. 
A detailed metallurgical examination of the engine was conducted by the NTSB Materials 
Laboratory. According to the Materials Laboratory Factual report, the fatigue fracture of the 
crankshaft was due to bearing wear and bearing shift. Fatigue features on the connecting rod 
bolt exhibited low-cycle high-stress fatigue features, indicating that the fracture was secondary. 
Deposits on the surface of the journal contained chlorine, suggesting the presence of 
contamination or additives in the oil. A sample of the engine lubricating oil was collected for 
evaluation. The exact type and manufacturer of the oil was not known. The sample was 
transferred to an independent, third-party laboratory for analysis. The sample was tested in 
accordance with ASTM D445 standards, and the testing viscosity values were found to meet the 
manufacturer™s specifications.
