The student pilot reported that he had been performing touch-and-go practice takeoff and 
landings at a private airstrip. After approximately 10 landings, he taxied the airplane back to 
the parking area where he met with the former owner of the airplane and discussed the flight. 
After a short conversation, the pilot taxied to the end of the runway and departed to the east. 
The pilot reported that shortly after takeoff, the engine experienced a total loss of power and he 
attempted to land in a nearby field. The airplane subsequently impacted terrain, which resulted 
in substantial damage to the fuselage and wing assembly. The pilot attributed the loss of engine 
power to a lack of fuel, stating that the airplane's fuel supply was exhausted. The former owner 
of the airplane, who also witnessed the accident, responded to the accident site and reported 
observing no fuel in the fuel tank, lines, or filter.
A loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion as a result of the student pilot™s inadequate fuel 
planning. 
On March 3, 2010, at 1653 Pacific standard time, an experimental Muffett Quicksilver Sprint 
II, N6233V, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power and subsequent 
forced landing shortly after takeoff from the Buena Airport, Buena, Washington. The airplane, 
which is owned by the student pilot, was operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, when the accident 
occurred. The student pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, sustained serious injuries. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight that originated from Buena.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
Investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 5, 2010, the student pilot stated he was practicing 
touch-and-go landings at the private airstrip. After approximately 10 landings, the pilot taxied 
the airplane back to the parking area where he met with a friend (the former owner of the 
airplane) and discussed the flight. After a short conversation the pilot taxied to the departure 
end of the runway and departed to the east. He reported that shortly after takeoff the engine 
lost power and he attempted to land in a nearby field. The airplane subsequently impacted 
terrain, which resulted in substantial damage to the fuselage and wing assembly. The pilot 
attributed the loss of engine power to a lack of fuel, stating that the airplane simply ran out of 
gas.
An acquaintance of the pilot (and former owner of the airplane) reported that he heard the 
airplane takeoff. He reported that during the initial climb, approximately 200 feet above 
ground level (agl), he heard the airplane's engine "quit" and looked up to see the airplane in a 
ﬁstalling descent.ﬂ He reported that approximately 80 feet agl the airplane ﬁbroke overﬂ and 
collided with terrain in a nose-low attitude. The acquaintance went to the accident site to assist 
the pilot. He reported that while at the site, he observed no fuel in the fuel tank, lines or filter. 
He further reported that the student pilot had run out of fuel on two previous occasions.
The pilot did not submit a Pilot/Operator Report, Form 6120.1. Multiple attempts to contact 
the pilot following the March 5 telephone conversation were not successful.
