The Beech King Air had undergone maintenance that included a landing gear disassembly and 
inspection in preparation for the airplane's sale. Following the landing gear inspection, the left 
main landing gear strut was overfilled to an extension that exceeded maintenance 
specifications due to the strut not being able to maintain the manufacturer's specified 
pressure/extension. In preparation for a maintenance test flight relating to engine throttle 
adjustments, an asymmetric left fuel load was used by the pilot in an attempt to compress the 
overextended strut at an airplane weight that was less than the maximum gross weight of the 
airplane. Upon completion of the flight, the pilot returned to the departure airport where he 
attempted a landing with a left quartering tailwind and with the airplane flaps fully retracted. 
The airplane touched down between the runway centerline and right side of the runway. The 
left main landing gear then collapsed, and the airplane veered off the left side of the runway. 
The pilot, who was the also the president of the company that performed the landing gear 
inspection and other maintenance items, reported that the landing gear was a Beech Queen Air 
part. Examination of the left main landing gear cylinder revealed that it separated at the lower 
joint above the upper torque knee. The joint exhibited corrosion and paint on its mating 
surface. The braze coverage in this area was noted to be acceptable with no anomalous voids. 
The separation was consistent with torsional overload. The examination also revealed that the 
landing gear shock assembly was a Beech Queen Air part that was not approved for installation 
on Beech King Air airplanes.
The collapse of the landing gear during landing due to the company's improper maintenance 
practices and the pilot's decision to take off with an overextended landing gear strut.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 2, 2010, at 1345 central standard time, a Beech 65-A90, N129LA, sustained 
substantial damage on impact with terrain during landing on runway 09 (4,201 feet by 75 feet, 
grooved asphalt) at DeKalb Taylor Municipal Airport (DKB), DeKalb, Illinois. The left main 
landing gear collapsed during landing roll out. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time of the accident. The 14 CFR Part 91 maintenance test flight was not operating on a 
flight plan. The pilot and a pilot/mechanic-rated passenger were uninjured. The local flight 
originated from DKB at 1330.
The pilot stated that the flight was performed to check the engine performance and throttle 
settings.  The flight remained in the traffic pattern of the departure airport where the pilot 
decided to return to make more adjustments. While landing on runway 09, the touchdown was 
ﬁnormal,ﬂ but three-fourths through the rollout the left main landing gear wheel started to 
vibrate. The pilot suspected a flat tire so he applied ﬁa bitﬂ of reverse thrust with ﬁsomeﬂ 
braking. As the airplane slowed down, the left main landing gear collapsed and the airplane 
skidded to a stop, striking the propeller. The pilot also reported that the crosswind landing and 
an unbalanced fuel load resulted in a heavier left wing and the collapse of the left main landing 
gear. The pilot reported to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that the landing was 
performed with the flaps fully retracted. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was the president of Win Win Aviation Inc., DeKalb, Illinois. He held a commercial 
pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land, airplane multi-engine land, instrument 
airplane, and rotorcraft-helicopter ratings. He accumulated a total flight time of 8,100 hours of 
which 1,200 hours were in the accident airplane make and model.
The passenger reported to the FAA that he was invited by the pilot for purposes of riding along 
and not performing any pilot duties. He also reported that he was not employed by nor did he 
perform any work on the airplane for Win Win Aviation, Inc. The passenger held an airline 
transport pilot certificate with an airplane multi-engine land rating and commercial privileges 
with an airplane single-engine land rating. The passenger also held a foreign based commercial 
pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land, airplane single-engine sea, and airplane 
multi-engine land ratings. The passenger also held a mechanic certificate with airframe and 
power plant ratings and inspection authorization.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N129LA, a 1966 Beech 65-A90 (King Air), serial number LJ-129, was purchased by Win Win 
Aviation, Inc. on August 21, 2009, and was registered to Win Win Aviation, Inc. on September 
2, 2009. 
On February 18, 2010, the airplane was sold to Eagle Air Transport, Inc., which does business 
as Sky Dive Chicago, Ottawa, Illinois. 
A logbook entry dated February 26, 2010, stated that a 6-year landing gear inspection had been 
completed and the airplane was returned to service. The entry was made by a Win Win 
Aviation Inc. mechanic. The entry stated that the left and right main landing gears were sent 
out for magnetic particle inspection, which was completed on January 25, 2010, by a test 
facility. The test facility reported all of the submitted components were found acceptable.
A logbook entry dated March, 1, 2010, stated that Pratt & Whitney PT6A-28 engines (left 
engine serial number PCE-40600 and right engine serial number PCE-50740) were installed 
under a West Tennessee Aviation supplemental type certificate SA822SO. The airplane was 
ground run, rigged, and found airworthy. The entry also stated, ﬁ–Landing gear due for 6 year 
inspection per Raytheon Maintenance Manual– work to be completed by Win Aviation in 
DeKalb Illinois. See Win Aviation Log entry for 6 year item entry and return to service.ﬂ The 
entry was made by a Sky Dive Chicago mechanic. The airplane accumulated a total time of 
7,751.3 hours and a Hobbs time of 4,014.8 hours.
On April 20, 2010, the airplane sale to Eagle Air Transport, Inc. was recorded. 
On April 30, 2010, the airplane's registration and sale acceptance to Eagle Air Transport Inc. 
was recorded.
 
The airplane's maximum gross weight was 9,650 lbs and its weight at the time of the accident 
was 7,451 lbs.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The DKB Automated Observing System recorded the following wind information:
At 1323: 360 degrees at 8 knots
At 1343: 020 degrees at 7 knots
At 1400: 020 degrees at 6 knots
At 1423: 340 degrees at 8 knots
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest off the left side of runway 09, near the intersection of runway 09 and 
the parallel taxiway to runway 2/20. A skid mark from the left main landing gear tire began 
between the centerline and right side of runway 09. The airplane sustained damage to the left 
main wheel well, the left wing, and the left propeller. The left main landing gear shock absorber 
assembly cylinder was separated from its piston at the brazed joint adjacent to upper torque 
knee collar. The brazed joint had some paint on its mating surface. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
According to the FAA, the airplane™s left main landing gear was serviced four times before the 
accident and after each servicing the strut would lose pressure overnight while it was in the 
retracted position. The strut was then inflated to a 6-inch extension, which was about twice the 
recommended extension. After this last inflation, the strut did not lose pressure. In preparation 
for a maintenance test flight, the left wing was fueled while the right wing remained nearly 
empty so that the added fuel weight would compress the left wing strut.
Examination of the left main landing gear strut was performed at Hawker Beechcraft 
Corporation, Wichita, Kansas, under the supervision of personnel from the FAA's Aircraft 
Certification Office, Wichita, Kansas. The examination revealed that the separation signatures 
of the submitted components exhibited torsional overload. The joint showed indications of 
acceptable braze coverage and "no anomalous voids." The joint also exhibited evidence of 
corrosion. The examination revealed that the left main landing gear shock absorber assembly 
was part number 50-810002, which is not approved for installation on Beech 90 series (King 
Air) airplanes but approved for installation on Beech 65 series (Queen Air) airplanes. Part 
number 50-810002 was designed with dampening rates for landing loads experienced by 
Queen Air 65 series airplanes.
When FAA inspectors arrived at the accident, they were met by the pilot who told them that the 
left main landing gear was a Queen Air part.
