Page 1 of 11
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fort Lauderdale, FL
Accident Number:
MIA07FA005
Date & Time:
11/01/2006, 0233 EST 
Registration:
N232TN
Aircraft:
British Aerospace HS 125-700A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
12 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Executive/Corporate
Analysis 
As the flight approached Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood International Airport, Fort Lauderdale, 
Florida, the flight crew prepared for a visual approach to the runway and advised the air traffic 
controller that the field was in sight. According to the pilot, he was distracted by trying to 
locate the runway for a visual approach. A review of the ﬁBefore Landingﬂ and ﬁClose Inﬂ 
checklists for the airplane revealed that both checklists contained landing gear verification 
tasks; however, although the copilot stated that he read from the checklist, the cockpit voice 
recorder (CVR), which captured other cockpit conversations, recorded no checklist challenge-
response callouts. During the landing, the airplane touched down on the runway with its 
landing gear retracted and slid about 2,600 feet before coming to a stop, sustaining substantial 
damage to a structural component and fire damage to the bottom of the fuselage. Following 
touchdown, the CVR recorded that the pilot asked what happened to the landing gear and that 
the copilot responded, ﬁWe never put it down.ﬂ 
Although the airplane was equipped with an audible landing gear warning system designed to 
alert the flight crew that the landing gear is not extended when the airplane is otherwise 
configured for landing, the CVR captured no sounds that could be associated with the landing 
gear warning horn, and the pilot reported that he did not hear a warning. Postaccident testing 
of the airplane™s landing gear system revealed that it operated normally using the normal and 
emergency extension systems and that the cockpit landing gear visual annunciators and 
standby indicators correctly indicated the landing gear position. However, the audible landing 
gear warning system did not operate. Examination of the electrical wiring for the warning 
system revealed that a wire labeled ﬁ68CA8ﬂ was fractured and separated from the ﬁCAﬂ relay; 
this separation rendered the landing gear warning horn inoperative. 
Metallurgical examination of the 68CA8 wire revealed that the fracture features were 
consistent with overstress; however, the source of the overstress condition was not identified. 
According to the airplane™s maintenance records, the CA relay and its immediate area were 
inspected 7 months and 22 days before the accident, and the airplane had operated for 60 
hours (accumulating 43 cycles) since the inspection. According to the airplane manufacturer, 
there is no preflight test that a flight crew could perform to determine the operational status of 
Page 2 of 11MIA07FA005
the audible landing gear warning system. However, because the audible landing gear warning 
system and the cabin altitude warning system shared the CA relay, the fractured 68CA8 wire 
would also have rendered the cabin altitude warning system inoperative, and the operational 
status of the cabin altitude warning system is a preflight check item for flight crews. Therefore, 
the anomaly that rendered the gear warning system inoperative would be detectable during a 
flight crew™s preflight check because the cabin altitude warning would fail to function. 
However, a review of available maintenance and discrepancy records revealed no indication 
that any flight crews had previously detected and reported an inoperative cabin altitude 
warning system, and the accident crewmembers provided no information about their preflight 
observations of the status of the cabin altitude warning system. Therefore, it could not be 
determined when the 68CA8 wire fracture occurred.
The pilot was employed by the airplane™s owner. The investigation found that the pilot™s U.S. 
commercial airman certificate (issued on the basis of his Mexican pilot license) was not valid 
for the carriage of persons for compensation or hire. Further, Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) records indicated that the pilot did not hold a U.S. airman medical certificate and that 
his U.S. airman certificate did not include a type rating for the accident airplane or an 
instrument rating (the accident flight was operated under instrument flight rules). 
Additionally, the pilot had not completed a pilot proficiency check within the preceding 12 
calendar months. Further, the copilot held only a U.S. private pilot certificate (issued on the 
basis of his Mexican pilot license) that did not include an instrument rating. Although there is 
insufficient evidence to indicate that any of these flight crew discrepancies were directly related 
to the cause of the accident, the FAA determined that these discrepancies represented 
noncompliance with numerous Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs). According to the FARs, 
the pilot was not authorized to act as pilot-in-command of the accident flight, and the copilot 
was not authorized to act as a required crewmember of the accident flight.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the flight crew to extend the landing gear. Contributing to the accident was the 
inoperative audible landing gear warning system.
Findings
Occurrence #1: WHEELS UP LANDING
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
1. ELECTRICAL SYSTEM,ELECTRIC RELAY - FRACTURED
2. (F) LANDING GEAR,GEAR WARNING SYSTEM - INOPERATIVE
3. (C) CHECKLIST - NOT FOLLOWED - FLIGHTCREW
4. (C) GEAR EXTENSION - NOT PERFORMED - FLIGHTCREW
Page 3 of 11MIA07FA005
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 1, 2006, about 0233 eastern standard time, a British Aerospace HS 125-700A, 
N232TN, registered to and operated by Juventude Ltd., was landed with the landing gear 
retracted at the Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood International Airport (KFLL), Fort Lauderdale, 
Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and an instrument flight rules 
(IFR) flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 
executive/corporate flight from Licenciado Adolfo Lopez Mateos International Airport 
(MMTO), Toluca, Mexico, to KFLL. The airplane was substantially damaged and there were no 
injuries to the commercial-rated pilot, private-rated co-pilot, or 10 passengers. The flight 
originated about 2235 central standard time from MMTO.
The pilot-in-command (PIC) who was flying the airplane from the left seat reported that he 
began his day at 1100 CST, and flew 2 flights in a different airplane; the total flight duration for 
the 2 flights was approximately 3 hours. He did not rest between the 2 flights, then departed in 
the accident airplane and proceeded to KFLL. The airplane was "flying smooth", and when near 
KFLL, he became distracted in looking for the runway while executing a visual approach to 
runway 9L. The co-pilot read to himself from a "Flight Safety" checklist, but "not very loud", 
and there was no challenge response which was "...not typical for them."  They "did not follow 
every item on the checklist", but the flaps were extended to 45 degrees for landing. In 
preparation for landing, he remembered placing his hand on the landing gear selector handle 
and moving it half way down, and later reported seeing a green light for the left main landing 
gear, but saw red lights for the nose and right main landing gears. He elected to continue the 
approach, and reduced the thrust levers to idle when the flight was approximately 1/4 mile 
from the runway. He did not hear an audible alarm at that time. The airplane was landed on 
runway 9L, and he thought he felt the tires rolling then applied the airbrake. He performed an 
emergency shutdown after the airplane came to rest on the runway, and all occupants exited 
the airplane. He (PIC) further reported that  they did "many things wrong."
The owner of the airplane who was a passenger reported that none of the flightcrew members 
advised them before landing to prepare for an emergency landing. Additionally, he went into 
the cockpit immediately after the airplane came to rest and noticed 2 red lights and a green 
light; the green light was associated with the left main landing gear. The remaining adult 
passengers stated they heard sounds during the landing then saw smoke. There was no 
mention that the flightcrew advised them to prepare for an emergency landing.
According to the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) Factual Report, all inter-cockpit conversations 
were in Spanish, while conversations with air traffic control were in English. The audio quality 
of the communications recorded by the cockpit area microphone was reported to be good, 
which starts with the flight being cleared to descend to 10,000 feet, and ends with one of the 
flightcrew members advising the KFLL air traffic control tower (ATCT) that they were securing 
the airplane. No reading of a checklist was heard, and there was no sound associated with 
extension of the landing gear or landing gear warning horn during the entire recording. The 
summary transcription indicates that approximately 25 minutes 8 seconds into the CVR 
recording, a flightcrew member reported the field in sight. At 25 minutes 58 seconds into the 
CVR recording, the CVR recorded a discussion by the flightcrew about using full flaps for 
landing. At 27 minutes 57 seconds into the CVR recording, the CVR recorded a mechanical 
Page 4 of 11MIA07FA005
voice stating "five hundred" feet. The CVR then recorded the engine sound decreasing, and at 
28 minutes 54 seconds into the CVR recording, a loud grinding sound started. The grinding 
sound continued for approximately 22 seconds, and stops at 29 minutes 16 seconds into the 
recording. The CVR then recorded a comment from the PIC asking what had happened to the 
landing gear. The CVR recorded the response from the co-pilot to be "we never put it down."  
The tower was then heard asking the flightcrew if they needed assistance, and one of the 
flightcrew members asked for assistance with moving the airplane off the runway. At 29 
minutes 53 seconds into the CVR recording, the CVR recorded a cockpit conversation in which 
one of the passengers asks about the incident and the captain reported that the landing gear 
folded when he lowered the nose to the runway, and that the red light is on in the gear handle. 
At 32 minutes 39 seconds into the recording, the CVR recorded one of the flightcrew members 
advising the KFLL ATCT that they were going to secure the airplane.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot-in-command (PIC) seated in the left seat was issued a FAA commercial pilot 
certificate with airplane single and multi-engine land ratings on December 17, 1990. The 
limitations of the certificate indicates, "issued on basis of and valid only when accompanied by 
Mexican pilot license number 1929. Not valid for the carriage of persons or property for 
compensation or hire or for agricultural aircraft operations."  The PIC did not have a type 
rating for the accident airplane make and model, which is contrary to 14 CFR Part 61.31 (a)(2), 
nor did he have an instrument rating, which is contrary to 14 CFR Part 61.3(e((1), for operation 
of an airplane under IFR. There was no record of a U.S. issued medical certificate. The PIC's 
last flight proficiency check occurred in July 2005, in which he received 10 hours of training in 
the accident make and model airplane at Tornado Flight School, Mexico City, Mexico. FAA 
regulation 14 CFR Part 61.58(a)(1) requires a flight proficiency check each 12 calendar months.
The co-pilot seated in the right seat was issued a FAA private pilot certificate with airplane 
single and multi-engine land ratings on January 5, 2006. The limitations of the certificate 
indicates, "issued on basis of and valid only when accompanied by Mexico pilot license 
number(s) 200302963. All limitations and restrictions on the Mexico pilot license apply."  The 
co-pilot did not have an instrument rating on his private pilot certificate, which is contrary to 
14 CFR Part 61.55(a)(2) for operation of an airplane under IFR. He was issued a U.S. first class 
medical certificate with no restrictions on April 10, 2006.
The co-pilot on the accident flight replaced another pilot who was scheduled to perform the 
flight but became ill.
Numerous requests were made by NTSB to the Mexican Government regarding Mexican pilot 
certificate information. The Mexican Government did not respond to the NTSB's requests.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was manufactured in 1978 by British Aerospace Aircraft Group, as model HS 125-
700A, with modification number 258332. It was designated constructors reference number NA 
0232, which correlates to serial number 257043. It was certificated in the transport category. 
The 10 passenger-seat airplane was equipped with retractable landing gears, and an audible 
landing gear warning which sounds when the flaps are in the landing position (45 degrees), the 
landing gear selector handle is in the up position, and one or both thrust levers are below the 
60 percent rpm position.
There is no direct functional test of the landing gear warning horn system that can be 
Page 5 of 11MIA07FA005
performed by the flightcrew before flight to determine the operational status of the landing 
gear warning horn; however, the cabin altitude warning system and the landing gear warning 
system share the same circuitry, including the CA relay and warning horn.
The airplane "Crew Manual" is divided into 3 volumes, with the first being aircraft systems 
descriptions, the second being operating data, and the third being "Pilot's Checklists." NTSB 
review of volume 1 revealed the cabin altitude warning horn is operationally tested during the 
"Before starting engines or APU" section found in the "Air Conditioning - Management in 
Normal Conditions" section. NTSB review of volume 3 of the Crew Manual revealed the "Pre 
Departure Check" checklist indicates a section titled "Test Panel" and describes to test each 
system.
Review of the maintenance records revealed a March 2006 entry which indicates that the 4 
club seats, 1 attendant seat, 1 toilet seat, and one 3-place divan were redressed. The toilet seat 
was not equipped with a seatbelt. At the time of the accident, with respect to passenger seats, 
the airplane was equipped with 4 club seats, and two 3-place divans, which allowed for 10 
passengers. There was no maintenance record entry or weight and balance associated with the 
cabin passenger seat change.
A handwritten list of 6 discrepancies was stapled to the outer page of the Aircraft Flight Log. 
None of the listed discrepancies pertained to the landing gear; however, two of the listed 
discrepancies indicates: "Both fuel indicators are Out/Service" and "Engine Number 1 ITT 
indicator [out of service]." The airplane owner reported that he was not personally aware of the 
discrepancies, and that his dispatcher would know what discrepancies were wrong with the 
airplane. The owner did state that he "always had maintenance performed in the U.S."
The FAA Master Minimum Equipment List (FAA MMEL) for the accident airplane make and 
model does not allow dispatching of an airplane with both fuel indicators inoperative, and also 
does not allow dispatching of the airplane with an inoperative ITT indicator.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A surface observation weather report (METAR) taken at the Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood 
International Airport on the day of the accident at 0153, or approximately 40 minutes before 
the accident, indicates the wind was from 330 degrees at 4 knots, the visibility was 10 statute 
miles, scattered clouds existed at 1,800 and 5,000 feet. The temperature and dew point were 
25 and 22 degrees Celsius, respectively, and the altimeter setting was 29.93 inches hg.
COMMUNICATIONS
The pilot was last in contact with the Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood International Airport (KFLL) 
Air Traffic Control Tower. There were no reported communication difficulties.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood International Airport is equipped with a runway designated 
9L/27R, which is a grooved, asphalt runway that is 9,000 feet long and 150 feet wide. The 
runway was closed immediately following the accident due to damage caused by the on-ground 
fire and fuel leakage. The damaged portion of the runway was in the process of being repaired 
when first examined by NTSB at approximately 1847; the runway was re-opened on the day of 
the accident at approximately 2100 hours.
Examination of runway 9L by NTSB and FAA revealed evidence of runway contact first located 
Page 6 of 11MIA07FA005
at 26 degrees 04.417 minutes North latitude and 080 degrees 09.553 minutes West longitude, 
or approximately 2,337 feet from the approach end of runway 9L. Skid marks on the runway 
were continuous from the first touchdown point to the location where the airplane came to rest 
located at 26 degrees 04.622 minutes North latitude and 080 degrees 09.139 minutes West 
longitude. The skid mark length based on GPS readings was calculated to be approximately 
2,600 feet.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The airplane was equipped with a Fairchild Weston Systems, Inc., cockpit voice recorder 
(CVR), model GA100, P/N GA100-0000, S/N 00768. The CVR was retained by NTSB for 
readout and a summary of the recorded communications was prepared.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
According to a maintenance individual who helped recover the airplane, when they arrived on-
scene approximately 2.5 hours after the landing, the airplane was resting on the fuselage 
bottom and the nose landing gear doors were tightly closed and the inboard left and right main 
landing gear doors were open approximately 1 inch. All landing gears were inside the wheel 
wells. The landing gear selector handle was in the "down" position, and the emergency hand 
pump handle was stowed. When electrical power was applied, he confirmed the landing gear 
indicator lights as reported by the PIC. The airplane was raised from the runway and the 
landing gears began extending automatically. He pumped the landing gear emergency pump 3 
times and the gears went into the down and locked position. The landing gears were then 
pinned and the airplane was towed to the ramp.
Examination of the airplane by NTSB following recovery revealed the aft portion of both nose 
landing gear doors exhibited longitudinal scraping; there was no scraping damage to the main 
landing gear doors. Scraping damage to the bottom of the fuselage was noted from 
approximately fuselage station (FS) 283.1, to approximately 16 inches aft of FS 374.55. 
Additionally, scraping damage was noted to "Beam No. 1."  Soot was noted in the area of both 
main landing gears, on the exterior surface of the lower skin of the right wing forward and aft 
of the main landing gear, and on the outboard gear door of the right main landing gear. Fire 
damage was noted to the fairings of both main landing gears located forward of the inboard 
gear doors. The fluid level in the front hydraulic reservoir was within 1 inch from the top of the 
sight tube, while the fluid level in the rear reservoir was noted to be at the full mark with 3 
accumulators. Fresh hydraulic fluid was noted on the exterior skin surface adjacent to the No. 
2 engine nacelle. Both wing flaps were symmetrically extended 45 degrees. Examination of the 
cockpit following recovery revealed the landing gear selector handle was in the down position, 
and no circuit breakers were tripped or popped. A small sized "crew manual" for the "125 
Series 700B" was found in the cockpit, and a large sized "crew manual" for the "Hawker 
Siddeley H.S. 125 Series 700A FAA Approved Airplane Flight Manual" was found in a cabinet 
located in the cabin. The "Aircraft Flight Log" book, which was located resting on the center 
pedestal in the cockpit depicted the accident flight duration as 3 hours.
The airplane was then placed on jacks for further evaluation of the landing gear. An electrically 
operated pump was installed onto the right engine to supply hydraulic pressure in order to 
operate the landing gear, and an external power supply was connected to supply electrical 
power to the airplane. The aircraft's battery was turned on and green down and locked lights 
for the nose and both main landing gears were illuminated; all landing gears were down and 
Page 7 of 11MIA07FA005
locked at that time. The auxiliary pump supplied hydraulic pressure to the airplane's hydraulic 
system at 3,000 psi and no hydraulic leakage was noted. The landing gear was then retracted 
using the normal system, and all landing gears retracted and all landing gear doors closed 
satisfactory. With electrical power applied to the airplane, the landing gear retracted, and both 
thrust levers at flight idle, no gear warning horn was heard. The landing gear selector was then 
placed in the down position and all gears went into the down and locked position and the gear 
doors closed with no discrepancies noted. The gear selector was then placed in the gear-up 
position and all landing gears retracted and the gear doors closed with no discrepancies noted. 
The landing gears were then extended using the emergency hand pump and all gears went into 
the down and locked position. The warning horn utilized in the landing gear audible warning 
system was then powered by an external power source and the horn was determined to be 
functional. Trouble shooting of the circuit for the inoperative landing gear audible warning 
system revealed a separated wire at a relay identified as "CA", which is located behind panel 
"F22", which is behind the co-pilot's seat. The separated electrical wire was identified as "CA8."  
The separated electrical wire was then positioned at the appropriate position on the relay and 
with the thrust levers at flight idle, the landing gear retracted, and the flap selector placed to 
the 45 degree position, the warning horn operated satisfactory. During testing, the main and 
nose gear standby indicators correctly indicated the position of each respective landing gear. In 
addition each landing gear annunciator light above the landing gear selector handle correctly 
indicated each respective landing gear position during the functional testing of the landing 
gear. The "CA" relay was retained for further examination.
Examination of the "CA" relay was performed at the NTSB Materials Laboratory located in 
Washington, D.C. The result of the examination revealed one terminal was fractured. A wire 
labeled "68CA8" remained attached to the fractured end of the terminal. Another wire was 
fractured where it intersected the solder bead on the fractured terminal, and several strands of 
the "68CA8" wire were fractured near the terminal. Examination of the terminal fracture 
surface revealed a "...mix of smooth features and elongated dimples consistent with overstress 
shear fracture."  No evidence of preexisting fracture such as fatigue was noted. One of the other 
terminals on the relay was fractured in the laboratory and both fracture surfaces were similar.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Operational testing of the landing gear, flaps, and landing gear warning horn is performed 
during an inspection identified as "C12", which is required to be performed every 1,200 hours. 
The procedure requires the airplane to be on jacks, ground electrical power applied to the 
airplane, and an external source providing hydraulic pressure to the airplane's hydraulic 
system. The "F22" panel area is inspected during an F6 inspection, which is performed every 
24 months. The "CA" relay is located behind the "F22" panel.
A review of the airplane maintenance records revealed the last "C12" and "F6" inspections 
occurred on March 10, 2006. The airplane total time and landings at the time of the last C12 
and F6 inspections were 10,127.9, and 6,341, respectively. At the time of the accident, the 
airplane had accumulated 60.0 hours and 43 landings since the last "C12" and "F6" 
inspections. Further review of the maintenance records revealed no entry indicating removal, 
repair, or replacement of the "CA" relay, or wiring to or at the "CA" relay.
As previously reported by the pilot-in-command, prior to landing he noticed a green light 
indicating the left main was down and locked, but noticed red lights for the nose and right 
main landing gears. This was later confirmed by one of the passenger's after the airplane came 
Page 8 of 11MIA07FA005
to rest, and also by the mechanic who helped recover the airplane. NTSB review of the small 
sized crew manual found in the cockpit revealed the emergency procedures for "Landing Gear 
Three Greens Not Indicated" indicates the circuit breakers for the warning horn, and ground 
proximity warning system (GPWS) if installed are to be pulled. If all gears do not indicate 
locked down by the standby indicators, then the emergency hand pump is utilized in an 
attempt to lower the landing gear(s). The captain did not attempt to extend the landing gear 
using the emergency hand pump. According to the system description found in the airplane 
flight manual, "With the aircraft on the ground a selector lever out-of-position indication is 
given by three green annunciators and three red annunciators being illuminated."
Immediately following the accident, the flightcrew removed the airplane's checklist. NTSB 
review of a copy of the checklist revealed it was a training checklist from Flight Safety 
International. One of the items on the before landing checklist pertaining to the landing gear 
indicates "Down, 3 Green."  The training checklist also has a section titled "Close In", which 
indicates that the landing gear is required to be "rechecked."
NTSB review of Service Difficulty Reports (SDR's) for the make and model airplane that cover 
the period, "Prior to 1995", and "1995 to Present", revealed no entry related to the fractured 
terminal of the "CA" relay.
The submitted NTSB "Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report" indicates the "No" 
block was checked for the question was there mechanical malfunction or failure.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane minus the retained cockpit voice recorder was released to the owner of the 
airplane on March 1, 2007. Additional items consisting of the maintenance records, and "CA" 
relay were later retained by the NTSB. The cockpit voice recorder and maintenance records 
were released to John H. Lewis, of South Aviation, on August 29, 2007. The "CA" relay was 
released to John Taylor, also of South Aviation, on October 12, 2007.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Unknown 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/01/2005
Flight Time:
10112 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1730 hours (Total, this make and model), 10112 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 9 of 11MIA07FA005
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
22, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
British Aerospace
Registration:
N232TN
Model/Series:
HS 125-700A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
257043
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
12
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2006, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
25500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
60 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
10187.9 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Garrett-AiResearch
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TFE 731-3
Registered Owner:
Juventude Ltd.
Rated Power:
3700 lbs
Operator:
Juventude Ltd.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 10 of 11MIA07FA005
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KFLL, 9 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0153 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 1800 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
330°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Toluca (MMTO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Fort Lauderdale, FL (KFLL)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
2235 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Fort Lauderdale/Hollywood Intl 
(KFLL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
9 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
9L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
9000 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
10 None
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
12 None
Latitude, Longitude:
26.076944, -80.152222
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
11/20/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven J Petrossian; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Fort Lauderdale, FL
Publish Date:
11/20/2008
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 11 of 11MIA07FA005
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
