National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Culebras Island, PR
Accident Number: ATL01LA086
Date & Time: 06/02/2001, 1400 EST
Registration: N1278V
Aircraft: Cessna R172-K
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis A Cessna R172-K was on approach to Flamenco Beach when the pilot reported that he encountered a downdraft approximately 15 feet over the runway.
The pilot stated, that the downdraft pushed the airplane down hard onto the runway.
A review of the weather data did not reveal any gust or downdrafts in the area at the time of the accident.
Examination of the airplane revealed the lower part of the engine firewall was buckled, as well as the area underneath the fuselage behind the firewall.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Pilots improper flare which resulted in a hard landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On June 2, 2001, at 1400 eastern daylight time, a Cessna R172-K, N1278V, registered to and operated by the private pilot, experienced a hard  landing at Benjamin Rivera Noriega Airport, Culebras Island, Puerto Rico.
The personal flight was operated  under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the pilot and passenger reported no injuries.
The flight departed Culebras Island, Puerto Rico, at 1340.
According to the pilot,  he was on approach to Flamenco Beach when he encountered a downdraft approximately 15 feet over the runway.
He stated," that the downdraft pushed the airplane down hard onto the runway."
After the hard landing he inspected the airplane and found no visible damage to the landing gear, wheel pants or fairings.
Weather data did not reveal any gust or downdrafts in the area at the time of the accident.
Examination of the airplane revealed that the lower part of the engine firewall was buckled, with buckling of the skin under the fuselage behind the firewall.
A review of the FAA form 337 repair, showed that the lower firewall assembly,  stringer assembly and the lower engine mount on the left hand side had been replaced.
There were no mechanical problems reported by the pilot prior to the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 43, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
