National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Amarillo, TX
Accident Number: FTW01LA135
Date & Time: 06/02/2001, 1350 CDT
Registration: N2495C
Aircraft: Piper PA-38-112
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Prior to turning final, the pilot completed the before landing checks.
While on final approach to runway 04, the engine "sputtered a little."
There was a strong right crosswind so the pilot crabbed the airplane into the wind.
Prior to landing, the pilot aligned the airplane with the runway, and the wind began pushing the airplane to the left.
The pilot initiated a go-around by applying full throttle and turning off the carburetor heat; however, the engine began to "sputter."
Subsequently, the airplane landed "hard" on its left main landing gear, bounced several times, veered left, and exited the runway onto the grass.
While on the grass, the airplane porpoised several times collapsing the nose landing gear.
The airplane came to rest on its nose.
At the time of the accident, the wind was from 140 degrees at 14 knots gusting to 19 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inadequate compensation for the crosswind, which resulted in a hard landing.
A contributing factor was the crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On June 2, 2001, at 1350 central daylight time, a Piper PA-38-112 (Tomahawk) single-engine airplane, N2495C, was substantially damaged during a hard landing at the Amarillo International Airport, Amarillo, Texas.
The airplane was registered to Panther Aviation, Inc. and operated by Cleburne Aviation Services, both of Cleburne, Texas.
The private pilot, sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan was filed and activated for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The cross-country flight originated from Cleburne, Texas, at 1040.
The pilot reported to the NTSB investigator-in-charge that prior to turning final, he completed the before landing checks.
While on final approach to runway 04, the engine "sputtered a little, like losing a magneto, carburetor icing, or fouled spark plugs."
There was a strong right crosswind so he crabbed the airplane into the wind.
Prior to landing, he aligned the airplane with the runway, and the wind began pushing the airplane to the left.
The pilot initiated a go- around by applying full throttle and turning off the carburetor heat; however, the engine began to "sputter."
Subsequently, the airplane landed "hard" on its left main landing gear, bounced several times, veered left, and exited the runway onto the grass.
While on the grass, the airplane porpoised several times collapsing the nose landing gear.
The airplane came to a rest on its nose.
According to the FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, the nose wheel was folded under the airplane, the firewall was buckled, and the engine was displaced downward and to the left.
At 1410, the reported wind at the Amarillo International Airport was from 140 degrees at 14 knots gusting to 19 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 34, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1670 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 97 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3826.6 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-235-L2C Registered Owner: Panther Aviation, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
