National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: OGDEN, UT
Accident Number: DEN01LA109
Date & Time: 06/01/2001, 1208 MDT
Registration: N5QV
Aircraft: 2001 MCGIRL QUESTAIR VENTURE
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
 Analysis While on a test flight, in a new homebuilt experimental airplane, a fuel leak into the cockpit occurred.
The pilot declared an emergency, and during final approach to land, a fire developed in the cockpit.
The pilot ground looped the airplane on the runway in front of the tower.
Fixed base operator personnel extinguished the fire and removed the seriously injured pilot from the airplane.
Due to thermal damage, the source of the fuel leak and subsequent fire was not found.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: an in-flight fire, which originated from a fuel leak of unknown origin.
Findings Occurrence #1: FIRE Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM - LEAK 2.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM - FIRE Factual Information On June 1, 2001, at 1208 mountain daylight time, an experimental homebuilt 2001 McGirl Questair Venture airplane, N5QV, was destroyed when it caught fire on short final to land at Ogden-Hinckley Airport, Ogden, Utah.
The airline transport pilot and sole occupant received serious thermal injuries.
The flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91 and no flight plan was filed.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The airplane was in a test status following construction and initial inspection by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
The airframe had accumulated 12 hours of total time in service.
According to the pilot, he had proceeded to the test area in the vicinity of Brigham City, Utah, and was at 10,500 feet above men sea level (msl), when he noted some engine roughness.
He said he considered landing at Brigham City, but by manipulating the mixture control he was able to smooth out the engine operation so he decided to return to Ogden.
In his statement, the pilot said he was about 12 miles from Ogden when he noted a fuel leak which emanated from behind the glare shield and dripped on the cockpit floor and his right leg.
The Ogden Air Traffic Control Tower was notified and the pilot set up for a straight in landing on runway 16.
He lowered the landing gear when he was about 2 miles from the runway and shut off the main fuel tank.
The pilot said that on short final, or just after landing, the fuel ignited and he had fire in the cockpit.
He said he released the canopy hold down and shut down the engine.
When in front of the tower, he said he ground looped the airplane, but was unable to exit on his own due to his hands being burned.
According to the tower controller, the pilot was cleared to land the airplane on any runway after informing the tower he had fuel/fumes in the cockpit.
Following a fast unstable landing on runway 16, the airplane reversed direction on the runway and stopped adjacent to the control tower with fire evident in and around the cockpit.
Persons who worked for the fixed base operator (FBO) extinguished the fire and removed the pilot from the airplane.
Examination of the airplane provided evidence that the fire was more pronounced on the left and lower portion of the engine compartment and the left side of the cockpit.
Due to the fire damage, the origin of the fuel leak and subsequent fire was not found.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Commercial; Flight Engineer Age: 64, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
