National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Pingree, ID
Accident Number: SEA01LA110
Date & Time: 06/01/2001, 1315 MDT
Registration: CFDGH
Aircraft: Cessna 172M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot departed Edmonton, Canada, with his passenger in the Cessna 172M, with 48 gallons of usable fuel aboard.
The trip included 2 stops before terminating at the end of the first day having flown 3 hours and 34 minutes.
The pilot added 12 gallons of fuel at his stopover.
The following day he and his passenger departed on the next leg of the trip (Great Falls, MT, to Pocatello, ID).
The engine quit after not less than 6 hours 51 minutes of operation on a total of 60 gallons of usable fuel.
On site examination revealed no evidence of fuel in either fuel tank or spilled/leaked at the site, and only 4.5 ounces of fuel were retrieved from fuel lines.
The landing site was characterized by soft furrows in a field and the furrows were observed to change direction (from parallel) during the ground roll of the aircraft.
The pilot reported in a written statement that "...The pilot had thoughts of landing at Idaho Falls but decided to fly as flight planned...!"
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate in-flight decision by failing to refuel while en route, resulting in fuel exhaustion and the loss of engine power.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: DESCENT Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - SOFT 5.
The pilot and passenger were uninjured.
Visual meteorological conditions existed and a VFR flight plan was in effect.
The flight, which was personal, was operated under 14 CFR 91 and, according to the pilot, departed from Great Falls, Montana, at 0954 on the morning of the accident.
The pilot reported that he departed Edmonton (CYXD), Alberta, with full fuel (48 gallons useable) stopping at Drumheller (CEG4), Alberta, Cut Bank (KCTB), Montana, and finally Great Falls (KGTF), Montana.
He then reported purchasing 12 gallons of fuel and departed for Pocatello, Idaho.
Approximately 20 miles out of Pocatello the engine abruptly stopped and the pilot was unable to achieve a restart.
He executed a forced landing in a potato field.
During the rollout, the soft dry furrows in the field changed orientation slightly and the aircraft nosed over.
The pilot further reported in his statement:  "...At approximately 13:00, shortly after passing Dubois VOR, Idaho Falls tower frequency was tuned in.
The pilot had thoughts of landing at Idaho Falls but decided to fly as flight planned!
FSS was then contacted to extend flight plan by 30 minutes.
C-FDGH commenced to descend out of 8,500 feet.
At twenty (20) statue [sic] miles out, Pocatello tower was contacted with the intention to land.
When out of 7,000 feet and about fifteen statue [sic] miles from Pocatello, the engine quit...." A Federal Aviation Administration Inspector from the Salt Lake City Flight Standards District Office examined the aircraft and it was subsequently recovered from the accident site and transported to the Pocatello Airport.
During the examination and recovery process no fuel spillage was noted, and no fuel was found within either wing tank.
There was no evidence of a fuel spill at the site and no odor of fuel.
The 5/8 inch diameter fuel supply line between the gascolator and carburetor was removed and approximately 4.5 ounces of fuel was retrieved (refer to attached statement).
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
