National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Boise, ID
Accident Number: SEA01LA111
Date & Time: 06/01/2001, 1400 MDT
Registration: N4602S
Aircraft: Cessna TR182
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that during the landing roll on runway 28L with a 90 degree crosswind, the aircraft encountered a gust of wind.
The aircraft veered to the side of the runway and the right wing contacted a runway edge light and the propeller contacted the ground.
At the time of the accident, the airport was reporting winds from 180 degrees at nine knots, gusting to 16 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to adequately compensate for wind conditions.
Wind gusts were a factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and a visual flight rules flight plan was filed.
The aircraft was substantially damaged and the private pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The flight departed from Concord, California, about 1115.
The pilot reported to a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector from the Boise Flight Standards District Office and in a subsequent written statement, that during the landing roll with a 90 degree crosswind on runway 28L, the aircraft encountered a gust of wind.
The aircraft veered to the side of the runway and the right wing contacted a runway edge light, and the propeller contacted the ground.
Maintenance personnel performing repairs on the aircraft reported that the former tip rib on the right wing was damaged, and approximately 12 to 16 inches of leading edge wing skin, requiring an additional seam, was spliced in.
At 1406,  the Boise airport was reporting winds from 180 degrees at nine knots, gusting to 16 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
