Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Walton, IN
Accident Number:
CEN14LA075
Date & Time:
12/02/2013, 1610 EST 
Registration:
N810QS
Aircraft:
CESSNA 560
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Part(s) separation from AC
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The flight crew of the twin-engine jet heard a "bang," and experienced a slight yawing of the 
airplane during the initial descent for landing. The flight continued to a normal landing, and a 
post-flight inspection revealed that the right engine upper and lower cowlings had separated 
from the engine and struck the right horizontal stabilizer. Recovered sections of the departed 
cowling doors were examined, but the reason for the separation could not be determined 
because the engine cowling quick-release fasteners were not recovered. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The inflight separation of the upper and lower right engine cowlings for reasons that could not 
be determined based on available evidence.
Findings
Aircraft
Aircraft structures - Failure (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 6CEN14LA075
Factual Information
On December 2, 2013, about 1610 eastern standard time (EST), a Cessna 560 Encore, N810QS, 
was substantially damaged when an engine cowling departed the airplane inflight over Walton, 
Indiana. The two flight crewmembers and one passenger on-board were not injured. The 
airplane was registered to NetJets Sales, Inc. and operated by NetJets Aviation, Inc. under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 as an on-demand air taxi flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated on an instrument flight rules 
flight plan. The flight originated from Southwest Florida International Airport (KRSW), Fort 
Myers, Florida, about 1330 EST and was enroute to Chicago Midway International Airport 
(MDW), Chicago, Illinois.
The airplane was on initial descent, passing through 17,000 feet mean sea level (MSL) when 
the flight crew reported hearing a "bang" and experienced a slight yawing of the airplane. They 
initially believed a gear door had departed the airplane and reported the event to air traffic 
control. There were no indications or alerts of any anomalies received in the flight deck. The 
flight crew disconnected the auto-pilot and the airplane "flew normally." The flight continued 
to the planned destination where the airplane landed without incident. A post flight inspection 
revealed the right engine upper and lower cowlings had departed the airplane and collided with 
the right horizontal stabilizer. 
Wreckage
Three fragments of the lower cowling door and one fragment of the upper cowling door were 
recovered and examined at the manufacturer under the supervision of the NTSB investigator-
in-charge (IIC). The cowling doors are normally affixed to the engine nacelle with quick-release 
fasteners. The quick-release fasteners consist of a stud with pin on the cowling door side that 
interface with a receptacle on the engine nacelle. In normal operation, the stud with pin is 
inserted into the receptacle and rotated one-quarter turn to lock the two together by engaging 
the pin into the receptacle. As designed, there are a total of 26 fasteners on the upper cowling 
and 41 fasteners on the lower cowling. After the in-flight cowling departure, the accident 
airplane had 11 quick-release fasteners on the lower cowling and 5 fasteners from the upper 
cowling missing, with deformations and tearing of the surrounding door material. The tearing 
appeared consistent with overload of the sheet metal of the cowling door. 
Separation of the pin from the stud would not allow for engagement into the receptacle. An 
examination of the remaining studs with pins from the accident airplane showed that several 
pins were loose allowing some side to side movement. However, none of the pins examined 
were loose enough to allow a pin to slide completely out of the stud.
A detailed examination of the aircraft nacelle door was not possible. However, photos provided 
by the operator showed no stud/grommet presence and no significant distortion of the 
supporting structure of the lower nacelle door's inboard corner or the second stud/grommet 
position. This, along with the lack of studs at these two fastener locations, was consistent with a 
previous loss of the respective cross pins, which allowed the door to become partially 
unfastened at the inboard corner of the lower nacelle door. All other damaged door fastener 
Page 3 of 6CEN14LA075
holes showed evidence of aft-direction displacement of the doors consistent with the doors 
departing the aircraft.
Research
The operator removed 20 quick-release stud samples from the upper and lower cowling doors 
of 5 separate C560 airplanes from their fleet. These fasteners were examined to assess the 
condition of the fasteners after varying times in service with specific attention on the cross-
pins. Of the 20 studs examined, cross-pins of 15 studs were held tightly in place and were 
centered on the stud. One stud out of the 20 samples exhibited a loose cross-pin (but still 
captured on the stud), three studs exhibited off-center cross-pins, and one stud had no cross-
pin at all.
 
One stud sample exhibited slight bending of the cross-pin, however none of the studs 
showed excessive wear or deformation. All of the stud cross-pins met the minimum push-out 
force requirement as designed.
Additional Information
A review of the manufacturers service difficulty reporting system revealed in-flight cowling 
departures had occurred 4 other times in addition to the accident. These events occurred 
between March 2010 and March 2013. The reported cowling departures were either full or 
partial loss of the upper and/or lower cowlings. Of the 5 total cowling departures, 3 events lead 
to pieces of the cowling striking a tail surface after departure from the engine nacelle. 
Additionally, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) was made aware of a 6th 
cowling departure event that occurred in the United Kingdom (UK) in November 2015, this 
event was investigated by the Air Accidents Investigations Branch (AAIB) of the UK. The AAIB 
concluded the cause of the event was due to a number of fasteners that had not been securely 
fastened during maintenance.
Although on different airplanes, the operator reported having two events within one year. 
Following the accident, the operator modified their C560 Normal Preflight Inspection 
Checklist to include an inspection of the engine cowlings of both engines.
Due to the high probability that routine maintenance completed on an engine could contribute 
to the fasteners not being properly engaged and subsequently loosening during flight, the 
NTSB asked Textron Aviation to consider releasing a safety bulletin or safety video to 
maintenance personnel on the importance of proper installation and engagement of the quick-
release fasteners. However, on November 30, 2016, Textron Aviation notified the NTSB IIC 
that "while missing fasteners typically indicate either improper engagement or complete lack of 
engagement, the incomplete nature of the recovered parts does not allow for a definitive 
conclusion as to the cause to be reached." As such, Textron Aviation declined to release any 
safety-related information to maintenance personnel on the above-mentioned and the 
importance of proper engagement of the fasteners.
Page 4 of 6CEN14LA075
History of Flight
Enroute-descent
Part(s) separation from AC (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
45
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
5-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/08/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/30/2013
Flight Time:
6873 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2743 hours (Total, this make and model), 2725 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 103 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 32 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 9 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
53
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
5-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/02/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/21/2013
Flight Time:
10132 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1715 hours (Total, this make and model), 591 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 90 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 41 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 9 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6CEN14LA075
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N810QS
Model/Series:
560 Encore
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2002
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
560-0625
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
10
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/13/2013, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
16830 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
429 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
7752 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W CANADA
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PW535A
Registered Owner:
NetJets Sales, Inc
Rated Power:
3400 lbs
Operator:
NetJets Aviation, Inc
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
DXTA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KGUS, 811 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2058 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
64째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 6000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 8500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
80째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.8 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
5째C / 2째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Fort Myers, FL (KRSW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Chicago, IL (KMDW)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1330 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.632222, -86.198056 (est)
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Courtney Liedler
Adopted Date:
03/23/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Alan Pattenaude; FAA; Chicago, IL
Ricardo J Asensio; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
Paul McClaskey; NetJets Aviation, Inc.; Columbus, OH
Mark C Nye; NetJets Association of Shared Aircraft Pilots; Columbus, OH
Publish Date:
03/23/2017
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88511
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
