Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
HAMILTON, ND
Accident Number:
CHI99LA020
Date & Time:
11/03/1998, 1355 CST 
Registration:
N285BB
Aircraft:
Becker Wag Aero SUPER SPORT
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness reported that he saw the airplane about 1,000 to 2,000 feet above ground and 
'falling' from the sky.  He reported a wing had separated from the airplane.  The wreckage was 
located in a field and the right wing was found about 450 feet to the southwest of the main 
wreckage.  The pilot had built the experimental airplane with his brothers in 1985. The airplane 
had approximately 1,800 hours total time.  A metallurgical examination of the lower right wing 
strut attachment bracket revealed fatigue fractures of the lower sheet of the attachment 
bracket.  Each side of the lower sheet contained a bend relief slot at the location of maximum 
bend in the lower sheet.  The examination revealed that the fracture through the lower sheet 
extended across the bracket from one bend relief slot to the other. Aircraft fabric covered over 
the location of the fracture and it could not be observed during a normal pre-flight.  To 
properly inspect the area where the fracture occurred, the fabric needed to be cut and pulled 
back from the aircraft frame. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the fatigue failure of the lower wing strut attachment bracket. 
Page 2 of 6CHI99LA020
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) WING,BRACING STRUT - FATIGUE
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
2. TERRAIN CONDITION - OPEN FIELD
Page 3 of 6CHI99LA020
Factual Information
 History of Flight
On November 3, 1998, at 1355 central standard time (CST), a Becker Wag-Aero Super Sport, 
N285BB, was destroyed near Hamilton, North Dakota, when it impacted the terrain after an 
in-flight breakup.  The commercial pilot was fatally injured.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight had 
departed Cavalier Municipal Airport, Cavalier, North Dakota, at approximately 1330 CST on a 
local flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.
A witness reported he saw the airplane at about 1,000 to 2,000 feet above ground and "falling" 
from the sky.  He reported a wing had separated from the airplane.  
The airplane impacted the ground in a field.
Personnel Information
The pilot was a commercially rated pilot with single engine land and glider ratings.  He held a 
Second Class medical certificate.  He had a total of about 1,581 hours of flight time.  The pilot 
had owned the accident airplane since 1985, but it was not determined how many hours he had 
flown in the accident airplane.  The pilot's flight logbook was not recovered.  The pilot was also 
a certified Airframe and Powerplant (A&P) mechanic.  
Aircraft Information
The airplane was a single engine experimental Becker Wag-Aero Super Sport, serial number 
BA-2-85.  The airplane seated two and had a maximum gross weight of 1,400 pounds.  The 
engine was a 150 horsepower O-320 Lycoming engine. The total hours flown on the airplane 
was approximately 1,800 hours. 
The pilot's brother reported that he, the pilot, and another of his brothers had built the 
airplane.  He reported the aircraft plans had been purchased by an unidentified builder 
associated with the Fargo, North Dakota, chapter of the Experimental Aircraft Association 
(EAA).  The airplane was partially built and then sold to a member of the Grand Forks, North 
Dakota, EAA chapter.  He reported the pilot and brothers purchased the partially built 
airplane, and then completed building the airplane in 1985.  The airplane was certified on April 
25, 1985.  
Meteorological Conditions
At 1353 CST, weather conditions reported at Grand Forks International Airport, Grand Forks, 
North Dakota, were VMC.  The sky had few clouds at 3,500 feet and a broken layer at 25,000 
feet with 10 miles visibility.  The temperature was 37 degrees Fahrenheit and the winds were 
040 degrees at 11 knots.
Wreckage and Impact Information
The wreckage was located in a field about four miles east of Hamilton, North Dakota.  The right 
wing was found about 450 feet to the southwest of the main wreckage.  The main wreckage 
impacted the ground in a nose low attitude.  
Medical and Pathological Conditions
An autopsy was performed at Altru Hospital, Grand Forks, North Dakota.
Page 4 of 6CHI99LA020
A Forensic Toxicology Fatal Accident Report was prepared by the FAA Civil Aeromedical 
Institute.  The results were negative.
Tests and Research
The lower right wing strut attachment bracket was sent to the National Transportation Safety 
Board's Materials Laboratory for examination.  The examination revealed fatigue fractures of 
the lower sheet of the attachment bracket.  Each side of the lower sheet contained a slot 
(referred to as a bend relief slot) at the location of the maximum bend in the lower sheet.  The 
examination revealed that the fracture through the lower sheet extended across the bracket 
from one bend relief slot to the other.  (See Materials Laboratory Factual Report)
Additional Information
The brother of the pilot reported that aircraft fabric covered over the location of the fracture.  
He reported the fracture could not be observed during a normal pre-flight.  He reported that to 
properly inspect the area where the fracture occurred, the fabric would need to be cut and 
pulled back from the aircraft frame.     
The Federal Aviation Administration and Wag-Aero Inc. were a parties to the investigation.  
The aircraft wreckage was released to the brother of the pilot.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Unknown
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/30/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1581 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6CHI99LA020
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Becker Wag Aero
Registration:
N285BB
Model/Series:
SUPER SPORT SUPER SPOR
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
BA-2-85
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
ALLEN BECKER
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
ALLEN BECKER
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GFK, 844 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
65 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
170°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 25000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
40°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
3°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
CAVALIER, ND (ND06)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1330 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JIM          SILLIMAN
Adopted Date:
03/31/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVE   JACOBS; FARGO, ND
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
