Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
La Belle, MO
Accident Number:
CHI08LA031
Date & Time:
11/01/2007, 1635 CDT 
Registration:
N634WB
Aircraft:
WRB Associates, LLC. Zodiac 601 
XL
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
Analysis 
The airplane was certified as an Experimental Light Sport Aircraft (E-LSA) four days before the 
accident.  The accident occurred during the airplane's first flight since manufacture.  Several 
witnesses reported seeing the airplane depart and then commence a series of left turns about 
two miles southeast of the airport.  While the airplane was established in a left turn it rolled to 
the left and entered a near vertical descent.  The airplane exploded upon impact and a ground 
fire ensued.  The wreckage was found in a vacant field with no obstructions in the general area 
of the accident site.  The absence of any discernible lateral ground markings was consistent 
with a near vertical impact.  Examination of the recovered wreckage revealed no evidence of a 
pre-impact mechanical malfunction.  The pilot did not have any flight experience in a model 
601 XL airplane before the accident flight.  The pilot's most current flight review was 
completed more than 16 years before the accident.  According to the pilot's wife, it had been 
nearly 10 years since he last piloted an aircraft.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control while maneuvering.  Contributing to the accident 
was the pilot's lack of recent flight experience and his total lack of experience in the accident 
airplane model.
Page 2 of 7CHI08LA031
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN KIND OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
----------
Occurrence #3: FIRE/EXPLOSION
Phase of Operation: OTHER
Page 3 of 7CHI08LA031
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 1, 2007, at 1635 central daylight time, a WRB Associates Zodiac 601 XL airplane, 
N634WB, was destroyed during an in-flight collision with terrain and subsequent 
fire/explosion near La Belle, Missouri.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time 
of the accident.  The flight was operating under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91 without a flight plan.  The pilot, the sole occupant, was fatally 
injured.  The local flight departed Sharpe Farms Airport (MO09) near Lewistown, Missouri, at 
1630.
Several witnesses reported seeing the airplane depart and then commence a series of left turns 
about two miles southeast of the airport.  While the airplane was established in a left turn it 
rolled to the left and entered a near vertical descent.  The airplane exploded upon impact and a 
ground fire ensued.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the pilot of N634WB, age 71, held 
a private pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating.  He was not instrument 
rated.  The pilot's last aviation medical examination was completed on August 4, 1994, when he 
was issued a third-class medical certificate with no limitations or restrictions.
The pilot's flight logbook indicated that he had accumulated 119.2 hours total flight time, of 
which 80.7 hours were as pilot-in-command.  He had accumulated 3.5 hours at night and 3.6 
hours in simulated instrument conditions.  The pilot did not have any flight experience in a 
model 601 XL airplane before the accident flight.  The pilot's most current flight review, as 
required by 14 CFR Part 61.56, was completed on September 1, 1991.  The last documented 
flight was completed on September 1, 1998, for a conventional landing gear orientation flight 
with a flight instructor.  According to the pilot's wife, it had been nearly 10 years since he last 
piloted an aircraft.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was an amateur-built WRB Associates Zodiac 601 XL, serial number 6-
6358.  The all-metal airplane incorporated a low-wing design with a fixed tricycle landing gear.  
The airplane had a maximum gross weight of 1,320 pounds and could accommodate two 
occupants.  A Jabiru model 3300A reciprocating engine, serial number 33A1283, powered the 
airplane.  The 120-horsepower engine provided power through a Sensenich W64ZK-49, fixed-
pitch, two-blade, wood propeller.
Four days prior to the accident, the airplane was issued a Special Airworthiness Certificate 
under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 21.191(i) as an Experimental Light Sport Aircraft (E-LSA).  
The accident occurred during the airplane's first flight since manufacture.
A review of the airframe, engine and propeller records found no history of unresolved 
airworthiness issues.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest weather station to the accident site was at Quincy Regional Airport (KUIN), 
Quincy, Illinois, located about 32 nautical miles east of the accident site.  The airport was 
Page 4 of 7CHI08LA031
equipped with an automated surface observing system (ASOS).
At 1654, the KUIN ASOS reported the following weather conditions: Wind 150 degrees true at 5 
knots; visibility 10 miles; sky clear; temperature 13 degrees Celsius; dew point -6 degrees 
Celsius; altimeter setting 30.24 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was found in a vacant field with no obstructions in the general area of the 
accident site.  The absence of any discernible lateral ground markings was consistent with a 
near vertical impact.  The main wreckage consisted of the entire airframe.  The fuselage and 
main cabin were destroyed by fire.  The only discernible cabin components were of steel 
construction. The instrument panel and its associated components exhibited fire and impact 
damage.  Both wings were damaged by impact and fire.  All flight control surfaces were 
accounted for at the accident site.  The ailerons and flaps were located in their appropriate 
positions.  The flaps were in a fully retracted position.  The aileron and elevator control cables 
were continuous from their respective control surfaces to the cockpit control columns.  The 
rudder control cables were continuous from the control surface horn to the forward cockpit 
area.  The main landing gear assembly was separated from the fuselage.  The nose landing gear 
was impacted into the engine compartment.  The engine remained partially attached to the 
airframe. The entire engine assembly exhibited thermal damage.  Both propeller blades were 
highly fragmented and portions were found as far as 30 feet from the main wreckage.
Examination of the recovered wreckage revealed no evidence of a pre-impact mechanical 
malfunction.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On November 3, 2007, an autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Boone/Callaway County 
Medical Examiner's Office, Columbia, Missouri.  The cause of death was listed as multiple 
blunt force injuries due to aircraft accident.
The FAA's Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI) in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
toxicology tests on the pilot.  According to CAMI's report, the specimens were received in a 
state of putrefaction.  No ethanol was detected in liver and muscle samples.  Metoprolol and 
Amlodipine were present in liver and kidney samples.  Quinine was detected in liver samples.  
The pilot had been prescribed Metoprolol and Amlodipine for the treatment of hypertension.  
Quinine is found in tonic water and in over-the-counter nutritional supplements.
Page 5 of 7CHI08LA031
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
71, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Sport Pilot None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/04/1994
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/1991
Flight Time:
119 hours (Total, all aircraft), 81 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
WRB Associates, LLC.
Registration:
N634WB
Model/Series:
Zodiac 601 XL 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental Light Sport
Serial Number:
6-6358
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/28/2007, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Jabiru
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
3300A
Registered Owner:
WRB Associates, LLC.
Rated Power:
120 hp
Operator:
Stevens Lee Walker
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7CHI08LA031
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KUIN, 768 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
32 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1654 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
100°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.24 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Lewistown, MO (MO09)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Lewistown, MO (MO09)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1630 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
40.023611, -91.873889
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
12/28/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Raymond J Callahan; Federal Aviation Administration - St. Louis FSDO; St. Louis, MO
Publish Date:
12/28/2008
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7CHI08LA031
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
