The pilot reported that he landed the multiengine airplane without incident; however, while 
taxiing after landing, the left main landing gear collapsed, which resulted in substantial 
damage to the left wing and left horizontal stabilizer. Subsequent examination of the airplane 
revealed that the left main landing gear bellcrank pin had separated from its bushing. The pin 
was not located; however, metallurgical examination of the left main landing gear bellcrank 
and retraction link revealed significant deformation and fracturing of the bellcrank bushing, 
which was consistent with a very large force applied along the axis of the link. The 
deformations on the link suggested that the pin fractured inside the hole and exited the bore as 
two separate pieces. Although an overstress failure seems probable, other failure modes, such 
as a significant fatigue crack cannot be ruled out because the fractured pin fragments were not 
located. The airplane was manufactured about 38 years before the accident. It had been 
operated for about 3,675 total hours, about 25 hours of which occurred since its most recent 
annual inspection, which was performed about 2 months earlier.
The collapse of the left main landing gear due to a failure of the left main gear bellcrank pin for 
reasons that could not be determined because the pieces of the fractured bellcrank pin were not 
located.
On October 2, 2012, about 0900 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 310I, N8025M, operated by a 
private individual, was substantially damaged while taxiing after landing at the Burlington 
International Airport (BTV), Burlington, Vermont. The private pilot and a passenger were not 
injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the 
local personal flight that was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91.
According to the pilot, the airplane landed on runway 15, an 8,320-foot-long, asphalt and 
concrete runway without incident. He taxied toward the end of the runway and was making a 
right turn onto taxiway "C" when the left landing gear began to collapse. The left side of the 
airplane struck the ground, which resulted in substantial damage to the left wing and left 
horizontal stabilizer. 
Subsequent examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector 
revealed that the left main gear bellcrank pin separated from its bushing. The pin was not 
located; however, the left main gear bellcrank and retraction link were removed and forwarded 
to the NTSB Materials Laboratory, Washington, D.C., for examination.
The airplane was manufactured in 1964. According to an FAA inspector, at the time of the 
accident, the airplane had been operated for about 3,675 total hours and 25 hours since its 
most recent annual inspection, which was performed on August 8, 2012. 
Metallurgical examination revealed that the bellcrank and retraction link were connected by a 
pin inserted through a clevis on the long arm of the bellcrank and a pivot hole on the retraction 
link. One of the clevis tangs was bent outward and contained a small crack. Both flange 
bushings were fractured in similar manners on the inside of the clevis and the liberated halves 
of the bushings displayed features consistent with overstress, with no evidence of progressive 
cracking. The edges of the inner bore of the pivot hole in the retraction link were locally 
deformed radially outward in one direction on each side of the link, consistent with pin 
contact. [Additional information can be found in the Materials Laboratory Factual Report 
located in the public docket.]
According to a representative from Cessna Aircraft Company, Cessna was not aware of any 
previous failures or separations involving only the main landing gear bellcrank pin on Cessna 
310 series airplanes.
