The pilot reported that while maneuvering, the helicopter™s clutch caution light illuminated. 
The pilot initiated a precautionary descent and began to slow the helicopter in an effort to 
locate a clearing in the trees. The clutch caution light was still on after 10 to 12 seconds, so the 
pilot instructed his passenger to pull the circuit breaker. The pilot spotted a clearing, and 
shortly thereafter the low rotor rpm warning light illuminated and the horn sounded. The pilot 
lowered the collective and headed for a landing spot. About 20 to 30 feet above ground level, 
the pilot flared the helicopter and used the remaining collective control input the last 3 to 5 
feet. The helicopter subsequently landed hard in high brush surrounded by tall trees. 
During the postaccident examination, bench testing of the clutch actuator revealed that the 
actuator operated normally and within specified limitations. Further examination of the 
actuator motor found no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. The reason 
for the illumination of the clutch light could not be determined.
The pilot's failure to maintain sufficient rotor rpm during a precautionary landing, which 
resulted in a hard landing.
On October 3, 2012, about 1340 Pacific daylight time, a Robinson R22 Beta helicopter, 
N80140, sustained substantial damage during a hard landing approximately 32 nautical miles 
north of Rockport, Washington in the North Cascades National Park. The pilot and passenger 
were not injured. The helicopter had substantial damage to the tailboom and fuselage. The 
helicopter was registered to Emerald City Aircraft Leasing and operated by Glacier Aviation 
Inc., of Burlington, Washington, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and no flight plan was filed.  
The flight originated from Skagit Regional Airport, Burlington, Washington about 1230. 
The pilot reported that while maneuvering the clutch caution light illuminated and stayed on 
steady. The pilot initiated a descent and began to slow in an effort to locate a clearing in the 
trees. The light was still on after 10 to 12 seconds so the pilot instructed his passenger to pull 
the circuit breaker. A clearing was spotted and shortly thereafter the low rotor RPM warning 
light illuminated and the horn sounded. The pilot lowered the collective and headed for a 
landing spot. The pilot flared about 20 to 30 feet and utilized collective control the last three to 
five feet. The helicopter subsequently landed hard in high brush surrounded by tall trees. 
A National Park Service representatives video taped the accident site on October 15, 2012 and 
sent to the National Transportation Safety Board, investigator-in-charge. The videos show the 
helicopter in high brush surrounded by tall trees. The video revealed the separation of the 
tailboom and damage to the tail rotor blades. The fuselage was buckled in several areas. The 
wreckage was relocated to a secure facility for further examination. 
A follow-up examination of the wreckage was conducted and revealed that more of the fuselage 
was buckled. The left skid assembly was damaged and the rear cross-tube was bent. The drive 
belts were tight and properly positioned on both the upper and lower sheaves. The condition of 
the drive belts were unremarkable. The upper sheave had light marks along the outer 
circumference of the upper sheave. The drive belt contact areas on both sheaves were 
unremarkable. The clutch actuator was found in the extended position. The exposed actuator 
shaft was about 1 1/2 inches in length. The down limit screw was extended about 3/4-inches 
below its support bracket. The clutch actuator was operated from the ‚Disengaged™ to ‚Engaged™ 
switch positions. During the actuation of the clutch actuator the actuator motor made a noise 
that was not consistent in tone and had intermittent squealing throughout the actuator™s full 
range of travel. The actuator moved in both directions from stop to stop. No other anomalies 
were noted. 
The clutch actuator was removed and examined at the facilities of the Robinson Helicopter 
Company. The actuator was installed on test benches and operated normally and within limits. 
The actuator was disassembled and no anomalies were noted. The actuator motor was removed 
from the actuator and disassembled. The wiring grommet was damaged and was found in two 
parts. The magnets were removed and dusting was visible on the interior side of both magnets 
and on the rotor. The brushes and commutator showed signs of normal operation. The 
electrical cap assembly had dusting near the commutator area. The bearing on the output shaft 
side felt slightly rough when rotated by hand. No other anomalies were noted.
