The regularly scheduled domestic passenger flight arrived at its gate and passengers began 
deplaning. A catering truck approached the right front service door. The catering truck driver 
said he applied the brakes three times in an attempt to stop the truck before it struck the 
airplane. The truck driver subsequently found that a ﬁsleeve of hot/cold cupsﬂ rolled under the 
brake pedal and obstructed its movement.
An obstruction (a sleeve of cups) that lodged under the catering truck brake pedal, which 
prevented the driver from stopping the truck before it struck the parked airplane.
On October 4, 2012, about 2010 central daylight time, a Boeing 717-200, N894AT, was struck 
by a catering truck while it was parked at the gate at General Mitchell International Airport 
(KMKE), Milwaukee, Wisconsin. There were no injuries to the deplaning 103 passengers and 5 
flight crew. The airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to Wells 
Fargo Bank Northwest, NA, Salt Lake City, Utah, and operated by Southwest Airlines, Inc., 
Dallas, Texas, as Flight 725, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121 as 
a scheduled domestic passenger flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time 
of the accident, and an instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed and closed. The cross-
country flight had originated from Hartsfield - Jackson Atlanta International Airport (KATL), 
Atlanta, Georgia.
The airplane had arrived at gate C14 and passengers had started deplaning. A catering truck, 
owned by AirTran Airways and operated by Aerotek Aviation, approached the right front 
service door. The driver said he attempted to stop, applying the brakes 3 times. The truck did 
not stop and struck the airplane. After the accident, the driver of the truck found a sleeve of 
hot/cold cups under the brake pedal. The damage to the airplane was confined to the area of 
the production splice, a joint where the forward portion of the fuselage is mated to the 
midsection fuselage. This included fuselage stations 207, 218, 228. 235, and 250.
