The commercial helicopter pilot was on a visual flight rules (VFR) 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 135 EMS (emergency medical service) patient transfer flight from a remote 
medical clinic in Alaska to a hospital in Anchorage when it collided with the ocean during 
instrument meteorological conditions. The flight entailed flying over and near ocean waters 
and mountainous terrain during dusk and night conditions without lighted ground references 
(such as buildings and street lights) due to the uninhabited topography. With the pilot and 
patient were a paramedic and a nurse. While crossing over a portion of ocean approaching 
rising terrain, the helicopter likely encountered low ceilings and snow squalls. With the pilot 
unable to discern either the shore or the ocean, it is probable he flew the helicopter under 
control into the ocean. Pieces of the helicopter and the body of the nurse were recovered 
several days after the accident. The rest of the helicopter and its occupants are presumed to 
have sunk in the ocean. There were no distress calls received from the pilot, and no history of 
any significant mechanical issues with the helicopter. 
The accident flight was the pilot's first flight from this clinic, and this was his first winter 
season flying in Alaska. He had expressed his concern to a mechanic prior to the flight about 
flying over the accident route and water at night, and also told the nurse to bring his night 
vision goggles (NVGs) to assist him in seeing terrain. The pilot also had NVGs. It is unknown 
what weather information the pilot had when he elected to accept the flight. He had access to a 
company computer, and he and other company pilots routinely did their preflight weather 
planning using it. There is no record that he received any preflight weather briefing from the 
FAA, nor contacted them for weather information prior to his departure from the clinic, or 
sought weather updates while en route. It was night VFR when the pilot departed the clinic, but 
the weather had deteriorated near the accident site in close proximity to his departure time. 
The nearest reporting station was about 5 miles from the accident site. About 23 minutes 
before the accident, it was reporting instrument meteorological conditions with snow and low 
ceilings. 
Aerial search efforts had to be delayed due to the poor weather. Neither the operator nor the 
hospital provided en route weather updates, or primary dispatch services. The hospital's 
Page 2 of 16ANC08FA025
procedure was to call the assigned EMS pilot to request a flight, and the pilot made the 
decision to either accept or reject the flight. Company procedures required that the pilot 
complete a risk assessment form prior to taking a flight. There was no risk assessment form 
found for the accident flight, and company management could not locate other risk assessment 
forms for previous EMS flights. An exemplar risk assessment form was completed by the NTSB 
investigator-in-charge using information that the pilot could reasonably expect to have known 
prior to accepting the flight. That information equated to a "Moderate" risk level, and required 
company management's concurrence to authorize the flight. Company management was not 
notified. The pilot was required to phone the hospital communications center at 10-minute 
intervals via satellite phone while en route, and when he did not call at the required time, a 
search was initiated. 
The operator's main base was in Anchorage, and the EMS facility was in another Alaska town. 
The operator had not been assigned a principal operations inspector (POI) to oversee their 
operations until about 2 months prior to the accident. The POI had not inspected or visited the 
remote EMS location. Prior to the POI's assignment, the operator did not have a POI assigned 
for the preceding 22 months, but instead relied on various points of contact (POC) within the 
local FAA Flight Standards District Office to provide oversight. Investigation disclosed no 
evidence that any POC had visited the EMS facility. The operator also did not adhere to the 
proper procedures in training the accident pilot in the use of the NVGs. These discrepancies 
were not discovered by the FAA until after the accident. NTSB/SIR-06/01 recommended that 
the FAA require EMS operators to use formalized dispatch and flight-following procedures that 
include up-to-date weather information and assistance in flight risk assessment decisions. 
With a formalized dispatch and flight following process, it is probable the helicopter would 
have been turned around/canceled prior to entering instrument meteorological conditions 
(IMC), or due to the noncritical nature of the patient, the patient could have waited until an 
airplane was available that was capable of flying in IMC.
The pilot's decision to continue VFR flight into night instrument meteorological conditions. 
Contributing to the accident were the operator's failure to adhere to an FAA-approved and 
mandated safety risk management program, the FAA's failure to provide sufficient oversight of 
the operator to ensure they were in compliance with the risk management program, the pilot's 
lack of experience in night winter operations in Alaska, and the operator's lack of an EMS 
dispatch and flight following system.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 3, 2007, about 1718 Alaska standard time, a Eurocopter BK117C1 helicopter, 
N141LG, is presumed to have sustained substantial damage during impact with ocean waters, 
about 3 miles east of Whittier, Alaska. The helicopter was operated by Evergreen Alaska 
Helicopters, Inc., under contract to Providence Hospital, Anchorage, Alaska, under their 
Lifeguard Program, as a visual flight rules (VFR) patient transport flight under 14 CFR Part 
135. Of the four persons aboard, the commercial pilot, paramedic, nurse, and patient, only the 
body of the nurse was recovered. The remaining three were not located, and are presumed to 
have also died. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed in the area of the accident, and 
company VFR flight following procedures were in effect. The accident flight departed Cordova, 
Alaska, about 1640.
The helicopter was based in Soldotna, Alaska, and flew to Cordova to pickup the patient about 
1340. After boarding the patient, the helicopter departed for Anchorage about 1640. During the 
flight from Cordova to Anchorage, the pilot communicated with the hospital's communications 
center at 10-minute intervals via satellite telephone. During the communications he gave the 
helicopter's position and estimated time of arrival in Anchorage. The helicopter was reported 
missing when the pilot failed to make a required position report, and attempts to communicate 
with him failed.
On the evening of December 3, the Alaska Rescue Coordination Center (ARCC) initiated a 
search for the missing helicopter. Initially, search efforts were restricted to watercraft due to 
weather in the search area. The following day both aircraft and watercraft carried on the 
search, as well as ground searchers on land. On December 8, the body of the nurse and some 
wreckage were found floating in Passage Canal near Whittier.  On December 10, the active 
search for the helicopter and its three missing occupants was terminated.
 
The flight from Cordova to Anchorage required flying over/near the ocean waters of Prince 
William Sound. Prince William Sound is an isolated area with no roads, few small 
towns/villages, and essentially no land or water-based lights. For patient transfers from 
Cordova to Anchorage, Providence hospital routinely used airplanes operating under 
instrument flight rules as the preferred transportation method. The use of the helicopter was 
the last option. Helicopter flights operate under visual flight rules only. 
The VFR flight in a helicopter from Cordova to Anchorage typically would follow the north and 
east boundary of Prince William Sound to avoid extended flight over water.
The accident flight departed Cordova about 1640, and official sunset was 1548. Federal Air 
Regulation Part 135.205(a) states: No person may operate a helicopter under VFR unless that 
person has visual surface reference, or at night, visual surface light reference, sufficient to 
safely control the helicopter.  
DAMAGE TO AIRCRAFT
To date, the only pieces of helicopter wreckage recovered are fragmented pieces of the main 
rotor blades, and the aft left cabin door. Two flight helmets belonging to the flight nurse and 
the pilot were found floating in the surf. Night vision goggles were attached to the helmets via 
lanyards. The NVG switches were found in the "ON" position. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
No personal flight records for the pilot were discovered for examination, and the following 
information was taken from operator and FAA records.
The pilot held a commercial pilot's certificate, with ratings for airplane single-engine land, 
helicopter, and instrument helicopter. An FAA second class medical certificate was issued to 
the pilot on January 29, 2007, with the limitation that he must wear corrective lenses. The pilot 
was hired by Evergreen Helicopters on April 16, 2007. At the time of the accident he had about 
2,678 hours of flying experience. Of those hours, about 2,398 were in helicopters, and about 
120 hours were in the same make and model as the accident helicopter. The pilot had 65 hours 
of night flying experience, 78 hours of simulated instrument flight, and 18 hours of actual 
instrument flight time. He accumulated about 70 hours of Alaska time working for another 
operator during the summer in Southeast Alaska, and 109 hours with the current operator for a 
total of 179 hours of Alaska time. He had not previously flown during the winter months in 
Alaska.   
For night vision goggle (NVG) training he had flown three flights for 5.0 hours total flight time. 
The flights included inadvertent IMC procedures, and unusual attitude recovery. The NVG 
training was begun on August 20, and completed on August 22, 2007. According to the FAA, 
the pilot did not complete the NVG training as prescribed by the vendor/trainer, which 
according to the trainer, required five separate flights for a total of at least 5 hours of flight 
time, and therefore the pilot was not qualified to use NVG. The FAA had not assigned a 
Principal Operations Inspector (POI) to the operator at the time of the NVG training, and did 
not cancel the pilot's NVG usage, as the discrepancy was not discovered until after the accident. 
According to the operator, they understood that the pilot required 5 hours of NVG flight, not 
specifically five flights, and therefore they believed the pilot was trained to qualification.
Route training was provided to the pilot during his local area familiarization flights, however 
Cordova was not included in that familiarization training.  No evidence was discovered 
showing that the pilot had ever flown to or from Cordova.
The pilot completed and passed a Federal Air Regulation Part 135.293/299 Airman 
Competency Check ride on May 8, 2007, given by a company check airman. The check ride 
included instrument navigation and communications procedures, use of the auto pilot, 
inadvertent IMC procedures, and unusual attitude recovery. The accident pilot held an 
instrument rotorcraft certificate, but was not required to be IFR current. 
According to the check pilot, the accident pilot was a capable pilot, and current in all of his 
required pilot tasks and training.
The pilot's weather training consisted of completing the operator's interactive computer 
module, which was completed on May 5, 2007.
The operator's pilot training manual contains a section titled, "Special Subjects Training - For 
Additional Pilot Authorizations." Additional training subjects include underwater evacuation 
and ditching; however, the training was not required for the EMS helicopter position and was 
not provided to the accident pilot or crew.
The medical flight crews received formal training from the operator, in the operation of some 
helicopter systems, principally communications, patient care relative to flight, airspace 
surveillance, NVG usage, and emergency procedures. Essentially, medical flight crewmembers 
who had flown with the accident pilot, felt he was conscientious, professional, and a good pilot. 
One crewmember said on one occasion, he and the pilot got into severe turbulence, and after 
the flight the pilot was visibly shaken, as was he. Another crewmember said he was concerned 
about the number of days in a row the pilots worked 12 hour shifts, and wrote a letter to his 
supervisor because he was concerned that the accident pilot was making mistakes due to 
fatigue. The letter was forwarded to the operator, and the pilots were give additional days off.
OPERATOR INFORMATION
Evergreen International is a multinational aviation company supporting hundreds of aircraft 
worldwide. At the time of the accident, Evergreen Alaska Helicopters, Inc., a subsidiary of 
Evergreen International, supported numerous helicopter operations throughout Alaska, 
including two dedicated EMS helicopters, both of which were contracted to Lifeguard, 
Providence Hospital. 
The accident helicopter was stationed at Providence Hospital, Soldotna, Alaska, and designated 
for day/night VFR operations only. 
At the time of the accident, operational control of flight operations was specified in the 
company's FAA-approved Operations Specifications. The specifications stated in part, 
"...operational control is named management personnel to include Chief Pilot, Director of 
Maintenance, Chief Inspector, and Director of Operations."  Under paragraph 7(a), the 
operations specification stated in part, "...prior to the certificate holder conducting any flight 
operation under Part 135, the certificate holder must provide information to the designated 
pilot in command that indicates which flight or series of flights will be conducted under Part 
135, that indicates which Part 91 flights will be conducted by the certificate holder, and that the 
certificate holder is accountable and responsible for the safe operations of these flights or series 
of flights." According to the operator, all flights for Providence Hospital were conducted under 
Part 135.
According to the company operations manual Chapter 10, page 4, Pilot in Command: "The 
Director of Operations and the Pilot in Command are jointly responsible for the initiating, 
continuation, diversion, and termination of a flight in compliance with Regulations and 
Evergreen's Operations Specifications." 
The crew for the helicopter at Soldotna was a single pilot, and usually two medical 
crewmembers. The pilot has numerous tools to conduct flight operations, including computer 
access to weather data, and company operations specifications and procedures.
Pilots received an annual Part 135 check ride, and annual safety training.  The company did 
make a helicopter and fuel available for pilots who wanted to stay instrument current. The 
instrument training/currency was voluntary. No evidence was presented showing that the 
accident pilot was instrument current. 
At the time of the accident, the company operations manual stated that when inadvertent IFR 
was encountered, the pilot™s primary responsibility was to maintain attitude control (level the 
helicopter), heading control (turn to avoid known obstacles), add climb power, and attain 
climb airspeed.  The pilot should then climb to the area™s minimum safe altitude, make no 
turns greater than a standard rate turn, and contact ATC/FSS.
Aviation Flight Risk Evaluation Program
The operator had a flight risk evaluation program with an associated form to be completed by 
the pilot and filed at the main office in Anchorage. There was no continuity among the pilots 
interviewed as to when and how the form was filled out. Some pilots filled the form out as a 
daily risk evaluation, while others filled it out for each flight. The remaining Soldotna-based 
pilot said he left the completed forms with other paperwork destined for the main office, but 
did not know what became of them. The chief pilot at the main office was not able to locate the 
completed forms, and no form for the accident flight was presented. 
The risk evaluation program used a point system divided among categories, such as 
administrative, equipment, crew, weather, and environment. Selected elements are given a 
point value, and the total point value is assigned a risk factor, such as low, caution, medium, 
and high, etc. There is a required action associated with each risk factor. For instance, low 
requires pilot concurrence, caution requires the pilot to take steps to lower/reduce the risk, and 
medium requires management concurrence with the pilot to initiate the flight. Using the 
operator's form, and the conditions present for the accident flight that the pilot knew, or 
should have known at the time of evaluation prior to the flight, the point value reached the 
medium risk level. A medium risk level flight required concurrence from operator management 
to proceed. The pilot did not contact his management for concurrence. 
Weather Minimums
The pilot was operating in Class G airspace, and the Part 135 VFR visibility requirements for 
night cross-country flight during Helicopter Emergency Medical Services (HEMS) flights in 
Class G airspace using NVG were 1,000 feet and 3 miles. At the time of the accident, these 
minimums were included in the company operations specifications.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter was a 2003 model year, Eurocopter GMBH BK117C1, twin-engine turbine 
helicopter. According to the operator's records, at the time of the accident the helicopter had 
about 11,021 hours of flight time. It was maintained under an Approved Airworthiness 
Inspection Program (AAIP), and the last inspection was completed November 19, 2007. The 
helicopter was equipped for instrument flight. An examination of the airframe and engine log 
books revealed no known mechanical anomalies. 
The helicopter was configured as an air ambulance.  Among other equipment, it contained 
communications equipment, seating for the medical crew, stretchers for patients, medical 
monitors, medical equipment, and on-board oxygen.
The helicopter was certified for day/night VFR flight by one pilot.  It had standard 
instrumentation for instrument flight, and was certified for single-pilot instrument operations. 
The helicopter was not equipped with emergency pop-out floats, and none were required by the 
FAR.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
VFR conditions prevailed along the route of flight from Soldotna to Cordova, and at the time of 
departure from Cordova, but instrument flight rules (IFR) conditions developed in Whittier 
after the helicopter departed Cordova. FAA weather cameras at Whittier/Portage Pass, pointed 
south toward Prince William Sound, showed rapidly deteriorating weather in the area of 
Whittier, and Portage Pass, just before sunset at 1548 Alaska standard time. After sunset the 
weather cameras were unusable. 
The weather reporting stations along/near the route of flight from Cordova to Anchorage, 
principally Whittier and Portage were automated stations. Automated stations can be accessed 
via computer, by telephone, or aircraft radio. When accessed by telephone or aircraft radio they 
provide current weather conditions being sensed at the time of the contact. In addition, the 
FAA maintained a series of weather cameras in select areas accessible through the Internet and 
Flight Service Stations. Telephone and computer records showed that the pilot used the 
telephone to contact the automated reporting sites, as well as Internet resources to gather 
information about the weather conditions along the route of flight prior to leaving Soldotna. He 
did not contact an FAA flight service station for a complete weather briefing. No records were 
discovered showing that the pilot accessed any weather sites after departing Soldotna. 
The closest weather reporting station to the accident site was the automated weather station at 
Whittier, about 5 miles west of the suspected accident location. The 1655 AST observation, 
about 23 minutes prior to the estimated time of the accident, reported 1 mile visibility in light 
snow and mist, ceiling obscured, vertical visibility 300 feet, wind from 120 degrees at 6 knots, 
temperature and dew point 22 degrees F, altimeter setting 29.46 inches of HG.
Another helicopter transited the Whittier/Portage Pass portion of the route about 2 hours prior 
to the accident helicopter. The pilot of that helicopter described weather conditions as waves of 
snow squalls and near zero visibility. He said during daylight hours he was able to see snow 
squalls ahead and behind, and had to land his helicopter several time to wait out the squalls.
No pilot reports appropriate to the area and time of the accident were found. 
COMMUNICATIONS
The EMS dispatch center is located at Providence Hospital, and staffed by hospital employees. 
There were no employees of the helicopter operator involved in the dispatch operation. The 
dispatchers processed requests for transportation, but did not make any decisions relative to 
the transport. Dispatchers are given a list of aircraft available for transport from each facility. 
The list has an order of preference i.e. first choice, second choice, etc. Dispatchers do not make 
decisions on the appropriateness of particular aircraft based on distance, weather, time of day, 
or criticality of the patient. Once a third choice aircraft is dispatched, in this instance the 
helicopter, no further steps are taken to reassign a more appropriate aircraft, or divert a more 
appropriate aircraft if one becomes available. 
The flight dispatch process consisted of the pilot being asked by the hospital's communications 
center personnel if he/she could make a flight between two locations, and the pilot completing 
the operator's flight risk form. Once the flight is requested, the pilot is responsible for 
gathering and interpreting weather information and determining its relevance to the flight. The 
pilot then notifies the communications center whether he/she will accept the flight request.
During the last satellite telephone communication between the hospital dispatch center and 
the pilot, the pilot said that they were about 25 miles east of Whittier, and estimated their 
arrival in 27 minutes. When the helicopter did not check-in 10 minutes later, a 
communications search began.
The operator, Evergreen, does not actively participate in flight following, or the en route 
communications process, and participation is not required by CFR Part 135.    
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The impact area was believed to be the ocean waters of Prince William Sound in the area of 
Passage Canal near Whittier. The largest piece of wreckage recovered was the intact, aft left 
cabin sliding door. The door's latch was found in the closed position. The emergency door 
release was in place. The emergency window release was in place. The center portion of the 
plexi-glass door window was broken out. The door was a sliding type, and the door 
sliders/rollers were intact. 
 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the nurse under the authority of the Alaska State Medical 
Examiner, 4500 South Boniface Parkway, Anchorage, Alaska, on December 5, 2007. The 
examination revealed the cause of his death was salt water drowning. He had minimal, non-life 
threatening traumatic injuries.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The helicopter's missions could include flight over/near fresh/salt water at night. The 
helicopter was not equipped with emergency pop-out floats, a self-deploying emergency 
beacon, or a raft. The crew was not required to wear flotation devices, or survival suits. 
Saltwater temperatures in Alaska typically range from 33-43 degrees F. The flight crew's 
training did not include underwater egress training. The nurse, the only individual recovered 
from the water, was voluntarily wearing a float coat. The crew was required to wear helmets, 
and the nurse's and the pilot's helmets were recovered from the water. The helmets were fitted 
with a dense foam layer for comfort/fit, which provided buoyancy to the helmets. Neither 
helmet had discernible impact damage.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Basic Operation - Patient Transfer Flight
Unlike most of the 48 contiguous states, most clinics and hospital facilities are not connected 
by roads, or the distances are so great, that "routine" patient transfers are frequently 
accomplished by aircraft. 
When a patient's medical caregiver determines that they can no longer provide an appropriate 
level of care for the patient, a facility with the appropriate level of care is notified, and the 
decision to transport is made by the sending and receiving caregivers. The transport may, or 
may not, be critical. At Providence Hospital, prior to the accident flight, a generic request for 
transfer was sent to the hospital's communications center. In this case, predetermined by 
policy, the first and second choice for patient transport from Cordova, were airplanes, and the 
helicopter was the third choice, due to the crossing of Prince William Sound. Prior to 
requesting the helicopter, the communications center noted that the airplanes had accepted 
other assignments. 
Providence Hospital contracted with one operator for airplane flights, and a different operator 
for helicopter flights. There was no interface between the two operators, and the 
communications center did not reroute an airplane when one became available. Providence 
Hospital communications center did not have a central point of contact with aviation expertise, 
to either assess the need for transport in relation to resources available, or to facilitate a 
collaborative process with the aviation transport providers about the appropriate use of 
aviation assets. The helicopter pilot accepted the flight, knowing that he would have to cross 
Prince William Sound after dark. EMS pilots are not told the criticality or nature of a patient, 
because it might impair their judgment with respect to making the flight. After the helicopter 
took off from Soldotna, one of the airplane missions was canceled. Because there was no active 
oversight of the operation as a whole, the airplane was not diverted to Cordova, and the 
helicopter continued.
 
Hospital administration said that the safe conduct of a patient transfer flight was the 
responsibility of the helicopter operator. 
Interviews - Helicopter Operator
Interviews were conducted with five of the operator's other pilots. One experienced pilot said 
he would not have accepted a transport over Prince William Sound at night, due to lack of 
ground reference lights, and lack of available weather information. Other than the operator's 
check pilot, none of the pilots had flown with the accident pilot. 
A company mechanic stationed in Soldotna, who saw the pilot preparing for the flight to 
Cordova, said the pilot was apprehensive about flying over Prince William Sound after dark 
from Cordova to Anchorage, and the pilot advised the rest of the crew to make sure they took 
their night vision goggles.
Research
Federal Air Regulation Part 135.183 states: No person may operate a land aircraft carrying 
passengers over water unless; (a) it is operated at an altitude that allows it to reach land in the 
case of an engine failure; (b) it is necessary for takeoff or landing; (c) it is a multi-engine 
aircraft operated at a weight that will allow it to climb, with the critical engine inoperative, at 
least 50 feet per minute, at an altitude of 1,000 feet above the surface; or (d) it is a helicopter 
equipped with helicopter flotation devices.
HEMS Flight and Duty Time
The HEMS program was developed by the FAA to acquaint their inspectors with special 
characteristics associated with EMS helicopter operations. According to the operator, their 
helicopter was operated under 14 CFR Part 135, and not under the HEMS guidelines.
Title 14, CFR Part 135.271, in part, describes the applicability of flight crewmembers assigned 
to HEMS flights, and specifies flight time and duty time limitations. Flight crewmembers may 
not accept an assignment for flight time if that crewmember's total time in all commercial 
flight will exceed 500 hours in any calendar quarter, 800 hours in any two consecutive 
calendar quarters, and 1,400 hours in any calendar year. A pilot must have 10 consecutive 
hours of rest immediately preceding reporting to the hospital for duty. Crewmember™s flight 
time during any 24 consecutive hours is limited to 8 hours unless an emergency evacuation 
operation is prolonged. Each crewmember who exceeds the 8 hour daily flight time limit, must 
be relieved of the HEMS assignment immediately upon completion of the emergency 
evacuation operation, and must be given a rest period of at least 12 consecutive hours for an 
assignment of less than 48 hours, and at least 16 consecutive hours for an assignment of more 
than 48 hours. 
Each flight crewmember must receive at least 8 hours of rest during any 24 consecutive hour 
period of a HEMS assignment. A flight crewmember must be relieved of the HEMS assignment 
if he cannot receive at least 8 consecutive hours of rest during any 24 consecutive hour period 
of a HEMS assignment. A HEMS assignment may not exceed 72 consecutive hours at the 
hospital. The operator may not assign any other duties to the flight crewmember during a 
HEMS assignment. The operator must provide at least 13 rest periods of at least 24 consecutive 
hours in each calendar quarter.
CFR Part 135.273 defines duty period and rest time limitations, and defines a calendar day as 
beginning at midnight and ends 24 hours later at the next midnight. Duty period means the 
period of time between reporting for an assignment involving flight time, and release from that 
assignment. Rest period means the period free of all responsibility for work or duty.
 
Essentially, there were two pilots assigned to the accident helicopter to cover 24 hours a day, 7 
days a week, with intermittent relief by other company pilots. The operator had told 
Providence Hospital that additional pilots were qualified and available for pilot relief, but 
interviews with the other pilots revealed that although qualified in the accident helicopter, they 
were employed flying other helicopters for the operator fulltime, and were not typically 
available for routine pilot relief.
The pilots maintained their own shift logs, and the operator was not able to find the accident 
pilot's shift log for the month of November. They said he had not turned it in prior to the 
accident flight. The operator suspected that the shift logs were in the helicopter, and not 
recovered. A review of the accident pilot's shift logs from April 2007 through October 2007 
showed that days on and off varied widely. As an example, during June and July the pilot 
worked 14 days on, had 14 days off, worked 29 days on, had one day off, then worked another 
12 days on. According to payroll records, the day of the accident was the pilot's twentieth shift, 
and he had nine more shifts until his days off. Under CFR Part 135.267(f), the certificate holder 
must provide each flight crewmember at least 13 rest periods of at least 24 consecutive hours 
each in each calendar quarter. The operator's scheduling method met the minimum 
requirement for rest periods during a calendar quarter as required by the regulation. The 
operator did have two additional pilots in training, and was planning to assign them to the 
Soldotna helicopter.
On January 26, 2006, the NTSB published Special Investigation Report - Emergency Medical 
Services Operations (NTSB/SIR-06/01). The report profiled 55 EMS aircraft accidents that 
occurred between January 2002, and January 2005. During the accident study, the NTSB 
identified commonalities, and as a result, the NTSB issued six findings, and made four 
recommendations to the FAA. 
The first recommendation (A-06-12) dealt with Part 135 operations and positioning flights, and 
does not relate to this accident. 
The second recommendation (A-06-13) would require all EMS operators to develop and 
implement a flight risk evaluation program. The operator in this accident did have such a 
program in place, however, interviews with pilots and top management personnel revealed that 
the program was not well understood, and not monitored. As noted, no risk evaluation form 
was discovered for the accident flight, but the accident flight would have qualified in the 
medium risk category, which required concurrence at a higher level than the pilot. No 
concurrence was requested. 
The third recommendation (A-06-14) would require EMS operators to use formalized dispatch 
and flight-following procedures that include up-to-date weather information and assistance in 
flight risk assessment decisions. The hospital communications center provided rudimentary 
satellite telephone flight-following, but had no responsibility for providing flight risk 
information or weather to the pilot. After normal business hours, the operator provided an off-
duty supervisor for flight concurrence via telephone. The operator does not actively monitor 
flights. The automated weather stations at Whittier Airport (PAWR) and Portage Glacier 
(PATO) provided real-time weather data after the helicopter departed Cordova that the pilot or 
dispatcher could have accessed via telephone or radio during the flight. According to the 
automated stations, the weather along the route of flight had deteriorated, and was below the 
VFR weather minimums required by the operator's Operations Specification (OPSPEC) of 3 
miles visibility and 1,000 foot ceiling with the use of night vision goggles.
The fourth recommendation (A-06-15) would require EMS operators to install terrain 
awareness and warning systems (TAWS) in their aircraft. The accident helicopter was equipped 
with a Enhanced Ground Proximity Warning System.
FAA Operations
Typically the FAA assigns a Principal Operations Inspector (POI) to each operator. The POI 
may be assigned to as many as 40 individual operators, depending on the size and complexity 
of each operator. Evergreen was assigned a POI in October of 2007. Prior to that, Evergreen 
did not have an assigned POI for 22 months. During that time, in lieu of a POI, Evergreen was 
given FAA points of contact (POC). 
Annually, a POI is given a list of required inspection items for each operator, and oversees 
operational changes for the operator. Additionally, the POI may engage in other surveillance or 
inspections as necessary. 
In the absence of a POI, the required inspection items are accomplished by the POC, or other 
FAA personnel as assigned. According to the FAA, all of Evergreen's required inspections were 
completed. Other surveillance or inspections may not be accomplished in the absence of a POI.       
The POI assigned to Evergreen in October was sent to Panama to certify airplanes, which were 
going to be put on Evergreen Alaska's certificate. He said he was in Panama at the time of the 
accident, and that prior to leaving for Panama, he had not made any inspections of Evergreen. 
FAA Notice N8000.293: Helicopter Emergency Medical Services (HEMS) Operations was 
issued with the intent to provide guidance for POIs in specialties regarding the HEMS 
operators that they supervise. According to the current POI assigned to the operator, the 
HEMS process was considered a subset of the required inspection process, but in the absence 
of a POI, only the required inspections were completed.
The NTSB IIC requested FAA Program Tracking and Reporting Subsystem (PTRS) records for 
the operator. The FAA provided 21 records covering the fiscal year from October 2007 through 
October 2008, of which 10 applied to helicopters. Four of the helicopter records were required 
inspection items. Of the four PTRS records, one was a review of the operator's operations 
manual, one was a pilot ramp check, one was an approval of a training program revision, and 
the final record was a review of the operator's dispatch flight-following procedures. According 
to an FAA supervisor, an inspection of the Soldotna base would not have been a required 
inspection item, and during the 22 months without a POI, only required inspections were 
performed. Also, the POI assigned in October 2007, did not visit or inspect the Soldotna EMS 
base.
OTHER INFORMATION
The weather conditions that existed at the accident site during the time of the accident were 
estimated to be: 1 mile visibility in light snow and mist, ceiling obscured, vertical visibility 300 
feet, wind from 120 degrees at 6 knots. Dark night conditions prevailed. The helicopter was 
equipped with an Enhanced Ground Proximity Warning System (EGPWS). The pilot was using 
a night vision goggles (NVG) during the flight. A radar altimeter was installed on the 
helicopter. The accident flight was not being tracked by an automated flight following program, 
and did not receive flight dispatch services prior to the initiation of the flight. A formal flight 
risk assessment form was supposed to be completed prior to the flight. No completed form was 
discovered.
On February 7, 2006, the NTSB issued four safety recommendations to the FAA addressing 
EMS operations.  They are as follows:
NTSB Recommendation No. A-06-12 - Require all EMS operators to comply with 14 CFR Part 
135 operations specifications during the conduct of all flights with medical personnel onboard. 
NTSB Recommendation No. A-06-13 - Require all EMS operators to develop and implement 
flight risk evaluation programs that include training all employees involved in the operation, 
procedures that support the systematic evaluation of flight risks, and consultation with others 
trained in EMS flight operations if the risks reach a predefined level. 
NTSB Recommendation No. A-06-14 - Require EMS operators to use formalized dispatch and 
flight-following procedures that include up-to-date weather information and assistance in 
flight risk assessment decisions. 
NTSB Recommendation No. A-06-15 - Require EMS operators to install terrain awareness and 
warning systems on their aircraft and to provide adequate training to ensure that flight crews 
are capable of using the systems to safely conduct EMS operations. 
These four recommendations were also placed on the NTSB's "Most Wanted List of Safety 
Improvements" in October 2008.
Additionally, the NTSB stated in its January 2006 Special Investigation Report on EMS 
Operations that they were pleased that the FAA encouraged the use of night vision imaging 
systems in EMS operations, and that the NTSB would continue to monitor the applicability and 
usage of these devices in the EMS industry.
Also, on December 21, 2007, the NTSB issued two safety recommendations to the FAA 
regarding the use of radar altimeters in EMS night operations.  They are as follows:
NTSB Recommendation No. A-07-111 - Require helicopter EMS operators to install radar 
altimeters in all helicopters used in HEMS night operations. 
NTSB Recommendation No. A-07-112 - Ensure that the minimum equipment lists for 
helicopters used in helicopter EMS operations require that radar altimeters be operable during 
flights conducted at night.
