The pilot performed an off-airport landing in the helicopter, to pick up a patient for transport 
to a nearby hospital. During the subsequent takeoff, the helicopter's tail rotor struck a wire that 
was located about 30 feet above the ground, oriented perpendicular to its flight path. The pilot 
immediately landed without further incident. Neither the pilot, nor the crew were previously 
informed of the wire, which was not observed until just prior to contact. The helicopter 
sustained damage to the tail rotor, vertical stabilizer, and left aft storage compartment door.
The pilot's inadequate visual lookout, which resulted in an in-flight collision with a wire.
On December 1, 2007, about 1310 central standard time, a Bell 206-L4 helicopter, N95CH, was 
substantially damaged when it struck a wire during takeoff from a field in Talladega, Alabama. 
The certificated commercial pilot, two crew members, and a passenger were not injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and a company visual flight rules flight plan was filed for 
the planned flight to a hospital in Ironton, Alabama. The air ambulance flight was conducted 
under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.
According to the operator, the flight previously departed from Anniston, Alabama, and the 
pilot performed an off-airport landing to pick up a patient for transport to a nearby hospital. 
During the subsequent takeoff, the helicopter's tail rotor struck a wire that was located about 
30 feet above the ground, oriented perpendicular to its flight path. The pilot immediately 
landed without further incident. Neither the pilot, nor the crew were previously informed of 
the wire, which was not observed until just prior to contact.
The helicopter sustained damage to the tail rotor, vertical stabilizer, and left aft storage 
compartment door. 
The pilot did not report any mechanical problems with the helicopter. He reported 11,166 hours 
of total rotorcraft flight experience, which included 480 hours in the same make and model as 
the accident helicopter.
