The airplane was landing at night on a runway contaminated with 2.5 inches of slush and a 60-
degree left crosswind at 16 knots, gusting to 22 knots. After the airplane touched down, it 
immediately began hydroplaning to the right. The pilot attempted to correct by adding power 
to the right engine to regain directional control; however, the nose landing gear struck a 
concrete pad, which was supporting a lighted runway sign. The landing gear separated from 
the airplane and struck the leading edge of the left wing, which created an indentation and 
hole. The nose landing gear wheel well was structurally deformed, and required a major repair 
to rectify. Prior to landing, a vehicle had tested the runway™s braking action, and the pilot was 
informed that it was "POOR."
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during landing roll out. Contributing to the 
accident was the slush contaminated runway and the crosswind weather conditions.
On December 2, 2007, approximately 1845 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 551, N551GF, 
departed the runway during the landing roll at Coeur d'Alene Air Terminal (COE), Coeur 
d'Alene, Idaho.  The airline transport pilot, airline transport second pilot, and six passengers 
were not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  CCM Aviation L.L.C. was operating 
the airplane under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the cross-country personal flight that originated from Henderson, Nevada, 
approximately 3 hours before the accident.  An instrument flight rules flight plan had been 
filed and activated.  
The pilot reported to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that he landed on 
runway 23.  He said upon touchdown the airplane began hydroplaning to the right. He added 
power to the right engine to try and stay on the centerline, and regain directional control. The 
airplane continued drifting right until it struck a concrete pad that was supporting a lighted 
runway sign. The airplane came to rest approximately 90 degrees to the centerline, and 10 to 15 
feet off the runway.
Post accident examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that the nose landing 
gear separated from the airplane and impacted the leading edge of the left wing, which created 
an indentation and hole. Additionally, the nose gear wheel well was structurally deformed, 
which required a major repair to rectify. The pilot said that on approach to the airport, he was 
told that there was 3/4 inch of snow on the runway, and the wind was from 170 to 190 degrees 
at 16 knots, gusting to 22 knots. He was also told that braking had been tested by a vehicle, and 
was reported to be "NIL" on runway 01/10 and "POOR" on runway 05/23.  After landing, he 
discovered that the runway had 2 1/2 inches of slush on it.
