The pilot stated that he landed on runway 15 and was on the landing roll out when a gust of 
wind caused the left wing to come up. He applied left aileron and there was no response. The 
airplane started turning to the right. He lost directional control of the airplane and it came to a 
stop on the runway. A witness stated that he heard the pilot call in on the UNICOM radio 
frequency and observed the airplane on final approach. The witness heard an increase in 
engine power and looked up. The airplane was about 2 feet above the runway "Flailing," the 
airplane rose to an altitude of less than ten feet, and appeared to be banking and yawing out of 
control. The nearest weather reporting facility located 11 nautical miles southeast of the crash 
site was: wind 150 degrees at 8 knots. No gusting winds were reported at the time of the 
accident. The Chief Pilot for the local Sheriff's Department responded to the accident scene. He 
observed the airplane was in an upright position on fire. The left main landing gear and 
empennage had separated, the engine compartment was on the runway, and the nose landing 
gear was bent to the right. Examination of the runway by the Chief Pilot revealed the airplane 
touched down on the runway 214 feet from the displaced threshold and bounced. A tire mark 
and two white paint transfer marks about 3 to 6 inches in length were present on the runway. 
The airplane touched down again 559 feet just left of runway centerline, and another paint 
transfer mark was present on the runway  extending 1 to 2 inches in diameter curving to the 
right. About 918 feet from the displaced threshold, another set of white paint transfer marks 36 
feet in length were observed in a left arc on the runway. Additional tire marks were present on 
the runway in a left arc at 1,011 and  1,057.8 feet. A white paint transfer mark,12 to 18 inches in 
length was present on the left edge of the runway 1,170 feet from the displaced threshold. The 
airplane departed the left side of the runway 1,302 feet from the displaced threshold. A narrow 
line was present in the grass extending 174 feet in an arc from the runway towards a berm and 
back towards the runway with propeller ground strike scars. The airplane turned to the right 
and came to rest on the runway 1,585 feet from the displaced threshold. Examination of the 
airframe, flight controls, propeller assembly, engine assembly and accessories revealed no 
anomalies.
Page 2 of 6MIA08LA024
The pilot's improper recovery from a bounced landing resulting in a loss of directional control.
On December 1, 2007, at 1634 eastern standard time, a Cirrus SR22, N874SR, registered to 
Cirrus D and S LLC, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, had a loss of directional 
control on landing roll out at Hendersonville Airport, Hendersonville, North Carolina. The 
airplane received substantial damage and a post crash fire ensued. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The private pilot and one passenger reported 
no injuries. The flight originated from Johnson County Airport, Mountain City, Tennessee, on 
December 1, 2007, at 1500.
The pilot stated he landed on runway 15 and was on landing roll out when a gust of wind 
caused the left wing to come up. He applied left aileron and there was no response. The 
airplane started turning to the right. He lost directional control of the airplane and it came to a 
stop on the runway. He and his passenger exited the airplane and observed a post crash fire in 
the engine compartment. The pilot obtained a fire extinguisher from the airplane and was 
unable to extinguish the fire.
A witness stated he heard the pilot call in on the UNICOM radio frequency and report that he 
was landing on runway 15. He went outside to make a parking space available for the arriving 
airplane. The witness observed the airplane on final approach and everything appeared to be 
normal. He then heard an increase in engine power and looked up at the arriving airplane. The 
airplane was about 2 feet above the runway "Flailing," the airplane rose to an altitude of less 
than ten feet, and appeared to be banking and yawing out of control. The right wing looked as if 
the wing hit the ground, the airplane went off the runway, hit an embankment, and went back 
on the runway coming to a complete stop. The witness observed a small fire in the front of the 
aircraft, and called the 911 emergency operator.
The 1654 surface weather observation at Ashville Regional Airport, Ashville, North Carolina, 
located 11 nautical miles southeast of the crash site was: wind 150-degrees at 8 knots. No 
gusting winds were reported at the time of the accident.
The Chief Pilot for Henderson County Sheriff's Department responded to the accident site. The 
officer stated the wreckage was facing 130 degrees magnetic in an upright position on fire. The 
left main landing gear and empennage had separated, the engine compartment was on the 
runway, and the nose landing gear was bent to the right. Examination of the runway revealed 
the airplane touched down 214 feet from the displaced threshold and bounced. A tire mark and 
two white paint transfer marks, about 3 to 6 inches in length were present on the runway. The 
airplane touched down again 559 feet just left of runway centerline, and additional paint 
transfer marks were present on the runway  extending 1 to 2 inches in diameter curving to the 
right. About 918 feet from the displaced threshold, another set of white paint transfer marks, 
36 feet in length were observed in a left arc on the runway. Additional tire marks were present 
on the runway in a left arc at 1,011 and  1,057.8 feet.  A white paint transfer mark, 12 to 18 
inches in length was present on  the left edge of the runway 1, 170 feet from the displaced 
threshold. The airplane departed the left side of the runway 1,302 feet from the displaced 
threshold.  A narrow line was present in the grass extending 174 feet in an arc from the runway 
towards a berm and back towards the runway with propeller ground strike scars. The airplane 
turned to the right and came to rest on the runway 1,585 feet from the displaced threshold.
Examination of the airframe, and flight controls revealed no anomalies. The propeller spinner 
exhibited torsional twisting. Both propeller blades remained attached to the propeller hub. One 
propeller blade was bent span wise along its entire length. A gouge was present on the tip of the 
propeller blade The propeller blade exhibited leading edge polishing from the propeller tip 
inboard to the propeller tip stripe. The propeller blade rotated in the hub past its stop in the 
high pitch direction.  Another propeller blade exhibited "S" bending; span wise scratching; 
chord wise scratching; leading edge polishing, and nicks were present at the outboard propeller 
tip stripe. The propeller blade rotated in the hub past its stop in the high pitch direction. The 
remaining propeller blade exhibited forward bending at the tip of the propeller blade; polishing 
at the propeller tip stripes, and chord wise scratching.
The engine was examined by the FAA and a partial disassembly of the engine was conducted. 
All valve covers were removed. The top sparkplugs were removed and exhibited worn normal 
combustion deposits. The propeller was rotated by hand and compression and suction was 
obtained at all cylinders. The rocker arms and valves moved when the crankshaft was rotated. 
Continuity of the crankshaft was confirmed to the rear accessory gears and to the valve train 
when rotated by hand. The magnetos were removed from their mounts and spark at the 
ignition towers could not be verified due to fire damage; however the impulse couplings 
appeared to operate when rotated.
 
