The flight instructor and student pilot returned to the airport to do touch-and-go landings. 
Following the first touch-and-go, the airplane climbed to about 200 feet above the runway, and 
the engine started to run rough and lose rpm. The flight instructor attempted to return to the 
runway. He reported that the airplane landed hard about 80 feet short of a water retention 
pond, and rolled into the pond, coming to rest inverted. He said there were no known 
mechanical problems with the airplane prior to the accident, and that during the accident the 
tail was separated from the cabin section. The airplane was not examined by the NTSB, and it 
is unknown what precipitated the loss of engine power.
The loss of engine power during takeoff initial climb for an undetermined reason.
On December 1, 2007, about 1645 Eastern standard time, a Cessna 152 airplane, N169LC, 
sustained substantial damage during an in-flight collision with terrain, following an emergency 
descent and landing after takeoff, at the Kendall-Tamiami Executive Airport, Miami, Florida. 
The airplane was being operated by the pilot as a visual flight rules (VFR) instructional flight 
under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred. The commercial certificated flight 
instructor and student pilot were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and 
no flight plan was filed. The flight departed the Kendall-Tamiami Executive Airport about 
1530.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) dated December 9, 
the flight instructor reported that they returned to the airport about 1640 to do touch-and-go 
landings. Following the first touch-and-go, the airplane had climbed to about 200 feet above 
the runway when the engine started to run rough and lose rpm.  According to the flight 
instructor, he declared an emergency, and attempted to return to the runway. He reported that 
he was unable to make the runway, the airplane landed hard about 80 feet short of a water 
retention pond, and rolled into the pond, coming to rest inverted. He said there were no known 
mechanical problems with the airplane prior to the accident, and that during the accident the 
tail was separated from the cabin section.
The airplane was not examined by the NTSB.
