Reportedly, the pilot completed a preflight  of the airplane and elected to fly the airplane, 
despite reports that the airplane had been parked on the ramp for about one year.   A witness 
stated that during the run-up the engine was running very rough.   Shortly after takeoff the 
engine lost power and the airplane collided with the runway.  The post-flight inspection 
revealed that the airplane had been fueled with  automotive gasoline.  A visual examination of 
the fuel supply revealed that the automotive gasoline appeared to be 'stale'. 
The pilot's inadequate pre-flight inspection of the fuel supply that resulted in the loss of engine 
power due to fuel contamination. 
 On May 1, 2000, at 1504 eastern daylight time, a DeHavilland DH-82C Tigermoth, N918DH, 
collided with the ground following a reported loss of engine power during takeoff at Daytona 
Beach, Florida. The airplane was operated by the private pilot under the provisions of Title 14 
CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of 
the accident and no flight plan was filed. The airplane was substantially damaged.  The pilot 
and the passenger were not injured.  The accident occurred during the initial departure from 
Daytona Beach Airport in Daytona Beach, Florida.
The pilot stated that he had made prior arrangements with the tower to receive light gun 
signals for takeoff from an intersection on runway 7L.  With about 3000 feet of runway 
remaining of the 10,500 foot runway, the pilot accelerated the airplane for takeoff. The 
airplane climbed to an altitude of about 100 feet when a loss of engine power occurred. The 
airplane descended and collided with the ground about 150 feet from the end of the runway.
A witness stated that the engine appeared to be running very rough as the airplane accelerated 
towards the end of the runway. The airplane had been parked on the ramp and not flown for 
about one year prior to this flight. During the post-accident examination of the airplane, it was 
determined that there was about one half tank of automotive gasoline in the fuel tanks.  
According to the Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, the visual examination of the fuel 
supply revealed that the automotive gasoline appeared to be "stale".
