The airplane was destroyed by impact with terrain and by fire following a loss of control during 
climbout.  The pilot and two passengers sustained fatal injuries.  A witness stated, 'I observed 
him taxi and the next I observed was the takeoff.  I observed some flaps that seemed to be a 
short field takeoff.  It appeared to not gain the normal altitude. He seemed to be in a climb 
attitude (not steep) and the flaps remained on.  My estimate is aprox. 1 mile before he made his 
left turn.'  He further stated, 'He made the normal pattern for downwind and was still in a 
climb attitude but not gaining altitude and the flaps appeared to be on.  I observed downwind 
and he seemed to still not gain altitude and appeared to be about 1 1/2 tree lengths above the 
trees.  My line of vision was then obscured by a tree and I heard the crash.  I can not remember 
if the engine was running at the time of impact.  It was through the rest.  (During the initial 
climb and takeoff [the airplane operator] ran into the Unicom and called for [the pilot] to raise 
the flaps. No response.  The flaps I believe never went up.)'  Another witness stated, 
'Crashed/looked as if stalled then nose down and left.  Airplane sounded at full power still at or 
till sound of crash.'  The airplane was found impacting terrain approximately 80 degrees pitch 
down.  An on-scene investigation revealed flight control and engine continuity and the engine 
exhibited a thumb compression at all cylinders.  The flap jackscrew was recovered and 
exhibited 5.9 inches of thread extension which indicated 40 degrees of flap extension. 
the pilot not maintaining aircraft control and the stall/spin he encountered.  A factor was the 
extended flaps. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 2, 2000, at 1050 central daylight time, a Cessna 172M, N13145, piloted by a private 
pilot, was destroyed by impact with terrain and post impact fire following a loss of control 
during climbout from runway 27 (2,420 feet X 45 feet, dry/asphalt) at Cornell Municipal 
Airport, near Cornell, Wisconsin.  The personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  No flight plan was on 
file.  The pilot and two passengers sustained fatal injuries.  The local flight was originating at 
the time of the accident.
A witness stated, "About time of rotation (nose wheel off) noticed flaps out.  [A]mount of 
deflection unknown.  [L]ooked as if flaps came out/down as climb out proceeded.  Wasn't 
climbing well/poor rate of climb.  Never got above 200-250 ft. AGL.  Airplane came around 
toward downwind leg of pattern.  Airplane looked in slow flight attitude.  Sounded as if in full 
power.  Airplane then went out of sight [and] crashed.  Crashed/looked as if stalled then nose 
down and left.  Airplane sounded at full power still at or till sound of crash."
Another witness stated, "I observed him taxi and the next I observed was the takeoff.  I 
observed some flaps that seemed to be a short field takeoff.  It appeared to not gain the normal 
altitude.  He seemed to be in a climb attitude (not steep) and the flaps remained on.  My 
estimate is aprox. 1 mile before he made his left turn."  He further stated, "He made the normal 
pattern for downwind and was still in a climb attitude but not gaining altitude and the flaps 
appeared to be on.  I observed downwind and he seemed to still not gain altitude and appeared 
to be about 1 1/2 tree lengths above the trees.  My line of vision was then obscured by a tree 
and I heard the crash.  I can not remember if the engine was running at the time of impact.  It 
was through the rest.  (During the initial climb and takeoff [the airplane operator] ran into the 
Unicom and called for [the pilot] to raise the flaps.  No response.  The flaps I believe never 
went up.)"
Another witness stated, "The plane crossed the highway and then I noticed the wings tipping 
up and down.  It appeared to barely clear the trees over the wooded area on the south side of 
highway."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was an instrument rated private pilot.  He held a Third Class Medical Certificate 
dated July 2, 1997.  The medical indicated that he had asthma and it required him to carry an 
inhaler to exercise the rights of his certificate.  His logbook and records indicated he had a total 
of 223 hours of flight time and two hours of flight time in the last 90 days.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a Cessna 172M, serial number 172-62528.  The airplane had its annual 
inspection performed on July 23, 1999.  The airplane accumulated 6958 hours total time and 
50 hours since its last inspection.  The engine accumulated 4560 hours total time and 412 
hours since its last overhaul.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1055, the Rice Lake Municipal, Rice Lake, Wisconsin, weather was: Wind 200 degrees at 5 
knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition clear; temperature 14 degrees C; dew point 8 
degrees C; altimeter 30.11 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest in a field 223 degrees and .3 nautical miles from Cornell Municipal 
Airport and was located at latitude 45 degrees 09.662' N and longitude 091 degrees 06.650' W. 
The airplane was found resting approximately 80 degrees pitch down and on a 280 degree 
heading.  The fuselage was found destroyed by fire.  The left and right wings were found 
attached to their struts.  The left wing tip was found imbedded in terrain immediately adjacent 
the wing and the outboard two feet of its leading edge was crushed rearward.  The right wing's 
leading was crushed rearward from its strut outboard to the wing tip.  The empennage was 
found inverted, resting on the ground, and on the left wing.  The right elevator and rudder were 
destroyed by fire.  The engine and propeller were found beneath the fuselage and were 
imbedded in soil.
An on-scene investigation was conducted.  Control continuity was established to all control 
surfaces.  Control continuity was established to the engine.  The engine exhibited a thumb 
compression at all cylinders.  Three and a half gallons of blue liquid were recovered from the 
compromised left fuel tank.  The flap jackscrew was recovered and exhibited 5.9 inches of 
thread extension.  According to the Cessna representative, the thread extension indicated 40 
degrees of flap extension.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Office of the Medical Examiner, County of Ramsey, State of Minnesota performed an 
autopsy on the pilot, on May 3, 2000.
The Federal Aviation Administration Civil Aeromedical Institute prepared a Final Forensic 
Toxicology Fatal Accident Report.  The report on the pilot was negative for the tests performed.
FIRE
The airplane sustained a post impact fire.  The fire destroyed the cabin, the right wing inboard 
of the strut, fuselage, and the empennage forward and right of the left elevator.  Vegetation 
near the impact caught on fire.  A fire stop ditch was dug.  The airplane operator reported that 
a three and a half acre grass fire occurred.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Parties to the investigation included the Federal Aviation Administration, Cessna Aircraft 
Company, and Textron Lycoming.
The airplane wreckage was released to a representative of the operator on May 4, 2000.
