The helicopter landed hard and rolled over during a practice autorotation.  The CFI was 
providing dual instruction to his student, a CFI candidate.  The student was handling all of the 
controls, and he intended to perform a 180-degree full touchdown autorotation.  During the 
maneuver, the CFI observed that his student had allowed the airspeed to decrease and the 
main rotor rpm to become low.  The CFI called the low rotor rpm situation to his student's 
attention. However, the student did not take decisive corrective action by initiating a power 
recovery in sufficient time to avoid the resultant low rotor rpm flare and hard touchdown.  No 
mechanical malfunctions were noted. 
The student's misjudged altitude and failure to maintain rotor rpm while practicing an 
autorotation, and, the instructor's delayed remedial corrective action and inadequate 
supervision of the flight. 
 On May 1, 2000, about 1645 hours Pacific daylight time, a Hughes 269C, N5395S, operated by 
Western Operations, Inc., landed hard at the (uncontrolled) Rialto Municipal Airport, Rialto, 
California.  The helicopter was substantially damaged, and the commercial certificated flight 
instructor (CFI) and the student sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The instructional flight was performed under 14 CFR 
Part 91, and it originated from Rialto about 1600.
The CFI indicated to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that he was 
providing dual instruction to the student, and the student was handling all of the engine and 
flight controls.  The CFI was providing training to the student who was a CFI candidate.  The 
accident occurred during a practice, 180-degree full touchdown autorotation, when the 
helicopter's airspeed decreased and the main rotor rpm became too low.  The CFI indicated 
that he observed the low rpm indication and called it to the attention of his student, but the 
student did not take decisive corrective action by promptly initiating a power recovery to avoid 
the resultant low rotor rpm flare and hard touchdown.  No mechanical malfunctions were 
noted.
The student reported to the Safety Board investigator that he holds an airline transport pilot 
certificate with both airplane and rotorcraft ratings.  He also holds a CFI certificate for 
airplanes.  The purpose of the flight was to receive instruction in furtherance of a rotorcraft 
instructor's certificate.  The student indicated that he commenced the practice full touchdown 
autorotation from 2,000 feet mean sea level (about 545 above ground level), and abeam the 
desired taxiway touchdown point.  He stated that, "As I rolled out on final at 300 feet (agl) I 
was low."  The student indicated that although he had initiated a power recovery, the helicopter 
impacted the ground hard.  He also stated that no mechanical malfunctions occurred during 
the flight.
