During an on-demand passenger flight, the airline transport certificated pilot was landing a 
helicopter at a lake gauging station.  The gauging station was surrounded by snow-covered 
terrain.  His two passengers were conducting snow pack studies around the lake.  Flat light 
conditions existed at the lake, and light drizzle was falling.  The pilot was utilizing the gauging 
station as his landing reference point, but during the landing approach, he flew past the station 
and had no other visual references.  The skids of the helicopter contacted the snow, and the 
pilot applied upward collective pitch.  He attempted to stabilize the helicopter in a hover, but 
began drifting forward and to the left. The left landing gear skid contacted the snow, and the 
helicopter rolled onto its left side.  A passenger described the weather conditions at the landing 
site as the 'inside of a ping pong ball.'  The pilot recommended additional white-out training as 
a way to prevent the accident. 
The pilot's misjudging the landing flare in whiteout/flat light conditions.  Factors associated 
with the accident are the whiteout and flat lighting conditions. 
 On May 1, 2000, about 1230 Alaska daylight time, a high skid equipped Bell 206B helicopter, 
N301MH, was substantially damaged during a collision with snow-covered terrain, about 21 
miles northeast of Homer, Alaska, about latitude 59 degrees, 45 minutes north, and longitude 
150 degrees, 51 minutes west.  The helicopter was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) 
on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The 
helicopter was operated by Maritime Helicopters Inc., Homer, Alaska.  The airline transport 
certificated pilot, and the two passengers, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  A VFR flight plan was filed.  The flight originated at the Homer Airport, Homer, at 
1130.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on May 1, at 1747, the Chief Pilot for the operator reported the 
helicopter was landing at Bradley Lake, located on the Kenai Peninsula.  The helicopter pilot 
was landing next to a gauging station that was surrounded by snow-covered terrain.  Flat light 
conditions existed at the lake, and light drizzle was falling.  The sky conditions were 500 feet 
overcast, and the visibility was about 1 mile.  The pilot was utilizing the gauging station as his 
landing reference point, but during the landing approach, he flew past the station and had no 
other visual references.  The skids of the helicopter contacted the snow, and the pilot applied 
upward collective pitch.  He attempted to stabilize the helicopter in a hover, but began drifting 
forward and to the left.  The left landing gear skid contacted the snow, and the helicopter rolled 
onto its left side.
The Pilot/Operator report (NTSB form 6120.1/2) submitted by the pilot, included a written 
statement.  In the statement, the pilot said that during the landing approach, he passed the 
gauging unit that he was using as a reference.  After passing the unit, he focused his attention 
on the snow in front of the helicopter.  When the helicopter touched down on the snow, the 
pilot said he thought the helicopter was still one or two feet above the snow surface.  He 
brought the helicopter to a hover, but the helicopter drifted forward about 30 feet, and about 
60 to 75 feet to the left.  The left skid contacted the snow, and the helicopter rolled over.  In the 
Recommendation Section of the 6120.1/2 form where comments can be added about how the 
accident could have been prevented, the pilot noted "additional white-out training."
Both passengers in the helicopter reported that during the landing approach, the helicopter 
developed a high sink rate and touched down hard on the snow, beyond the gauging station.  
The terrain presented no visual references, and one passenger described the visual conditions 
as "the inside of a ping pong ball."  Both passengers said the weather conditions included 
bright, filtered sunlight through overcast skies, and a light rain.
