Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Teterboro, NJ
Incident Number:
NYC06IA075
Date & Time:
03/03/2006, 1415 EST 
Registration:
N973M
Aircraft:
Dassault Aviation Falcon 900EX
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business
Analysis 
The Falcon 900EX, was being flown by the co-pilot from the left seat, and was landing on 
runway 24, a 6,013-foot-long, 150-foot-wide, asphalt runway. Witnesses reported the airplane 
touched down about halfway down the runway, the airplane then traveled off the end, and 
came to rest in mud, about 330 feet from the end of the runway. Tire marks consistent with the 
airplane's tires were observed to begin about 1,000 feet prior to the end of the runway. The 
airplane sustained damage to the landing gear assemblies, and the right outboard slat. Post-
incident examination of the braking system did not reveal any evidence of a preimpact 
malfunction. It was noted that the landing gear tachometer generators were found to be out-of-
tolerance during portions of a test procedure. The specific reason for the out-of-tolerance 
condition was not determined; however, it may be attributed to damage sustained during the 
overrun, or post incident disassembly. According to the airplane manufacturer, the out-of-
tolerance conditions found with respect to the tachometer generators would have resulted in 
no significant adverse consequence (less than 1-percent) on the overall performance of the 
braking system. The airplane's flight data recorder showed that the flight crew did not utilize 
the airplane's air brake after touchdown, which would have reduced lift, and improved braking 
effectiveness during the high speed phase of the landing run. The airplane's total ground roll 
travel after touchdown was approximately 3,522 feet. A weather observation taken after the 
incident reported the winds from 330 degrees, at 19 knots, gusting to 26 knots. Post-incident 
friction tests conducted on the runway, revealed friction levels, which would not have required 
the issuance of a notice to airmen; however, some small patches of snow/ice were observed on 
the runway surface.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The co-pilot's failure to obtain the proper touchdown point, which resulted in an overrun. 
Contributing were the gusty wind conditions, the failure of the flight crew to utilize the air 
brake after touchdown, and a partially contaminated runway.
Page 2 of 7NYC06IA075
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS
2. (C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - COPILOT/SECOND PILOT
3. (F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - ICY
4. (F) FLIGHT CONTROL,SPEED BRAKE - NOT DEPLOYED
Page 3 of 7NYC06IA075
Factual Information
On March 3, 2006, about 1415 eastern standard time, a Dassault Aviation Falcon 900EX, 
N973M, sustained minor damage during a landing overrun at Teterboro Airport (TEB), 
Teterboro, New Jersey. The certificated airline transport rated flight crew and one passenger 
were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules 
flight plan had been filed for the flight that departed Palwaukee Municipal Airport (PWK), 
Wheeling, Illinois. The business flight was conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91.
According to the flight crew, the airplane departed and proceeded to TEB uneventfully. The 
airplane was initially cleared for the instrument landing system approach to runway 6, with a 
circle-to-land on runway 1. After a wind check reported winds from 290 degrees at 10 knots, 
the flight crew requested and received clearance to land on runway 24, a 6,013-foot-long, 150-
foot-wide, asphalt runway. Due to the wind conditions, the flight crew added 10 knots to the 
airplane's landing approach speed of 120 knots. Shortly prior to touchdown, the control tower 
reported the winds from 290 degrees at 15 knots, gusting to 20 knots. Both pilots reported that 
the airplane touched down on the runway centerline, "close to" or "within" the touchdown 
landing zone. The thrust reverser was deployed and the flight crew initially felt the sensation of 
braking; however, as the airplane continued down the runway, the braking action seemed less 
effective.
The airplane departed the end of the runway, and came to rest in mud, about 330 feet from the 
end of the runway. Tire marks consistent with the airplane's tires were observed to begin about 
1,000 feet prior to the end of the runway. The airplane sustained damage to the landing gear 
assemblies, and the right outboard slat.
On scene examination of the airplane did not reveal any pre-incident mechanical malfunctions, 
nor did the pilots report any. 
The landing gear legs, telescopic strut, brake assemblies, brake servo valves, and the braking 
system control box were removed and examined, with no pre-incident discrepancies noted. The 
tachometer generators were also examined; however, they were found to be out of tolerance 
during portions of the test procedure. The specific reason for the out-of-tolerance condition 
was not determined. According to the airplane manufacturer, the out-of-tolerance conditions 
found with respect to the tachometer generators would have resulted in no significant adverse 
consequence (less than 1-percent) on the overall performance of the braking system. 
Post-incident friction tests conducted on runway 24, by airport personnel, revealed friction 
levels, which would not have required the issuance of a notice to airmen; however, some small 
patches of snow/ice were observed on the runway surface.
The pilot seated in the right seat, was the designated pilot-in-command for the flight. The 
company reported that he had accumulated about 11,000 hours of total flight experience, 
which included about 1,500 hours in the Falcon 900EX.
The pilot flying, was seated in the left seat. The company reported he had accumulated about 
6,500 hours of total flight experience, which included about 1,200 combined hours in the 
Falcon 900EX.
Several witnesses at the airport reported that they observed the airplane touch down about 
Page 4 of 7NYC06IA075
halfway down runway 24. One witness reported observing smoke from the main landing gear 
tires as the airplane traveled off the end of the runway surface.
The airplane was equipped with a cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and flight data recorder (FDR), 
which were retained and forwarded to the National Transportation Safety Board Vehicle 
Recorders Laboratory, Washington, District of Columbia. The airplane's engines were also 
equipped with digital electronic engine controllers (DEECs), which were downloaded under the 
supervision of a Safety Board investigator.
The data downloaded from the FDR and DEECs did not reveal any evidence of engine or 
airframe malfunctions. According to the FDR, the airplane's airspeed just prior to touchdown 
was about 130 knots, and the ground speed just after touchdown was about 120 knots. A rollout 
distance computation conducted by a Safety Board Vehicle Recorder Specialists showed that 
the airplane's total ground roll travel after touchdown was approximately 3,522 feet. 
In addition, the FDR showed the airbrakes were not utilized during the landing. According to 
the airplane operating manual, the airbrakes are to be extended after touchdown, and 
"airbrake extension reduces lift, and improves braking effectiveness during the high speed 
phase of the landing run." 
A weather observation taken after the incident recorded: winds from 330 degrees, at 19 knots, 
gusting to 26 knots, visibility 10 statue miles, clear skies, temperature 0 degrees Celsius (C), 
dew point -12 degrees C, altimeter 29.84 inches of mercury.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/01/2006
Flight Time:
11500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1500 hours (Total, this make and model), 9000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 7NYC06IA075
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/01/2005
Flight Time:
6500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1200 hours (Total, this make and model), 4500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 35 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Dassault Aviation
Registration:
N973M
Model/Series:
Falcon 900EX 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
73
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
11
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/01/2006, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
49000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
3 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
4541 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Garrett-AiResearch
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TFE-731-60
Registered Owner:
Motorola, Inc.
Rated Power:
5000 lbs
Operator:
Motorola, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7NYC06IA075
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TEB, 9 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1418 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
19 knots / 26 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
330°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.84 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
0°C / -12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Wheeling, IL (PWK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Teterboro, NJ (TEB)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1300 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Teterboro (TEB)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
9 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Ice; Snow
Runway Used:
24
IFR Approach:
Circling; Visual
Runway Length/Width:
6013 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.846389, -74.071389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Luke Schiada
Adopted Date:
03/31/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Bromirski; FAA/FSDO; Teterboro, NJ
Bernard H Curtis; Dassault Falcon Jet; White Plains, NY
Philippe Mauviot; BEA, France
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7NYC06IA075
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
