Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Winslow, AZ
Accident Number:
ANC06LA021
Date & Time:
03/04/2006, 1445 MST 
Registration:
N8322C
Aircraft:
Piper PA-32R-300
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The certificated private pilot, with one passenger, was on a cross-country personal flight under 
Title 14, CFR Part 91.  Just after takeoff, when the airplane was about 200 feet above the 
ground, the engine began to run rough and lose power.  Emergency procedures did not restore 
power, and the airplane collided with a barbwire fence during an off-airport forced landing, 
sustaining substantial damage to the wings, fuselage, and empennage.  The airplane was 
equipped with a recently installed factory-remanufactured Textron Lycoming IO-540 engine.  
Postaccident investigation revealed a grayish, soft, rubbery material partially blocking the ports 
of the fuel flow divider's metering pin. There was no debris discovered in the interior of the fuel 
injector servo, or in the fuel injector's inlet screen.  According to a representative of Textron 
Lycoming, fuel system components on factory-remanufactured engines are shipped separately.  
It is the responsibility of the receiving maintenance technician to install the fuel system 
components on the engine, and ensure that no debris enters the fuel line or fuel flow divider 
during the installation process.  A Safety Board senior metallurgist who examined the gray 
foreign material was unable to identify the source, but reported it consisted of agglomerations 
of smaller particles, consistent with a Teflon-like material.  The Safety Board metallurgist also 
reported that the rubbery material was not consistent with fuel supply line material, and no 
additional debris was found inside the fuel line or within the fuel injector servo.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The presence of a foreign material/substance in the fuel system, which partially blocked the 
fuel flow divider, and resulted in a loss of engine power during takeoff-initial climb,  and an 
emergency landing.  A factor associated with the accident was unsuitable terrain for a forced 
landing.  
Page 2 of 6ANC06LA021
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,FUEL FLOW DIVIDER/DISTRIBUTOR - BLOCKED(PARTIAL)
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM - FOREIGN MATERIAL/SUBSTANCE
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
3. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
4. OBJECT - FENCE
Page 3 of 6ANC06LA021
Factual Information
On March 4, 2006, about 1445 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-32R-300 airplane, 
N8322C, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power and subsequent forced 
landing, about 2 miles south of the Winslow-Lindbergh Regional Airport, Winslow, Arizona. 
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight 
under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The certificated private pilot and the 
sole passenger sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a 
VFR flight plan was in effect.  The intended routing of the flight was from Lincoln, Nebraska, to 
Palm Springs California, with a fuel stop in Winslow.  The accident flight originated at the 
Winslow-Lindbergh Regional Airport, Winslow, about 1445. 
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on March 4, the pilot reported that after completing the uneventful flight between 
Lincoln and Winslow, he purchased about 50 gallons of fuel, and then departed on the final 
flight leg to Palm Springs.  He said that just after takeoff, when the airplane was about 200 feet 
above the ground, the engine began to run rough, and lose power.  The pilot said that after 
performing the engine emergency procedures, he was unable to restore sufficient engine power 
to sustain flight, and he selected a forced landing area among rolling hills.  He stated that 
during the emergency descent, just before touch down, all engine power was lost.  During the 
forced landing roll, the airplane struck a barbwire fence, pivoted to the left, and collapsed the 
main landing gear.  The airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings, fuselage, and 
empennage. 
According to the pilot/owner, the airplane was equipped with a recently installed factory-
remanufactured Textron Lycoming IO-540 engine.  The pilot's maintenance provider located in 
Lincoln preformed the engine installation, about 20 hours before the accident.  
The airplane was retrieved from the accident site and transported to Phoenix, Arizona.
On March 24, 2006, a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector from the 
Scottsdale Flight Standards District Office, along with an air safety investigator from Textron 
Lycoming, conducted an engine exam and test run of the accident engine. The FAA inspector 
reported that the engine remained attached to the airframe, and once the engine was started, it 
ran rough and would not produce full power.  A subsequent internal inspection of the engine's 
fuel flow divider revealed a grayish, soft, rubbery material partially blocking the ports of the 
flow divider's metering pin.  
The recovered material, along with the fuel flow divider, fuel injector servo, and a portion of 
fuel line that connected the fuel injector servo to the fuel flow divider fuel supply line, was sent 
to the National Transportation Safety Board's Materials Laboratory for examination.  A Safety 
Board senior metallurgist reported that the grayish-colored rubbery material consisted of 
agglomerations of smaller particles, consistent with Teflon like material, showing a significant 
fluorine elemental peak.  Each mass measured less than 0.06 inches in maximum dimension 
with individual particles estimated to be a few thousands of an inch in size, which would break 
apart into smaller clumps when probed. The metallurgist reported that the rubbery material 
was not consistent with the fuel supply line material, and no additional debris was found inside 
the fuel line or within the fuel injector servo.  There was no debris discovered in the interior of 
the fuel injector servo, or in the fuel injector's inlet screen.    
Page 4 of 6ANC06LA021
A senior manager for Textron Lycoming's materials laboratory reported to the NTSB that when 
factory-remanufactured engines are shipped, the fuel injector servo assembly is not installed 
on the engine.  He said that once the engine has been test-run at the factory, and before the 
engine is shipped to the customer, or to the customer's maintenance provider, the fuel injector 
servo is removed from the engine, and placed inside the engine-shipping crate. He stated that 
the fuel flow divider assembly remains attached to the engine, and that the fuel line which 
connects the fuel flow divider and the fuel injector servo, remains connected to the fuel flow 
divider.  The other end of the fuel line is then capped-off during shipment.  It is the 
responsibility of the maintenance technician to install the fuel control servo on the engine, 
connect the fuel line, and ensure that no debris enters the fuel line or fuel flow divider during 
the process. 
The Safety Board released the fuel system components to the owner's representatives on 
November 13, 2006.  
  
 
          
   
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/01/2004
Flight Time:
2839 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1900 hours (Total, this make and model), 2464 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 24 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ANC06LA021
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N8322C
Model/Series:
PA-32R-300 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32R-7680093
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/01/2006, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
20 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6679 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-KIA5D
Registered Owner:
Ronald D. Craig, Trustee, 
Bruce A. Miller
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
Ronald D. Craig
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Winslow, AZ (KINW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
PALM SPRINGS, CA (KPSP)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1445 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Winslow-Lindbergh Regional (KINW)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4941 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
22
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
7499 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 6 of 6ANC06LA021
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
35.021667, -110.722500
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Clinton  O Johnson
Adopted Date:
04/25/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael E Brown; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Mark Platt; Textron Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
