The private pilot, who was also the owner/builder of the experimental amateur-built airplane, 
had just taken off for a personal flight. Witnesses reported hearing ﬁspitting and sputteringﬂ 
engine noise as they observed the airplane descending from a low altitude. The pilot 
subsequently performed an off-airport landing about 1 mile south of the airport. During the 
landing, the fuel tank was compromised, and a postcrash fire ensued, which destroyed the 
cockpit and consumed the propeller and all of the fuselage fabric coverings forward of the 
empennage. Based on this evidence, it is likely that the engine experienced a loss of power 
shortly after takeoff, which resulted in the need for an off-airport landing.
Postaccident examination of the airplane, which included disassembly of its converted 75-
horsepower automobile engine, did not reveal evidence of any preimpact mechanical 
malfunctions or failures; however, fire damage destroyed the fuel tank, fuel lines, carburetor, 
and fuel filter. According to a friend of the pilot, the accident flight was the airplane™s first flight 
since it was damaged after experiencing a loss of engine power during takeoff about 2 years 
before the accident. The airplane™s maintenance logbooks were not located, and its 
maintenance and operational history could not be verified. The reason for the partial loss of 
engine power could not be determined based on the available evidence.
Toxicology testing of the pilot detected several previously unreported medications, and an 
autopsy identified hypertensive and atherosclerotic heart disease; however, it is unlikely that 
symptoms from the pilot™s heart disease or the effects of any of the detected medications 
impaired his ability to respond to the emergency.
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined based on the available 
evidence. 
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 2, 2015, about 1150 eastern standard time, an experimental amateur-built Adams 
DA1, N797A, owned and operated by a private individual, was substantially damaged during an 
off-airport landing and subsequent postcrash fire, shortly after takeoff from the Sebring 
Regional Airport (SEF), Sebring, Florida. The private pilot was fatally injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight 
that was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The airplane was built by the pilot and based at SEF.
According to a friend of the pilot, about 2 years prior to the accident, the pilot was flying the 
airplane when it experienced a loss of engine power just after takeoff, due to a clogged fuel 
filter. The pilot landed back on the runway and the airplane sustained a propeller strike. The 
accident flight was the airplane's first flight since that incident. Recent maintenance included 
replacing the fuel filter and converting the airplane from a tailwheel to tricycle landing gear 
configuration.
Witnesses near the accident site reported hearing a "spitting and sputtering" engine as they 
observed the airplane descending from a low altitude. The pilot was able to land the airplane 
on grass about 1 mile south of SEF; however, after landing a postcrash fire erupted and 
destroyed the cockpit before the pilot could exit the airplane.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 76, held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land and 
instrument airplane. The pilot's logbook were not recovered. He reported 1,950 hours of total 
flight experience, with 40 hours accumulated during the preceding 6 months, on his most 
recent application for a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third-class medical certificate, 
which was issued on November 10, 2014. In addition, at that time, he reported no chronic 
medical conditions and no medication use.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The single-engine, fixed-gear airplane, serial number 01, was issued an experimental special 
airworthiness certificate by the FAA on July 7, 2009. Its construction was based on a Sonerai 
homebuilt airplane kit, and it was powered by a converted Volkswagen 75-horsepower 
automobile engine, equipped with a Sterba wood propeller. The fuselage was constructed of 
steel tubing with fabric covering and the wings were constructed of aluminum.
The pilot's wife not able to locate the airplane's maintenance records, nor were they observed 
in the hangar where the airplane was kept.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A weather observation taken at SEF, at 1155, reported: wind from 130 degrees at 6 knots, 10 
statute miles visibility, scattered clouds at 3,400 and 4,000 feet, temperature 26 degrees 
Celsius (C), dew point temperature 17 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.28 in-Hg.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The airplane touched down on the ground, and slid for about 75-feet on a magnetic heading 
about 070 degrees before it came to rest upright, adjacent to a canal, behind a residence.
All major portions of the airplane were located at the accident site. The right aileron, nose 
landing gear, and wooden propeller fragments were located along a ground scar leading to the 
main wreckage. The fuel tank, which was located aft of the engine firewall and in front of the 
cockpit area was compromised during the off-airport landing. A postcrash fire destroyed the 
cockpit, and consumed the propeller and all fuselage fabric coverings forward of the 
empennage, which was undamaged. The right wing sustained impact damage to the tip and 
forward outboard leading edge corner. In addition, the right wing inboard trailing edge corner 
was deformed diagonally approximately 1-foot. The inboard 4 feet of the left wing was 
consumed to the spar and the majority of the wing was fire damaged. Flight control continuity 
was confirmed from the cockpit controls to the rudder and elevator control surfaces. The 
respective left and right aileron connections were displaced consistent with impact damage. 
The airplane's entire fuel system, which included the fuel tank, the carburetor and fuel filter 
were consumed by fire.
The engine was also fire damaged, and could not be rotated. Subsequent disassembly of the 
engine at SEF, which included examination of all cylinders, pistons, rocker arms, valves, and 
spark plugs did not reveal any evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunctions.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Office of the District 10 Medical Examiner, 
Winter Haven, Florida. The autopsy report identified hypertensive and atherosclerotic heart 
disease and indicated the cause of death was due to the postcrash fire.
Toxicological testing performed on the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical Science Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, was positive for the following:
"0.665 (ug/ml, ug/g) Citalopram detected in Blood
Citalopram detected in Liver
Desloratadine detected in Blood
Desloratadine detected in Urine
Ephedrine detected in Urine
Ephedrine NOT detected in Blood
Loratadine detected in Blood
0.368 (ug/mL, ug/g) N-Desmethylcitalopram detected in Blood
N-Desmethylcitalopram detected in Liver
Pseudoephedrine detected in Blood
Pseudoephedrine detected in Urine
Tamsulosin detected in Blood
Tamsulosin detected in Urine"
