The airline transport pilot departed in his light sport aircraft with a friend, who held a student 
pilot certificate, on a cross-country flight to another airport for lunch. GPS data showed the 
airplane maneuvered near the accident site for about 30 minutes, performing multiple climbs, 
descents, and turns. Several witnesses reported hearing the engine "sputter," which was 
immediately followed by an advance in engine power. Although the airplane's final movements 
were not captured by witness reports or radar/GPS data, examination of the accident site 
showed that the airplane was in a steep descent when it impacted a swamp. The impact 
geometry was consistent with an in-flight loss of control and subsequent uncontrolled descent 
to ground impact. A postcrash fire ensued, which consumed most of the airplane.
Postaccident examination of the airplane and the engine did not reveal any mechanical 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. Although the environmental 
conditions were favorable for light icing at glide or cruise power, witnesses reported that the 
engine regained power after "sputtering"; such a gain in power is not consistent with a 
carburetor ice condition. The cause of the "sputtering" reported by the witnesses could not be 
determined because the extensive fire damage precluded testing of the engine-driven fuel 
pump, carburetors, and ignition system components.
The pilot reported a vibration in the control stick to the airplane manufacturer in the days 
leading up to the accident. The manufacturer responded to the pilot on the morning of the 
accident and stated that the vibration could be the result of an inadequately balanced engine or 
propeller. However, the propeller's effect on the airplane's performance could not be 
determined because two of the blades were not recovered from the accident site and the acetal 
pitch change slide block within the propeller hub was consumed by postcrash fire.
Although sedating medications were found in toxicological specimens from both occupants, 
and the pilot's autopsy found evidence of severe coronary artery disease, the investigation 
could not determine if these physiological conditions contributed to the accident.
Page 2 of 10ERA15FA141
An in-flight loss of control for reasons that could not be determined based on the available 
evidence.
