The flight instructor reported that he and the student pilot departed on a local training flight. 
After completing maneuvers at 2,000 ft, the flight instructor initiated a simulated engine 
failure and proceeded to demonstrate the forced landing procedure to the student. He selected 
a field as the forced landing location and applied carburetor heat. After turning onto final 
approach for the field at an altitude of about 500 ft, the flight instructor discontinued the 
simulation by turning off the carburetor heat and applying engine power to initiate a climb. 
The flight instructor stated that the engine then "sputtered and produced no power," and he 
subsequently conducted a forced landing to the field. 
During postaccident examination of the airplane, no fuel was observed in either of the two 
wing fuel tanks; however, the fuel quantity at the time of the accident could not be determined 
because a fuel line was damaged during impact, and fuel might have leaked out postaccident. 
An auxiliary fuel supply was plumbed into the fuel system, and the engine started immediately, 
accelerated smoothly, and ran continuously with no anomalies observed.
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
testing of the engine revealed no anomalies.
On March 3, 2015, about 1100 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N498TC, was substantially 
damaged during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power near Venice, Florida. 
The flight instructor (CFI) was not injured, and the student pilot sustained minor injuries. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local 
instructional flight, which departed Venice Municipal Airport (VNC), Venice. The flight was 
conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
The CFI stated that he and the student departed VNC for a local training flight with 18 gallons 
of fuel onboard. After completing maneuvers at 2,000 feet, the CFI initiated a simulated engine 
failure and proceeded to demonstrate the forced landing procedure to the student. He selected 
a field as a forced landing location, and carburetor heat was applied. After turning onto final 
approach for the selected field at an altitude of about 500 feet, the CFI discontinued the 
simulation by turning off the carburetor heat and applying engine power to initiate a climb. 
The engine "sputtered and produced no power," and after ensuring the proper positions of the 
fuel selector valve, mixture control, and engine primer, the CFI conducted a forced landing to 
the field. Upon touchdown, the left wing contacted the ground and the airplane "cartwheeled." 
The airplane came to rest upright, and the CFI and student subsequently egressed. The CFI 
stated that the accident airplane had performed without anomalies during another 
instructional flight just prior to the accident flight, during which he also conducted a simulated 
engine failure. 
The airplane was manufactured in 1979 and was equipped with one Lycoming O-235 series, 
110-hp reciprocating engine, which had accumulated 3,484 hours since overhaul. The 
airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on February 13, 2015, and as of the 
accident flight, had accumulated about 29 hours since that date. 
The CFI held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single and multiengine 
land, and instrument airplane; as well as a flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane 
single and multiengine land and instrument airplane. His most recent Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) first-class medical certificate was issued in September 2013. He reported 
6,244 total hours of flight experience, of which 352 hours were in the accident airplane make 
and model.  
Postaccident examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed substantial damage to 
both wings and the forward fuselage. There was no fuel observed in either of the airplane's two 
wing fuel tanks; however, fuel quantity at the time of the accident could not be determined as a 
fuel line was damaged during impact. The airplane was subsequently removed from the site, 
the starter was replaced, and an auxiliary fuel supply was plumbed into the airplane's fuel 
system. The engine started immediately, accelerated smoothly, and ran continuously with no 
anomalies observed. The carburetor heat control could not be manipulated due to impact 
damage.
In a written statement, the flight instructor indicated that he had flown the accident airplane 
on a training flight prior to the accident flight on the day of the accident. Fueling records 
provided by the operator indicated that the airplane was last serviced at 1122 EST the day prior 
to the accident with 10.36 gallons of 100LL aviation fuel. The operator did not, however, 
provide flight records for the airplane; therefore, total flight time since the airplane's most 
recent fueling could not be determined.
The 1115 weather observation at VNC, located about 5 miles west of the accident site, included 
wind from 140 degrees at 12 knots with gusts to 17 knots, 10 statute miles visibility, clear skies, 
temperature 26 degrees C, dew point 18 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.21 inches of 
mercury. Review of a carburetor icing probability chart indicated the potential for serious icing 
at glide power given the atmospheric conditions present about the time of the accident.
