The private pilot reported that the airplane's approach and touchdown on runway 27 (2,088 
feet by 130 feet, turf) were uneventful.  The airplane did not decelerate as he depressed the toe 
brake pedals, although he felt pressure through the pedals.  He repositioned his feet and 
attempted to apply brake pressure again without any effect on braking performance.  The pilot 
realized that the airplane was going to run off the end of the runway and decided to shutdown 
the engine and turnoff the master electrical switch.  He was "standing on the brakes as hard as 
possible" when the airplane impacted an airport perimeter fence, traveled through a ditch, and 
onto a nearby road.  The airplane was subsequently struck by a vehicle traveling on the road.  
The airplane received substantial damage to both wings and the engine firewall.  Examination 
of the turf runway after the accident failed to reveal any skid markings that could be associated 
with the airplane's ground track.  Local law enforcement surveyed the accident site and 
determined that the airplane touched down with 1,072 feet of runway remaining.  According to 
the airplane's operating handbook, at maximum gross weight the airplane required about 600 
feet to stop on a paved, level, and dry runway.  The operating handbook did not provide 
landing performance data for a turf runway.  Local weather observations indicated that the 
surface wind was from the west-northwest at 9 knots.  The airplane was equipped with a hand 
brake and dual toe brakes.  The hand brake can also be used as a parking brake in conjunction 
with a locking ratchet system.  Once the hand brake lever is engaged, the use of toe brakes 
becomes ineffective.  With the hand brake fully disengaged, the left brake system functioned 
properly when its corresponding toe brakes (pilot and co-pilot positions) were depressed 
during a postaccident examination.  The right brake assembly had impact damage that 
prevented a functional test.  The pilot stated that he had used the parking brake earlier in the 
day, but he had alternatively used the toe brakes during the engine run-up before departing on 
the accident flight.  He concluded that the parking brake must have "partially engaged" 
sometime during the flight.
The pilot's inadvertent activation of the parking brake which resulted in the toe brakes 
becoming ineffective.  Contributing to the accident was the airport perimeter fence, the ditch, 
and the vehicle.
