Just after liftoff, the engine was not able to develop sufficient power for the initial climb. 
Although the engine never fully ceased operation, it was only able to produce partial power.  
The pilot stated that as the airplane reached about 2,000 feet down the runway he considered 
aborting the takeoff attempt, but the airplane was too high for the remaining runway. The 
airplane entered a spin and the pilot attempted to recover, which resulted in the airplane 
impacting the ground in a flat attitude. An examination of the engine revealed no mechanical 
or electrical malfunctions that would have precluded the engine from normal operation.
A partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. Also causal was the pilot's failure to 
maintain adequate airspeed, which resulted in a spin and collision with terrain
On November 02, 2007, about 1530 Pacific daylight time, an Interplane XJ experimental light-
sport airplane (E-LSA), N232PM, experienced a partial loss of power during takeoff from 
Independence State Airport, Independence, Oregon.  The pilot was operating the airplane 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The private pilot, the sole 
occupant, sustained serious injuries; the airplane sustained substantial damage.  The personal 
local area flight was originating at the time of the accident.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed. 
In a telephone conversation with a National Transportation Safety Board investigator, the 
pilot's spouse stated that she had spoken to her husband following the accident.  Although his 
physical impairment prohibited him from talking in depth with regards to the circumstances of 
the accident, he relayed to her that the airplane's engine was not able to develop sufficient 
power for takeoff.  He further indicated that although the engine never fully ceased operation, 
it was only able to produce partial power.  He attempted to maneuver the airplane in a level 
position and it hit hard in an open field remaining in the flat attitude.  
The pilot submitted a written statement reporting that although the accident airplane had 
accumulated 80.6 hours of flight time, the accident flight was to be his first time flying it.  He 
had expected the flight parameters to be comparable to similar airplanes that he had a wide 
array of experience piloting.  Following a normal preflight inspection and run-up, the pilot 
aligned the airplane on the runway for takeoff.  After the application of full throttle, the 
airplane began down the runway, and the engine appeared to be producing full power.  The 
pilot noted that he did not verify the revolutions per minute (rpm) indication inside the 
cockpit; rather, he was focusing on the handling characteristics of the airplane.  
The pilot further stated that as the airplane reached about 2,000 feet down the runway he 
considered aborting the takeoff attempt, but the airplane was too high.  The airplane entered a 
spin and the pilot attempted to recover, which resulted in the airplane impacting the ground in 
a flat attitude.
An examination of the Rotax 912 engine was conducted under the auspice of a Federal Aviation 
Administration inspector on January 10, 2008, in Independence. The initial examination of the 
engine disclosed that the damage incurred during the accident was minimal, thus facilitating 
an attempted engine run and functional checks. The engine started and operated as expected; 
no mechanical or electrical malfunctions were found that would have precluded the engine 
from normal operation. The complete examination notes are contained in the public docket for 
this accident.
