The accident airplane had not flown for an undetermined period of time, and the pilot was 
planning to conduct a 30-minute local flight. The pilot's mechanic attempted to prepare the 
airplane for the flight, and while prepping the airplane he drained water from both fuel tanks 
for approximately 45 minutes. He started the engine and let it run for 15 minutes. During that 
time the pilot arrived at the airport, and the mechanic suggested to the pilot that he allow him 
to fully drain the fuel tanks prior to his flight. The pilot refused and he and the passenger 
boarded the airplane. The flight departed, and shortly after the pilot reported a loss of engine 
power and ditched in the Gulf of Mexico. Examination of the airplane revealed water 
contamination of the fuel. Review of the pilot's toxicology report revealed the use of controlled 
substances. Post mortem toxicology testing performed on the pilot was consistent with the 
regular use and very recent smoking of cocaine, likely within 1 hour of the accident.  The pilot™s 
medical certificate was expired at the time of the accident.
The pilot's inadequate preflight inspection which resulted in a loss of engine power during 
cruise flight due to fuel contamination.  A factor was the pilot's impairment due to recent 
cocaine use.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 1, 2007, at 1406 central daylight time, a Mooney M20K, N4091H, experienced 
an engine failure during cruise flight and was ditched 1 mile off the shore of Panama City 
Beach, Florida. The airplane was substantially damaged. The certificated private pilot was 
killed, and the passenger incurred minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time of the accident, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight. The airplane was 
registered to Treasure Realty Incorporated and operated by the private pilot, under the 
provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The flight originated from 
Panama City International Airport (PFN), Panama City, Florida, at 1345.
The pilot's mechanic stated that the pilot contacted him at approximately 1219, and requested 
that he prepare the airplane for a short flight. He advised the pilot that he would need some 
time to get it ready. The mechanic further stated that the pilot told him that he was only going 
on a 30-minute local flight, and that he would be there shortly. The mechanic tried to start the 
engine but was unsuccessful. He then pulled the fuel drain inside the cockpit and water started 
to drain out of the right fuel tank. He continued to drain water out of both fuel tanks for 
approximately 45 minutes, then connected a power cart to the airplane and attempted to start 
the engine. The engine finally started and he let it run for 15 minutes. The mechanic added that 
when the pilot arrived at the airport, he suggested that the pilot should allow him to fully drain 
the fuel tanks. In response, the pilot told him that he was going on a short flight and that "he 
had to go." At that point the pilot and the passenger boarded the airplane and began to taxi. 
The pilot began taxiing the airplane while the power cart was still connected to the airplane. 
After that, he had no further contact with the pilot.
The PFN air traffic control tower personnel reported that at 1345, the pilot contacted the PFN 
tower controller and requested to depart "VFR" to the west. The controller advised the pilot to 
taxi to runway 32. At 1348, the PFN tower controller cleared the pilot for takeoff. At 1403, the 
pilot contacted the tower and advised the controller that he had lost engine power and was 
attempting to restart the engine. The tower controller advised the pilot that he was "cleared to 
land on runway 5, and squawk 7700.'' The controller stated that the airplane was at 2,100 feet 
over the beach, and 13 miles west of PFN, when the pilot radioed that he lost engine power. At 
1406, the controller observed the airplane on radar at 600 feet. The pilot made no other radio 
transmissions to the air traffic controller.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot, age 57, held a private pilot certificate with ratings for instrument airplane and 
airplane single-engine land. His certificate was issued on May 27, 1979. He held a third-class 
medical certificate issued on July 28, 2005, with limitations for corrective lenses. The Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) blue ribbon medical records revealed that at the time of his last 
medical certificate, the pilot had a total flight time of 2,000 hours, and 50 hours within the last 
6 months. The pilot's logbooks were not recovered for review. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane is a 1980 Mooney M20K, serial number 20-0468. It is a four-seat, low-wing 
airplane of predominantly aluminum construction with retractable tricycle landing gear. It was 
powered by a Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) TSIO-360-GB, 220-horsepower engine and 
equipped with a two-bladed McCauley propeller, model 2A34C216.
The airplane's logbooks were not recovered for review. Review of a maintenance receipt 
revealed that the last annual inspection was conducted on March 6, 2007, at a total Hobbs time 
of 1,264.8. The total airframe time could not be determined. Review of refueling records 
revealed that the airplane was last refueled on August 8, 2007 at Sheltair Aviation Services, 
Panama City, Florida, with 51.10 gallons of aviation fuel.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The airplane was located 1,500 feet off the shore of Panama City Beach, in the Gulf of Mexico, 
and approximately 13 miles west of PFN.
The airplane was recovered from the Gulf and remained intact. All primary flight control 
surfaces and airframe components were accounted for on the airplane during the recovery. 
Examination of the primary flight control surfaces did not reveal any mechanical anomalies. 
Examination of the left and right wing assemblies revealed that both fuel tanks were not 
breached, and both fuel tanks contained an undetermined amount water and fuel.
The engine remained attached to the airframe and the engine was displaced downward in the 
engine mounts. No other external visual anomalies were observed on the engine. All engine 
accessories remained attached to the engine assembly. The firewall sustained impact damaged 
on the lower section. The electrical wiring harness, and all flexible fluid lines aft of the engine 
were intact. The throttle control was in the full forward position. The mixture control at the 
carburetor was in the full rich position. The carburetor heat was in the off position.  
Examination of the fuel system revealed that the fuel manifold valve was intact and secured. 
The TCM lead seal was not observed on the fuel manifold. When disassembled, there was water 
inside the manifold valve. The screen was intact and no debris was observed beneath the 
screen. 
The fuel pump assembly was intact and secured, and there was visible surface corrosion to the 
pump housing and fuel lines. All fuel lines were intact and secured. Water was observed in the 
fuel lines when disconnected at the pump, and no fuel was observed. The pump was rotated by 
hand and water was observed to flow from the fuel outlet line.
The propeller assembly remained attached to the propeller crankshaft flange. The propeller 
spinner assembly remained attached to the propeller spinner back plate and no damage was 
observed. Both propeller blades remained attached to the propeller hub. The propeller 
governor was intact and secured. The propeller control lever and cable were connected and 
actuated normally with no anomalies observed. No visual damage was observed to the hub 
assembly or blades. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on November 2, 2007 by the State of Florida Office of 
the Medical Examiner, District Fourteen, as authorized by the Chief Medical Examiner of 
Panama City, Florida. The cause of death was reported as "drowning."
 
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The toxicology report stated no 
ethanol was detected in the liver or muscle. Review of the toxicology report revealed:
0.583 (ug/ml, ug/g) cocaine detected in the blood
6.702 (ug/ml, ug/g) benzoylecgonine detected in blood
ecgonine methyl ester detected in blood
anhydroecgonine methylester detected in the blood. 
35.605(ug/ml, ug/g) cocaine detected in urine
1478.1 (ug/ml, ug/g) benzoylecgonine detected in urine
ecgonine methyl ester detected in urine
anhydroecgonine methylester detected in urine
0.055(ug/ml, ug/g) cocaethylene detected in the urine.
A review of FAA medical records revealed that the pilot's most recent application for a third-
class Airman Medical Certificate indicates "No" in response to "Do You Currently Use Any 
Medication" and in response to all other items under "Medical History," including specifically 
"Substance dependence or failed a drug test ever, or substance abuse or use of illegal substance 
in the last 2 years," "Admission to hospital" and "Other illness, disability, and surgery." The 
application also indicates "No" in response to "history of any convictions involving driving 
while intoxicated by, while impaired by, or while under the influence of alcohol or a drug..." 
and to "History of non-traffic convictions (misdemeanors or felonies)." The report of medical 
examination accompanying the application notes that the pilot "has been issued" a medical 
certificate. 
