The airplane was in cruise flight when the crew detected a strange odor. When the captain 
opened the cockpit door, he saw smoke in the courier area. The crew donned oxygen masks, 
declared an emergency, and diverted to the nearest suitable airport. The crew then noticed 
heavy smoke coming from the lavatory and heard a motor running continuously. The captain 
discharged a Halon fire extinguisher into the lavatory compartment and the smoke subsided. 
Post-incident examination revealed the lavatory fan functioned normally, but the recirculation 
fan, located beneath the lavatory, had seized. The motor end ball bearing, located below the fan 
rotor, had failed, allowing the motor rotor to make contact with the motor stator.
Failure of the recirculation fan motor end ball bearing.
On November 2, 2007, at 0527 central standard time, a Douglas DC-8-73F, N880UP, 
registered to and operated by United Parcel Service (UPS), Louisville, Kentucky, made an 
emergency landing at Wichita Mid-Continent Airport (ICT), Wichita, Kansas, after smoke filled 
the cockpit. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time of the incident. The 
non-scheduled domestic cargo flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 121, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan had 
been filed and activated. The captain, first officer, flight engineer, and a jump seat occupant 
were not injured. The cross-country flight originated at Louisville (SDF), Kentucky, at 0513 
eastern standard time, and was en route to Ontario International Airport (ONT), Ontario, 
California.
According to the incident report submitted by UPS, the airplane was in cruise flight about 150 
miles east of ICT when the crew detected a strange odor.  When they opened the cockpit door, 
they saw smoke in the courier area. The crew donned oxygen masks, declared an emergency, 
and diverted to ICT. The crew then noticed heavy smoke coming from the lavatory and heard a 
motor running continuously. The captain discharged a Halon fire extinguisher into the lavatory 
compartment and the smoke subsided.
On January 30, 2008, the lavatory fan and recirculation fan were disassembled and examined 
under the auspices of FAA's Flight Standards District Office in SDF. According to UPS's 
Aircraft Engineering Report, the lavatory fan functioned normally. Examination of the 
recirculation fan (m/n AVRF85-62D1779), however, revealed the motor (p/n  941D601-1) had 
seized. Further examination revealed the end ball bearing (p/n P8C7706-19) located below the 
fan rotor had failed, allowing the motor rotor to make contact with the motor stator.
