National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Factual Report
Location: Lyndonville, VT
Accident Number: ERA17LA312
Date & Time: 09/02/2017, 1810 EDT
Registration: N132AV
Aircraft: PIPER PA28
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On September 2, 2017, about 1810 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-181, N132AV, was 
substantially damaged during collision with terrain during takeoff from Caledonia County 
Airport (CDA), Lyndonville, Vermont. The private pilot and two passengers were not injured. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal 
flight which was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot said he performed a preflight inspection of the airplane in 
front of the five passengers he intended to fly that day with no anomalies noted. He 
demonstrated the corresponding movements between the flight controls, and the flight-control 
surfaces; highlighting the corresponding movement between the ailerons and the control yoke.
The pilot said he then completed a 20-minute flight with two of the passengers and returned to 
CDA. There, a friend volunteered to fly the fifth passenger in his airplane while the pilot flew 
with the third and fourth passenger. The pilot cautioned his friend about the density altitude, 
and how his airplane "needed more time to build speed" during the takeoff roll.
After taxi, the pilot positioned the airplane on the runway for departure and performed a flight 
control deflection check. He said there was corresponding movement with the flight control 
surfaces, but that the resistance in the controls was light. His concern led him to perform the 
check 8 times, before he initiated the takeoff.
The pilot stated that after rotation, the airplane was unresponsive, or slow to respond, in the 
roll axis when he applied aileron corrections. He elected to close the throttle, and perform a 
forced landing to the grass area beyond the departure end of the runway. The landing resulted 
in substantial damage to the wings, cabin, empennage, and the tail section of the airplane.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land. The pilot 
reported 310 total hours of flight experience, of which 305 hours were in the accident airplane 
make and model.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the airplane was manufactured in 
1984 and had accrued approximately 4,287.8 total aircraft hours. Its most recent annual 
inspection was completed June 8, 2017. The maximum allowable gross weight of the airplane 
was 2,550 pounds. The airplane's estimated weight during the accident takeoff was 2,428 
pounds.
At 1855, the weather recorded at CDA included clear skies and calm wind. The temperature 
was 18°C, and the dew point was 6°C. The altimeter setting was 30.19 inches of mercury. The 
calculated density altitude was 1,525 feet.
The wreckage was examined at the accident site by an FAA inspector and a Vermont Agency of 
Transportation operations manager, and all major components were accounted for at the 
scene. The airplane came to rest upright about 700 ft beyond the departure end of runway 20, 
and about 250 ft left of the runway centerline.
Flight control continuity was established from the individual flight controls to all flight control 
surfaces, except for the left aileron. The aileron was significantly impact damaged, and its 
control rod was fractured. The corresponding fractured control-rod piece inside the wing was 
observed to move with control yoke inputs.
Each half of the fractured control rod was harvested from the wreckage and retained for further 
examination at the NTSB Materials Laboratory. According to an NTSB senior materials 
engineer, examination of the fracture surfaces of the control rod revealed, "All fracture features 
were consistent with ductile overstress fracture under bending loads. No
evidence of a preexisting crack was observed."
According to FAA Pamphlet FAA-P-8740-2, Density Altitude: Whether due to high altitude, high temperature, or both, reduced air density (reported in terms
of density altitude) adversely affects aerodynamic performance and decreases the engine's 
horsepower output. Takeoff distance, power available (in normally aspirated engines), and 
climb rate are all adversely affected. Landing distance is affected as well; although the 
indicated airspeed (IAS) remains the same, the true airspeed (TAS) increases. From the pilot's 
point of view, therefore, an increase in density altitude results in the following: Ł Increased takeoff distance.
Ł Reduced rate of climb.
Ł Increased TAS (but same IAS) on approach and landing.
Ł Increased landing roll distance.
Because high density altitude has particular implications for takeoff/climb performance and 
landing distance, pilots must be sure to determine the reported density altitude and check the 
appropriate aircraft performance charts carefully during preflight preparation. A pilot's first 
reference for aircraft performance information should be the operational data section of the 
aircraft owner's manual or the Pilot's Operating Handbook developed by the aircraft 
manufacturer. In the example given in the previous text, the pilot may be operating from an 
airport at 500 MSL, but he or she must calculate performance as if the airport were located at 
5,000 feet. A pilot who is complacent or careless in using the charts may find that density 
altitude effects create an unexpected Œand unwelcome Œ element of suspense during takeoff 
and climb or during landing.
According to FAA Advisory Circular AC-61-23C, Pilot's Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge: "The effect of torque increases in direct proportion to engine power, airspeed, and airplane
attitude. If the power setting is high, the airspeed slow, and the angle of attack high, the effect 
of torque is greater. During takeoffs and climbs, when the effect of torque is most pronounced, 
the pilot must apply sufficient right rudder pressure to counteract the left-turning tendency 
and maintain a straight takeoff path."
According to FAA Airplane Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-38) Chapter 4: "–as airspeed decreases, control effectiveness decreases– because of less airflow over the
control surfaces. As airspeed is further reduced, the control effectiveness is further reduced and 
the reduced airflow over the control surfaces results in larger control movements being 
required to create the same response. Pilots sometimes refer to the feel of this reduced 
effectiveness as "sloppy" or "mushy" controls... The pilot will notice the airplane's reaction time 
to control movement increases. Just before the stall occurs, buffeting, uncommanded rolling, 
or vibrations may begin to occur."
Pilot Information  
Certificate: Private
Age: 63, Male
Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied: Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): None
Restraint Used: Unknown
Instrument Rating(s): None
Second Pilot Present: No
Instructor Rating(s): None
Toxicology Performed: No
Medical Certification: Class 3
Last FAA Medical Exam: 06/20/2017
Occupational Pilot: No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent: 06/20/2017
Flight Time: 310.6 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300.2 hours (Total, this make and model), 7 hours (Last 90
days, all aircraft), 5.5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: PIPER
Registration: N132AV
Model/Series: PA28 181
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Year of Manufacture: 1984
Amateur Built: No
Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 28-8490111
Landing Gear Type: Tricycle
Seats: 4
Date/Type of Last Inspection: 06/08/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time: 4287.8 Hours at time of
accident
Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING
ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: O&VO-360 SER
Registered Owner: On file
Rated Power: 180 hp
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: KCDA, 1188 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time: 2155 UTC
Direction from Accident Site: 161°
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: Calm /
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual: /
Wind Direction: Turbulence Severity
Forecast/Actual: /
Altimeter Setting: 30.19 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 18°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: Lyndonville, VT (CDA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Destination: Lyndonville, VT (CDA)
Type of Clearance: None
Departure Time: 1810 EDT
Type of Airspace: Class G
Airport Information
Airport: CALEDONIA COUNTY (CDA)
Runway Surface Type: Asphalt
Airport Elevation: 1187 ft
Runway Surface Condition: Dry
Runway Used: 20
IFR Approach: None
Runway Length/Width: 3302 ft / 60 ft
VFR Approach/Landing: None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: 2 None
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 3 None
Latitude, Longitude: 44.569167, -72.018056 (est)
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Brian C Rayner
Additional Participating Persons: James Mills; FAA/FSDO; Portland, ME
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=95952
