National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Factual Report
Location: Broomfield, CO
Accident Number: CEN17LA340
Date & Time: 09/01/2017, 1515 MDT
Registration: N8957Z
Aircraft: CESSNA 310G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Miscellaneous/other
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
On September 1, 2017, about 1515 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 310G airplane, N8957Z, 
sustained substantial fuselage damage during a landing gear collapse while landing on runway 
30R at the Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport (BJC), near Broomfield, Colorado. The pilot 
and passenger were not injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by Zero Energy 
Aviation, LLC under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91 as a training 
flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated on a visual 
flight rules flight plan. The flight originated from the Boulder Municipal Airport (BDU), 
Boulder, Colorado, about 1315 and the intended destination was the Greeley-Weld County 
Airport (GXY), Greeley, Colorado.
The pilot reported that during approach to GXY, he lowered the landing gear and noted a that 
the green gear-down indicator illuminated. Upon touchdown, he felt a "mushy feeling" and 
aborted the landing, leaving the landing gear in the down position. He noted that the gear-
down indicator was still illuminated. He attempted another landing with the same result and 
initiated another aborted landing, again leaving the landing gear in the down position. At this 
time neither the red gear-up light nor the green gear-down light were illuminated. 
The pilot left the landing gear in the down position and proceeded toward BDU, which was the 
airplane's home base. He attempted to contact ground personnel at BDU to assist in verifying 
the landing gear position. There was no response on the common traffic advisory frequency 
(CTAF), and he elected to contact the air traffic control tower (ATCT) at BJC. After establishing 
communication with BJC ATCT, he performed several fly bys of the tower and tower personnel 
confirmed that the right main landing gear was not fully extended. After making another 
attempt to lower the landing gear using the emergency checklist, the pilot landed on runway 
30R. During the touchdown, the landing gear collapsed.
According to the pilot, maintenance personnel found that the pushrod extending from the gear 
motor to the right main landing gear was found bent. The reason for the bent pushrod was not 
determined.
Federal Aviation Administration records indicated that the pilot held a private pilot certificate 
with an airplane single engine land rating. He did not hold a multiengine rating. The airplane 
was a twin-engine retractable-gear airplane.
Pilot Information  
Certificate: Private
Age: 63, Male
Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied: Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): None
Restraint Used: 3-point
Instrument Rating(s): None
Second Pilot Present: Yes
Instructor Rating(s): None
Toxicology Performed: No
Medical Certification: Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam: 06/16/2015
Occupational Pilot: No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time: 13842 hours (Total, all aircraft), 7259 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CESSNA
Registration: N8957Z
Model/Series: 310G G
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Year of Manufacture: 1962
Amateur Built: No
Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 310G0057
Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 6
Date/Type of Last Inspection: 04/30/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 4993 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection: 80 Hours
Engines: 2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time: 4035 Hours
Engine Manufacturer: CONT MOTOR
ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: IO-470 -D
Registered Owner: ZERO ENERGY AVIATION LLC
Rated Power: 260 hp
Operator: ZERO ENERGY AVIATION LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: BJC, 5673 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time: 2135 UTC
Direction from Accident Site: 0째
Lowest Cloud Condition: Scattered / 15000 ft agl
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 6 knots /
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual: /
Wind Direction: 30째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual: /
Altimeter Setting: 30.2 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 30째C / 3째C
Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: BOULDER, CO (BDU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed: VFR
Destination: GREELEY, CO (GXY)
Type of Clearance: VFR
Departure Time: 1315 MDT
Type of Airspace: Class D
Airport Information
Airport: ROCKY MOUNTAIN METROPOLITAN
(BJC)
Runway Surface Type: Asphalt
Airport Elevation: 5673 ft
Runway Surface Condition: Dry
Runway Used: 30R
IFR Approach: None
Runway Length/Width: 9000 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing: Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 2 None
Latitude, Longitude: 39.908889, -105.117222
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): John M Brannen
Additional Participating Persons: Michael D Burton; FAA - Denver FSDO; Denver, CO
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=95959
