This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Harpswell, ME
Accident Number: ERA17LA307
Date & Time: 09/01/2017, 1710 EDT
Registration: N4615X
Aircraft: CESSNA U206
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On September 1, 2017, about 1710 eastern daylight time, a Cessna U206G, N4615X, operated 
by Waters Aero-Marine, doing business as Penobscot Island Air, was substantially damaged 
during a forced landing near Harpswell, Maine. The commercial pilot sustained minor injuries. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company visual flight rules flight plan was 
filed for the flight operated under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91, 
which departed Knox County Regional Airport (RKD), Rockland, Maine, about 1645, destined 
for Portland International Jetport (PWM), Portland, Maine.
According to the pilot, while in cruise flight at 2,500 ft en route to PWM, about 6 nautical miles 
from Brunswick Executive Airport (BXM), Brunswick, Maine, he heard a "loud bang," followed 
by a total loss of engine power. He immediately transmitted a distress call to Portland 
Approach Control, and advised that he was going to attempt to land at BXM. The pilot then 
advised on the Penobscot Island Air company frequency of his situation and his intentions. He 
then performed the emergency procedures for securing the engine and continued with the 
emergency landing.
At 600 ft the pilot realized that the airplane was not going to reach BXM and transmitted his 
intentions to make an off-airport landing. Upon landing the airplane bounced, traveled about 
150 ft, and touched down again. The nose landing gear entered a small drainage ditch; the 
airplane nosed over, and came to rest inverted. The pilot then verified that all the engine 
controls and electronics were shut off, and egressed through the pilot's door, which he had 
opened on touchdown.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman records and pilot records, the 
pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land, airplane 
single-engine sea, airplane multi-engine land, and instrument airplane. He also held a flight 
instructor certificate with a rating for airplane single engine. His most recent FAA second-class 
medical certificate was issued on May 18, 2017. He reported that he had accrued 2,400 total 
hours of flight experience, 800 of which was in the accident airplane, make and model.
According to FAA airworthiness and maintenance records, the airplane was manufactured in 
1979. Its most recent 100-hour inspection was completed on August 28, 2017. At the time of 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
the inspection, the airplane had accrued 7,359.1 total hours of operation, and the engine had 
accrued 1,694 total hours of operation since major overhaul.
The airplane was retained for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CESSNA
Registration: N4615X
Model/Series: U206 G
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: WATERS AERO-MARINE INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As: Penobscot Island Air
Operator Designator Code: O59A
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: IWI, 70 ft msl
Observation Time: 1653 EDT
Distance from Accident Site: 11 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 17°C / 1°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Few / 6500 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 6 knots / 22 knots,
Variable
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.96 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: Company VFR
Departure Point: ROCKLAND, ME (RKD)
Destination: PORTLAND, ME (PWM)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Minor
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude: 43.820000, -69.920000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Todd G Gunther
Additional Participating Persons: James Mills; FAA / FSDO; Portland, ME
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
