National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Elbow Lake, MN
Accident Number: CHI03LA242
Date & Time: 08/02/2003, 0630 CDT
Registration: NONE
Aircraft: Teratorn
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The unregistered two-place airplane was destroyed on impact with terrain.
The non- instrument rated pilot was fatally injured.
The accident pilot was told by his wife prior to the flight that the weather conditions at the destination were foggy.
The accident pilot replied to his wife that he could see the tops of the trees "and he was going to fly low and follow the rail road tracks."
The Sheriff's report stated the pilot's brother said that "it was too foggy to be flying.
The only reason he was flying was to look for [the accident pilot,] his brother."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's intentional flight into known fog and failure to maintain aircraft control during cruise flight.
A factor was the fog, and the low altitude flight.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - FOG 2.
(C) FLIGHT INTO ADVERSE WEATHER - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 3.
AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED 4.
LOW ALTITUDE FLIGHT/MANEUVER ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 5.
The personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
No flight plan was on file.
The pilot was fatally injured.
The flight originated from a private airstrip near Elbow Lake, Minnesota, about 0600, and was en route to Y63 at the time of the accident.
The Grant County Sheriff's report stated that prior to the flight the pilot's wife told the accident pilot that the weather conditions at Elbow Lake Airport were foggy.
The report said that the accident pilot replied that he could see the tops of the trees "and he was going to fly low and follow the rail road tracks into Elbow Lake."
The Grant County Sheriff's report stated: [The accident pilot's brother] told me that he had flown from Fergus Falls to Elbow Lake this morning looking for his brother's plane which had not arrived at the Elbow Lake Airport.
... [He] then called [his brother's wife] and ... asked what direction [the accident pilot] was taking to get to the airport.
[She] said that he was following the train tracks east that come from Wendell to Elbow Lake.
[He] then flew over the railroad tracks and followed them east to Elbow Lake and found his brother's plane in the wheat field.
... [He] said that it was too foggy to be flying.
The only reason he was flying was to look for his brother.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a single-engine land airplane rating.
His FAA third-class medical certificate was issued on December 26, 2002, with a limitation for corrective lenses.
On his application for that flight physical, the pilot reported that he had accumulated 12 total flight hours.
His pilot certificate was issued on April 23, 2003.
On his application for that certificate, the pilot reported that he had accumulated 45.8 total flight hours of which 3 hours were listed as instrument flight time.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION The accident airplane was an unregistered Teratorn, two-place airplane.
The original kit manufacturer is no longer in business.
The airplane's original kit builder could not be confirmed.
The accident airplane was a single-engine, high-wing airplane.
Its engine was a 64-horsepower Rotax 532 engine, serial number 3488536.
The engine was shipped from its manufacturer in April of 1985 to Teratorn Aircraft.
The propeller was a three-bladed, 66-inch diameter, Warp Drive propeller.
The propeller was shipped from its manufacturer on July 31, 1994.
At 0615, the FFM recorded weather was: Wind 330 degrees at 7 knots; visibility 3/4 of a statute mile; present weather mist; sky condition overcast 200 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew point 15 degrees C; altimeter 29.94 inches of mercury.
At 0635, the FFM recorded weather was: Wind 350 degrees at 7 knots; visibility 1/4 of a statute mile; present weather fog; sky condition overcast 200 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew point 15 degrees C; altimeter 29.94 inches of mercury.
At 0655, the FFM recorded weather was: Wind 350 degrees at 7 knots; visibility 3/4 of a statute mile; present weather mist; sky condition overcast 200 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew point 15 degrees C; altimeter 29.95 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION The Grant County Sheriff's report stated: The nose of the aircraft was pushed back to the left side and the plastic door was in front of the aircraft about 15 feet.
The motor appeared to have pushed forward and snapped off two of three propellers.
The wings also had damage to the front of them.
...
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION An autopsy was performed at the Department of Pathology, Lake Region Healthcare Corporation, in Fergus Falls, Minnesota, on August 2, 2003.
The FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute prepared a Final Forensic Toxicology Accident Report.
The report was negative for the tests performed.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION The FAA was a party to the investigation.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Unknown Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
