National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Oshkosh, WI
Accident Number: CHI03FA238B
Date & Time: 08/01/2003, 1300 CDT
Registration: N66VA
Aircraft: Vans Aircraft, Inc. RV-6T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis Two airplanes were substantially damaged during a collision while both aircraft were landing at the annual Experimental Aircraft Association fly-in at Oshkosh, Wisconsin.
Reduced separation standards and special arrival procedures were in effect at the time of the accident.
The accident aircraft were sequenced for landing and both were cleared to land at the same location on the same runway.
The trailing airplane landed and struck the leading airplane as the leading airplane was exiting the runway.
Federal regulations as well as the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) state that the pilot in command of an aircraft is directly responsible for, and is the final authority as to, the operation of that aircraft.
The AIM further states that, regardless of type of flight plan or whether or not under control of a radar facility, the pilot is responsible to see and avoid other traffic, terrain, or obstacles, when meteorological conditions permit.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The other airplane pilot's inadequate visual look out and his failure to perform a go-around, and maintain clearance from the other aircraft.
Findings Occurrence #1: COLLISION BETWEEN AIRCRAFT (OTHER THAN MIDAIR) Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT OF OTHER AIRCRAFT 2.
(C) GO-AROUND - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT OF OTHER AIRCRAFT 3.
N66VA had already landed and was exiting the runway when N3602D landed and struck N66VA's left wing.
The accident occurred during the annual Experimental Aircraft Association Airventure gathering.
N3602D was operating as a personal flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.
N66VA was operating as a business flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.
There were no injuries.
N3602D's flight originated from the Outagamie County Regional Airport, Appleton, Wisconsin about 1200.
N66VA was on a local flight that originated about 1245.
At the time of the accident, aircraft were using the "VFR Oshkosh Arrival, Purple Flow" procedures as outlined in the Special Flight Procedures Notice to Airmen (NOTAM), that was in effect at the time of the accident.
The NOTAM states, "Oshkosh Tower controllers may request that you land on one of the colored circles ('dots').
The 'orange dot' is 1,500 [feet] from the runway 27 threshold (4,678 [feet] remain); the 'green dot' is 3,000 [feet] from the runway 27 threshold (3,178 [feet] remain)."
In addition, the NOTAM states, "A waiver has been issued reducing arrival and departure standards for category 1 and 2 aircraft (primarily single engine and light twin engine aircraft)."
The pilot of N66VA reported that he had landed his aircraft on runway 27 on the "green dot" and was clearing the runway into the grass adjacent to the runway when his airplane was struck by N3602D.
The pilot of N3602D reported that he approached the airport using the prescribed arrival procedures and was instructed by air traffic control (ATC) to fly a close-in right downwind for runway 27.
He stated that ATC instructed him to turn onto the base leg of the traffic pattern before N66VA, which was on a short final, had passed off of his right wing.
He further stated that this reduced the spacing, but it appeared to be safe to continue the approach.
N3602D was cleared by ATC to land on the "green dot."
The pilot stated that upon touchdown, he recognized that he would not be able to stop his airplane before colliding with N66VA, which was on the runway.
The pilot of N3602D turned left in an attempt to avoid a collision, but N66VA also turned left to exit the runway into the grass.
Neither pilot reported any pre-impact difficulties with respect to their aircraft or aircraft systems.
An eyewitness to the accident reported that N3602D landed on runway 27, bounced, went into the grass on the south side of the runway, bounced again, came down, and struck N66VA.
Chapter 5-5 of the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) describes the roles and responsibilities of pilots and controllers as related to air traffic procedures.
Paragraph 5-5-1b of that chapter states; "The pilot in command of an aircraft is directly responsible for, and is the final authority as to the safe operation of that aircraft.
In an emergency requiring immediate action, the pilot in command may deviate from any rule in the General Subpart A and Flight Rules Subpart B in accordance with 14 CFR Section 91.3."
Section  5-5-8 of the AIM, entitled "See and Avoid" states in paragraph (a): "Pilot: When meteorological conditions permit, regardless of type of flight plan or whether or not under control of a radar facility, the pilot is responsible to see and avoid other traffic, terrain, or obstacles."
14 CFR Part 91.3 (a) states; "The pilot in command of an aircraft is directly responsible for, and is the final authority as to, the operation of that aircraft."
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam: 02/27/2002 Occupational Pilot: Last Flight Review or Equivalent: 12/28/2001 Flight Time: 10500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 6500 hours (Total, this make and model), 250 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft) Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information Aircraft Make: Vans Aircraft, Inc.
Registration: N66VA Model/Series: RV-6T Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Experimental Serial Number: 1 Landing Gear Type: Tailwheel Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 07/21/2003, Condition Certified Max Gross Wt.
: 1750 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 30 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-320 Registered Owner: Vans Aircraft, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
