National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Chadron, NE
Accident Number: CHI03LA244
Date & Time: 08/02/2003, 0815 MDT
Registration: N70522
Aircraft: Piper J3C-65
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane was substantially damaged when it impacted a hangar immediately after takeoff from an alfalfa field.
The pilot reported that he taxied for takeoff, leaving what he thought was sufficient distance for the takeoff roll and initial climb.
He noted that during the takeoff, at a point three-quarters of the distance to the hangar, he realized he was not going to be able to clear the obstacles.
The pilot stated:  "I was in a nose up attitude to try to clear the hangar but could not gain enough altitude.
I hit the hangar just left of center and the plane fell back to the ground."
The field was approximately one mile square and was surrounded by a barbed-wire fence.
The available distance from the point where the takeoff was initiated to the hangar was approximately 730 feet.
The takeoff path reportedly sloped upward about 10 feet.
The pilot reported that there were no malfunctions with the aircraft or engine prior to the accident.
Winds in the vicinity were reported from the south at eight knots.
Temperature and dew point were 22 degrees Celsius and 29.98 inches of mercury.
Density altitude was calculated as 4,847 feet.
Federal regulations require the pilot-in-command to review takeoff distance data prior to flight to ensure sufficient runway distance is available.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Inadequate preflight planning by the pilot to ensure the required takeoff distance was utilized, as well as a failure to abort the takeoff.
Contributing factors were the uphill gradient and the hangar.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) OBJECT - HANGAR/AIRPORT BUILDING 4.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.
The pilot reported minor injuries.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot's written statement reported that he taxied for takeoff, leaving what he thought was sufficient distance for the takeoff roll and initial climb.
The operating area was reportedly an alfalfa field with a hangar located on the north end.
The pilot noted that during the takeoff, at a point three-quarters of the distance to the hangar, he realized he was not going to be able to clear the obstacles.
He reported he stayed to the left of his intended takeoff path in order to minimize the hazard to people on the ground.
The pilot stated:  "I was in a nose up attitude to try to clear the hangar but could not gain enough altitude.
I hit the hangar just left of center and the plane fell back to the ground."
The owner of the aircraft reported that prior to the accident he had flown two passes over the field in the accident airplane, landed and shutdown approximately 50 yards south of the hangar.
He stated that the pilot, who was going to take the aircraft for a flight, situated himself in the rear seat.
He assisted the pilot start the engine and observed him taxi to the south.
He noted:  "I had began to walk back to the [hangar] when my attention was returned to the aircraft ... and noted he had shorten[ed] the takeoff area to less [than] I expected.
... As the aircraft passed by me I noted he had enough altitude to clear the fence, but the aircraft seemed to stall as it hit the [hangar]."
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) investigator on-scene, the field was approximately one mile square and was surrounded by a barbed-wire fence.
The investigator estimated the available distance from the point where the takeoff was initiated to the hangar was approximately 730 feet.
In addition, the takeoff path reportedly sloped upward about 10 feet.
Owners of the same make and model aircraft were asked about the expected takeoff performance by the FAA investigator.
They reportedly estimated a required takeoff distance of 900 feet based on the weather and loading conditions.
The post-accident examination of the aircraft did not reveal any pre-impact anomalies.
In addition, the pilot reported that there were no malfunctions with the aircraft or engine prior to the accident.
The pilot reported weather conditions at the scene as clear, 10 miles visibility, and northeast winds at less than 10 knots.
Conditions reported by the Chadron Municipal Airport (CDR) Automated Surface Observing System at 0753, located 6 miles south-southwest of the accident site, were clear skies, 10 miles visibility, and winds from 160 degrees at 8 knots.
The temperature and altimeter setting were reported as 22 degrees Celsius and 29.98 inches of mercury.
The density altitude calculated based on these conditions was 4,847 feet.
Federal regulations require the pilot-in-command to review takeoff distance data prior to flight.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
