National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Mitchell, SD
Accident Number: CHI03LA243
Date & Time: 08/02/2003, 0740 CDT
Registration: N4923X
Aircraft: Rockwell International S-2R
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The airplane was destroyed following an in-flight collision with power lines during a low-level aerial application pass.
The airplane subsequently impacted a tree and terrain.
The airplane was burned in a post-impact ground fire.
The pilot reported that he circled to look for obstacles and then started spraying.
He said that his airplane's main landing gear caught the wires that ran through the middle of the field.
He stated that he lost control of the aircraft and it impacted a tree and terrain.
After exiting the airplane, it subsequently burst into flames.
The pilot stated that there were no mechanical malfunctions during the flight.
His recommendation was, "Take ample time to observe all obstacles and give them respect."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate visual lookout and not maintaining clearance from the power line during the low level aerial application maneuver.
A related factor was the power line.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION 2.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On August 2, 2003, about 0740 central daylight time, a Rockwell International S-2R, N4923X, was destroyed following an in-flight collision with power lines during an aerial application flight near Mitchell, South Dakota.
The airplane subsequently impacted a tree and terrain and burned in a post-impact ground fire.
The pilot reported minor injuries.
The aerial application flight was being operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 137 without a flight plan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The local flight originated from MJ Aviation Airport I, near Letcher, South Dakota, at 0700.
The pilot reported that he circled the field to look for obstacles and then started spraying.
He said that his airplane's main landing gear caught the wires that ran through the middle of the field.
He stated: I proceeded forward straight [and] level across I-90 until [the] wires broke.
At this time I lost control hit a tree and crashed at approximately 7:40 AM.
I [immediately] removed seatbelt, helmet, and evacuated aircraft.
I ran up to house got owner to call 911 and washed chemical off my skin with garden hose.
At this time aircraft burst into flames, which were extinguished by Mitchell Fire [and] Rescue.
The pilot stated that there were no mechanical malfunctions during the flight.
His recommendation was, "Take ample time to observe all obstacles and give them respect."
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 31, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
