National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Oshkosh, WI
Accident Number: CHI03FA239
Date & Time: 08/02/2003, 0920 CDT
Registration: N1068S
Aircraft: Gerlach Skyraider II
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The airplane was substantially damaged when it impacted a road after takeoff.
The pilot reported that the takeoff roll was long and the airplane's engine seemed to lose power.
He stated that he "released [the] flaps to gain speed but the engine seem[ed] to have less power."
The pilot said that after clearing the fence at the end of the runway, he turned right and crashed on the road.
The passenger reported that on the accident flight the pilot used flaps during the takeoff and, in his opinion, the use of the flaps produced enough drag to slow the aircraft's speed on takeoff.
A witness stated that he observed the accident airplane during the takeoff, and the airplane was "going too slow, too low, and was climbing too steeply."
The witness stated that the airplane then stalled and struck the ground.
He stated that the airplane's engine was running until the airplane struck the ground.
In his written report, the pilot listed no mechanical malfunction of the airplane.
A postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no pre-impact anomalies.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) FLAPS - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 5.
The flight was performed during the annual Experimental Aircraft Association gathering.
The pilot reported that the engine lost power during the takeoff.
The 14 CFR Part 91 business flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The pilot and passenger were not injured.
The local flight was originating when the accident occurred.
In a written report of the accident, the pilot stated that the takeoff roll was long and the airplane's engine seemed to lose power.
He stated that he "released [the] flaps to gain speed but the engine seem[ed] to have less power."
The pilot said that after clearing the fence at the end of the runway, he turned right and crashed on the road.
In his written report, the pilot listed no mechanical malfunction of the airplane.
In a written statement to the Winnebago County Sheriff's Department, the pilot stated that the engine power "wasn't up to its normal standard.
It did takeoff [and] seemed to get better but all of a sudden it seemed to lose power again.
I tried to release the flaps to get some speed and the plane didn't respond."
The pilot stated that the airplane kept losing speed and power.
He stated that when the airplane cleared the fence, he attempted to land on the road.
The passenger reported that the accident flight was his second flight of the day in the accident airplane.
He stated that on the accident flight the pilot used flaps during the takeoff.
He stated that, in his opinion, the use of the flaps produced enough drag to slow the aircraft's speed on takeoff.
A witness stated that he observed the accident airplane during the takeoff.
He stated that the airplane was "going too slow, too low, and it was climbing too steeply."
The witness stated that the airplane then stalled and struck the ground.
He stated that the airplane's engine was running until the airplane struck the ground.
A postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no pre-impact anomalies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 34, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
