Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
BRYAN, TX
Accident Number:
FTW99LA205
Date & Time:
08/01/1999, 1957 CDT 
Registration:
N444UF
Aircraft:
Cessna 150L
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
During an instructional flight, the airplane stalled after the 750-hour flight instructor 
performed an abrupt pull-up to avoid colliding with powerlines while maneuvering.  Witnesses 
at the airport reported that the airplane had been operating in the closed traffic pattern, 
performing touch-and-go landings on runway 14.  They added that they heard the engine 
power being reduced from full power to idle and observed the airplane make a left turn and 
descend toward the south end of the airport.  Instead of making a right turn for a downwind 
landing on 32, the airplane continued straight ahead, crossing perpendicular to the runway.  
The witnesses then heard an increase in engine power and observed the airplane enter a climb.  
The 15-hour student pilot receiving instruction told a witness that he saw the powerlines 
crossing their flight path, and 'they pulled up hard and barely missed them.'  The witnesses 
reported that after clearing the powerlines, 'the left wing of the airplane dropped and the 
airplane appeared to stall and spin toward the ground.' 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The flight instructor's inadvertent stall while performing an evasive maneuver to avoid 
colliding with powerlines. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION
2. (C) MANEUVER TO AVOID OBSTRUCTIONS - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
3. (C) STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
Page 2 of 5FTW99LA205
Factual Information
 On August 1, 1999, at 1957 central daylight time, a Cessna 150L airplane, N444UF, was 
substantially damaged following a loss of control while maneuvering in the traffic pattern at 
the Coulter Field Airport, near Bryan, Texas.  The flight instructor sustained minor injuries and 
the student pilot was not injured.  The airplane was owned by Preiss Enterprises, Inc., and 
operated by United Flight Systems, Inc., both of College Station, Texas.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight for which a flight plan was 
not filed.  The local flight departed from the Easterwood Field Airport (CLL), near College 
Station, Texas, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.  
The 750-hour flight instructor reported to the operator that "the engine started sputtering and 
lost power while the airplane was abeam the departure end of the runway while on a left 
downwind for runway 14."  The flight instructor stated that he intended to land the airplane on 
a short taxiway perpendicular to the approach end of runway 32.  During his approach to the 
taxiway, engine power was reestablished, and he elected to initiate a climb to return to home 
base.  The flight instructor added that the engine lost power again during climb out, "and the 
airplane stalled."  The airplane impacted on the shoulder of a highway, went through a fence, 
and came to rest in a field in the inverted position.
Pilot/witnesses standing outside the terminal building at the airport reported that the airplane 
had been operating in the closed traffic pattern, performing touch-and-go landings on runway 
14.  They stated that when the airplane was established on a left downwind, abeam the south 
boundary of the airport, they heard the sound of the engine go from full power to idle.  They 
observed the airplane make a left turn and descend toward the south end of the airport.  The 
pilots commented that they expected the airplane to make a right turn and land downwind on 
runway 32.  They reported that the flaps were extended to about 10 degrees.  
The witnesses added that the airplane continued to descend perpendicular to the runway, and 
crossed the approach end of the runway at an estimated altitude of 150 feet agl.  When the 
airplane was just a few feet above the ground, the witnesses heard the sound of an increase to 
what sounded like full takeoff power.  The airplane initiated a climb until it reached the 
southwest boundary of the airport, which was paralleled by a 25-foot-tall powerline.  At 
powerline level, the airplane abruptly assumed a nose high attitude and cleared the powerlines.  
After clearing the powerlines, "the left wing of the airplane dropped and the airplane appeared 
to stall and spin toward the ground."  The airplane "fell almost vertically with the engine still 
running at full power." 
The 15-hour student pilot told one of the witnesses that he observed the powerlines in their 
flight path, and they "pulled up hard and barely missed them."      
Examination of the airplane by the operator revealed spar damage to both wings and structural 
damage to the vertical stabilizer and engine firewall.  The operator estimated that the airplane 
had approximately 18 gallons of fuel on board at the time of the accident.  The 1973 model 
airplane was not equipped with shoulder harnesses for either occupant.  The flight instructor 
sustained minor facial injuries during the accident.
Page 3 of 5FTW99LA205
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
23, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/13/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
750 hours (Total, all aircraft), 240 hours (Total, this make and model), 620 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 200 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N444UF
Model/Series:
150L 150L
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
150-75192
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
PREISS ENTERPRISES INC.
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
UNITED FLIGHT SYSTEMS INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
UNITED FLIGHT SYSTEMS INC.
Operator Designator Code:
Page 4 of 5FTW99LA205
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CLL, 321 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1953 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
177°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
32°C / 31°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
COLLEGE STATION, TX 
(CLL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1927 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
COULTER FIELD AIRPORT (CFD)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
367 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
14
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
4000 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
HECTOR     R CASANOVA
Adopted Date:
11/30/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
ROBERT J IOZIA; HOUSTON, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5FTW99LA205
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
