Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CORNELL, WI
Accident Number:
CHI00FA129
Date & Time:
05/02/2000, 1050 CDT 
Registration:
N13145
Aircraft:
Cessna 172M
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane was destroyed by impact with terrain and by fire following a loss of control during 
climbout.  The pilot and two passengers sustained fatal injuries.  A witness stated, 'I observed 
him taxi and the next I observed was the takeoff.  I observed some flaps that seemed to be a 
short field takeoff.  It appeared to not gain the normal altitude. He seemed to be in a climb 
attitude (not steep) and the flaps remained on.  My estimate is aprox. 1 mile before he made his 
left turn.'  He further stated, 'He made the normal pattern for downwind and was still in a 
climb attitude but not gaining altitude and the flaps appeared to be on.  I observed downwind 
and he seemed to still not gain altitude and appeared to be about 1 1/2 tree lengths above the 
trees.  My line of vision was then obscured by a tree and I heard the crash.  I can not remember 
if the engine was running at the time of impact.  It was through the rest.  (During the initial 
climb and takeoff [the airplane operator] ran into the Unicom and called for [the pilot] to raise 
the flaps. No response.  The flaps I believe never went up.)'  Another witness stated, 
'Crashed/looked as if stalled then nose down and left.  Airplane sounded at full power still at or 
till sound of crash.'  The airplane was found impacting terrain approximately 80 degrees pitch 
down.  An on-scene investigation revealed flight control and engine continuity and the engine 
exhibited a thumb compression at all cylinders.  The flap jackscrew was recovered and 
exhibited 5.9 inches of thread extension which indicated 40 degrees of flap extension. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot not maintaining aircraft control and the stall/spin he encountered.  A factor was the 
extended flaps. 
Page 2 of 7CHI00FA129
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) FLIGHT CONTROL,FLAP - EXTENDED
2. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
4. (C) STALL/SPIN - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7CHI00FA129
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 2, 2000, at 1050 central daylight time, a Cessna 172M, N13145, piloted by a private 
pilot, was destroyed by impact with terrain and post impact fire following a loss of control 
during climbout from runway 27 (2,420 feet X 45 feet, dry/asphalt) at Cornell Municipal 
Airport, near Cornell, Wisconsin.  The personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  No flight plan was on 
file.  The pilot and two passengers sustained fatal injuries.  The local flight was originating at 
the time of the accident.
A witness stated, "About time of rotation (nose wheel off) noticed flaps out.  [A]mount of 
deflection unknown.  [L]ooked as if flaps came out/down as climb out proceeded.  Wasn't 
climbing well/poor rate of climb.  Never got above 200-250 ft. AGL.  Airplane came around 
toward downwind leg of pattern.  Airplane looked in slow flight attitude.  Sounded as if in full 
power.  Airplane then went out of sight [and] crashed.  Crashed/looked as if stalled then nose 
down and left.  Airplane sounded at full power still at or till sound of crash."
Another witness stated, "I observed him taxi and the next I observed was the takeoff.  I 
observed some flaps that seemed to be a short field takeoff.  It appeared to not gain the normal 
altitude.  He seemed to be in a climb attitude (not steep) and the flaps remained on.  My 
estimate is aprox. 1 mile before he made his left turn."  He further stated, "He made the normal 
pattern for downwind and was still in a climb attitude but not gaining altitude and the flaps 
appeared to be on.  I observed downwind and he seemed to still not gain altitude and appeared 
to be about 1 1/2 tree lengths above the trees.  My line of vision was then obscured by a tree 
and I heard the crash.  I can not remember if the engine was running at the time of impact.  It 
was through the rest.  (During the initial climb and takeoff [the airplane operator] ran into the 
Unicom and called for [the pilot] to raise the flaps.  No response.  The flaps I believe never 
went up.)"
Another witness stated, "The plane crossed the highway and then I noticed the wings tipping 
up and down.  It appeared to barely clear the trees over the wooded area on the south side of 
highway."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was an instrument rated private pilot.  He held a Third Class Medical Certificate 
dated July 2, 1997.  The medical indicated that he had asthma and it required him to carry an 
inhaler to exercise the rights of his certificate.  His logbook and records indicated he had a total 
of 223 hours of flight time and two hours of flight time in the last 90 days.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a Cessna 172M, serial number 172-62528.  The airplane had its annual 
inspection performed on July 23, 1999.  The airplane accumulated 6958 hours total time and 
50 hours since its last inspection.  The engine accumulated 4560 hours total time and 412 
hours since its last overhaul.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1055, the Rice Lake Municipal, Rice Lake, Wisconsin, weather was: Wind 200 degrees at 5 
Page 4 of 7CHI00FA129
knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition clear; temperature 14 degrees C; dew point 8 
degrees C; altimeter 30.11 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest in a field 223 degrees and .3 nautical miles from Cornell Municipal 
Airport and was located at latitude 45 degrees 09.662' N and longitude 091 degrees 06.650' W. 
The airplane was found resting approximately 80 degrees pitch down and on a 280 degree 
heading.  The fuselage was found destroyed by fire.  The left and right wings were found 
attached to their struts.  The left wing tip was found imbedded in terrain immediately adjacent 
the wing and the outboard two feet of its leading edge was crushed rearward.  The right wing's 
leading was crushed rearward from its strut outboard to the wing tip.  The empennage was 
found inverted, resting on the ground, and on the left wing.  The right elevator and rudder were 
destroyed by fire.  The engine and propeller were found beneath the fuselage and were 
imbedded in soil.
An on-scene investigation was conducted.  Control continuity was established to all control 
surfaces.  Control continuity was established to the engine.  The engine exhibited a thumb 
compression at all cylinders.  Three and a half gallons of blue liquid were recovered from the 
compromised left fuel tank.  The flap jackscrew was recovered and exhibited 5.9 inches of 
thread extension.  According to the Cessna representative, the thread extension indicated 40 
degrees of flap extension.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Office of the Medical Examiner, County of Ramsey, State of Minnesota performed an 
autopsy on the pilot, on May 3, 2000.
The Federal Aviation Administration Civil Aeromedical Institute prepared a Final Forensic 
Toxicology Fatal Accident Report.  The report on the pilot was negative for the tests performed.
FIRE
The airplane sustained a post impact fire.  The fire destroyed the cabin, the right wing inboard 
of the strut, fuselage, and the empennage forward and right of the left elevator.  Vegetation 
near the impact caught on fire.  A fire stop ditch was dug.  The airplane operator reported that 
a three and a half acre grass fire occurred.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Parties to the investigation included the Federal Aviation Administration, Cessna Aircraft 
Company, and Textron Lycoming.
The airplane wreckage was released to a representative of the operator on May 4, 2000.
Page 5 of 7CHI00FA129
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
20, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/02/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
223 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N13145
Model/Series:
172M 172M
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
172-62528
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/23/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
50 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6958 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-E2D
Registered Owner:
W R O, INC.
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
CORNELL AERO WORKS
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7CHI00FA129
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
RPD, 1105 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
32 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1055 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
297°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
200°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
, WI (4T5)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1050 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
CORNELL MUNICIPAL AIRPORT (4T5)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1150 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2420 ft / 45 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
EDWARD     F MALINOWSKI
Adopted Date:
04/18/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
ROBERT W GAY; MILWAUKEE, WI
ANDREW L HALL; WICHITA, KS
GREGORY   ERIKSON; WAYNE, IL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7CHI00FA129
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
