Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SALEM, OR
Accident Number:
SEA00LA079
Date & Time:
05/01/2000, 0818 PDT 
Registration:
N1143L
Aircraft:
MORTON CHRISTAVIA MARK I
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot/builder of the kitplane took off from runway 13 on the aircraft's initial test flight and 
immediately encountered a nose heavy condition.  He declared an emergency and maneuvered 
to land on runway 34.  He reported that during his approach the aircraft was controllable as 
long as power was applied, but on short final he instinctively reduced power and the nose of 
the aircraft abruptly pitched down.  The aircraft then impacted the ground and slid up onto the 
runway.  The center of gravity range limits had been calculated by the pilot/builder as between 
10.5 to 19.5 inches with the aircraft's empty weight CG at 11.0 inches. Following the 
calculations, the pilot/builder changed the aircraft's battery (located forward of the cockpit) 
which added 7 pounds, and added a new engine exhaust system adding 2-3 additional pounds.  
A new CG was not calculated.  Center of gravity calculations based on the earlier weight/CG of 
the aircraft, including the weight of the pilot and the 96 pounds of fuel also placed the CG 0.5 
inch forward of the old forward limit. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot/builder's failure to correct the center of gravity computations after a weight increase.  
A contributing factor was the pilot/builder's exceeding the forward CG limit in fuel weight, of 
which both conditions resulted in a degradation of aircraft control. 
Page 2 of 6SEA00LA079
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - NOT CORRECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - EXCEEDED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. AIRCRAFT CONTROL - DIMINISHED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 6SEA00LA079
Factual Information
 On May 1, 2000, at 0818 Pacific daylight time, an experimental Morton Christavia Mark I 
kitplane, N1143L, registered to, and constructed and being flown by a private pilot, was 
substantially damaged during an in-flight collision with terrain following a loss of control while 
on short final to runway 34, at McNary Field, Salem, Oregon.  The pilot was uninjured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions existed, and no flight plan had been filed.  The flight, which was a 
maintenance check flight, was to have been operated under 14CFR91, and originated from 
McNary Field at 0816.
According to tower personnel, the pilot radioed that the aircraft had a brand new engine 
installed and was on a maintenance check flight.  Immediately after takeoff from runway 13, 
the pilot declared an emergency and was cleared to land on runway 34.  The controller 
reported that on short final the aircraft suddenly pitched nose down and impacted terrain.  The 
airport manager examined the impact site and reported that the aircraft impacted terrain 281 
feet short of the threshold, skidded up on to the runway tearing out a runway threshold light, 
and then came to rest along the east edge of the runway 236 feet north of the threshold.  Both 
main landing gear were torn off and slash marks characteristic of propeller strikes were 
observed in the soil immediately following the initial ground impact.
The pilot reported that he took off from Salem on the initial test flight for the aircraft and 
experienced a nose-heavy condition during climb out.  He requested immediate clearance to 
return and land and turned back toward the field.  He reported that he "needed power for 
control and while trying to make [a] wheel landing contacted [the] ground approximately 200 
[feet] short of [the] runway end."  During an interview with an inspector from the Federal 
Aviation Administration's Hillsboro Flight Standards District Office, the pilot reported that 
during his approach the aircraft was controllable as long as power was applied, and that on 
short final he instinctively reduced the power for landing and the nose of the aircraft abruptly 
pitched down.  He was unable to recover control prior to the ground impact.
According to the center of gravity (CG) calculations provided by the pilot/builder, the aircraft's 
empty weight was 1,053 pounds and its arm was 11.0 inches.  The arm for the forward pilot seat 
was 18 inches and the arm for the forward mounted fuel tank was -15 inches.  The 
documentation provided also indicated that the forward CG limit was 10.5 inches and the aft 
limit was 19.5 inches.
The CG at the time of the accident was calculated for the aircraft based on the previous 
information, plus a weight of 170 pounds for the pilot from his most recent medical 
examination, and the pilot's  reported total of 16 gallons of aviation fuel (96 pounds) aboard at 
takeoff, as follows:
            WEIGHT              ARM              MOMENT ACFT  WT   1,053 lb       11 inches       11,583 
inch-pounds PILOT WT      170 lb       18 inches         3,060 inch-pounds FUEL  WT        96 lb      -
15 inches        -1,440 inch-pounds
TOTAL WT   1,319 lb       10 inches       13,203 inch-pounds
The center of gravity under these conditions (10 inches) would lie one-half inch forward of the 
forward most CG limit.
In a telephone conversation with the pilot/builder, he reported that after having worked up the 
Page 4 of 6SEA00LA079
basic aircraft CG figures he then made two changes within the aircraft.  The first was the 
replacement of the aircraft battery with a larger unit weighing 7 pounds more than the former 
battery.  The battery was located forward of the cockpit.  The second was the replacement of 
the engine exhaust assembly with a newer, stainless steel system which weighed 2 to 3 pounds 
more than the former.  These two changes would have changed the aircraft CG, making the 
aircraft more nose heavy.
The pilot/builder reported on his submitted NTSB Form 6120.1/2 under the 
"Recommendation" section that "closer attention by [the] builder to COG due to heavier 
equipment being placed after [the] COG [was] figured - builder's failure to re-work COG 
figures."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
70, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/11/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
624 hours (Total, all aircraft), 624 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MORTON
Registration:
N1143L
Model/Series:
CHRISTAVIA MARK I 
CHRISTAVIA
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
2
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
0 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-235
Registered Owner:
MORTON, JOHN, W.
Rated Power:
108 hp
Operator:
MORTON, JOHN, W.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6SEA00LA079
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SLE, 210 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0756 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (SLE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
0816 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
MCNARY FIELD (SLE)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
210 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5145 ft / 140 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing; 
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
STEVEN     A MCCREARY
Adopted Date:
12/04/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
PINAR   CRANE; HILLSBORO, OR
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA00LA079
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
