National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CHARLOTTESVILLE, VA
Accident Number: BFO96LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/1995, 1615 EDT
Registration: N226WR
Aircraft: RUDY KITFOX 1
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the airplane was in cruise flight at 2,700 feet MSL when the engine lost power.
His attempts to restart the engine were unsuccessful, so he made a forced landing on a golf course.
During landing, the airplane collided with tall trees.
The pilot stated that the airplane was filled to its capacity (9.5 gallons) at the departure airport.
The loss of engine power occurred about 1.5 hours after departure.
Postaccident examination revealed that there was no fuel in the carburetor bowl/fuel system.
Expected fuel consumption for the engine was 6.5 gallons per hour.
The aircraft manufacturer recommended installing a low fuel warning system, but this aircraft was not so equipped.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's improper fuel management which resulted in fuel exhaustion.
A related factor was the pilot's inadequate fuel consumption calculations.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(F) FUEL CONSUMPTION CALCULATIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 3.
(C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On October 1, 1995, at 1615 eastern daylight time, a Rudy Kitfox homebuilt airplane, N226WR, operated by the airplane owner/builder, lost engine power during cruise flight and collided with trees during the forced landing near Charlottesville, Virginia.
The certificated private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The airplane was destroyed.
The airplane was operated as a personal flight under 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, no flight plan was filed.
The flight departed Farmville, Virginia, at approximately 1445.
The intended destination was New Market, Virginia.
According to the pilot, he departed New Market and flew to Farmville.
He reported that at Farmville he "...refueled, topped [the] main tank (9.5 gallon capacity).
It took 7 gallons [of fuel] to fill [the] tank."
He stated that about 1.5 hours into the flight the engine lost power, and his attempts to restart the engine were unsuccessful.
The pilot stated that when the engine lost power, the airplane was at 2700 feet Mean Sea Level (MSL) over wooded, hilly terrain.
He reported that he tried to land on a golf course, but the airplane touched down in a clump of trees short of the intended landing site.
The aircraft was examined at the accident site by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector.
The examination revealed no fuel in the carburetor bowl.
The FAA Inspector stated that the expected fuel consumption for the accident airplane/engine is 6.5 gallons per hour at 6300-6500 RPM.
He reported that the accident airplane had previously only completed short flights, so the actual fuel consumption of that airplane had not been documented.
The FAA Inspector also stated that the aircraft manufacturer recommended installing a low fuel warning system.
The accident airplane was not equipped with that system.
The pilot reported that there was no mechanical malfunction.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
