Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Elverta, CA
Accident Number:
WPR11LA122
Date & Time:
02/04/2011, 1422 PST 
Registration:
N416WC
Aircraft:
McDonnell Douglas Helicopters 
369E (MD500E)
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
Analysis 
A lineman was on the skid of the helicopter installing high-power electrical lines on a power 
line structure. The pilot positioned the helicopter about 30 to 50 feet from the structure. The 
main rotor blades made contact with an installation rope, which then wrapped around the 
mast as the blades pulled it in. The pilot lost control of the helicopter, and it began an 
uncontrolled descent to the ground. A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine 
revealed no mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. It is likely that 
the pilot misjudged the distance between the rotor blades and the installation rope.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot did not maintain rotor blade clearance from an installation rope while maneuvering 
to install power lines.
Findings
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause)
Monitoring environment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Wire - Response/compensation (Cause)
Wire - Effect on equipment (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR11LA122
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 4, 2011, about 1422 Pacific standard time, a McDonnell Douglas Helicopters 369E 
(MD500E), N416WC, became entangled with a sock line rope used to string power lines near 
Elverta, California. Wilson Construction Company was operating the helicopter under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 133. The commercial pilot and one 
passenger sustained minor injuries; the helicopter sustained substantial damage to the 
airframe and main rotor blades. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan 
had been filed.
The operator reported that the helicopter was working on a project to construct 30 miles of 
high power electrical lines, which are oriented north-south. It is not possible to pull the 
conductor wire through bundled travelers unless the sock line is actually in contact with the 
roller. Construction crews install a hold down, which is a temporary block that they secure to a 
ground anchor. They adjust the anchor rope to force the sock line to rest in the bundle block 
traveler when in tension. The operator noted that it is standard industry practice to use a 
helicopter to install a hold down. 
A lineman was on the skid of the helicopter, which was in position to install a hold down at a 
power line structure. The pilot positioned the helicopter about 30-50 feet south of the 
structure; his flagman was facing the west. The pilot believed that he was properly positioned 
near the sock line so that they could perform the task safely.
The lineman on the skid placed the larger of the two hold down ropes over the sock line, and 
allowed it to fall onto the west side. The lineman allowed the hold down block to hang by the 
large rope just below and on the east side of the sock line. The large rope tangled as it fell to the 
ground. The lineman on the ground grabbed the end of the rope, and tried to clear the tangle. 
The lineman on the skid had one hand on the hold down, and was preparing to release the 
second, smaller rope downward on the western side of the sock line with the other hand.
The main rotor blades made contact with the sock line rope, which wrapped around the mast 
as the blades pulled it in. The pilot lost control of the helicopter, and it began an uncontrolled 
descent to the ground. The helicopter came to rest upright about 10 feet south of the power line 
structure. The lineman on the skid was lying on the ground, but still attached to the helicopter 
by her fall restraint and positioning belt. The pilot extricated himself from the helicopter.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Investigators from the FAA, Boeing, and Rolls-Royce Allison (RR) examined the wreckage at 
the operator™s facilities at McLellan Airfield, Sacramento, California, on February 9, 2011.
The investigators examined the airframe and engine, with no mechanical anomalies identified 
that would have precluded normal operation.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-hover
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)  (Defining event)
Page 3 of 5WPR11LA122
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
57, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/28/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/11/2010
Flight Time:
22500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 17600 hours (Total, this make and model), 22500 hours (Pilot 
In Command, all aircraft), 75 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
McDonnell Douglas 
Helicopters
Registration:
N416WC
Model/Series:
369E (MD500E) 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0268E
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/26/2011, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
6256 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls-Royce Allison
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20B
Registered Owner:
Wilson Construction Company
Rated Power:
420 hp
Operator:
Wilson Construction Company
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Page 4 of 5WPR11LA122
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dawn
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSMF, 27 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
252°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.31 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
15°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Elverta, CA 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Elverta, CA 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
38.718333, -121.478333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard D Plagens
Adopted Date:
03/28/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Gerry Griswold; FAA FSDO; Sacramento, CA
Adrian Booth; Boeing; Mesa, AZ
Jon-Adam Michael; Rolls-Royce; Indianapolis, IN
Anthony Helbling; Wilson Construction; Canby, OR
Publish Date:
03/28/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=78282
Page 5 of 5WPR11LA122
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
