Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Slaton, TX
Accident Number:
CEN15LA138
Date & Time:
02/05/2015, 1510 CST 
Registration:
N602PB
Aircraft:
AIR TRACTOR INC AT 602
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
Analysis 
The pilot, who had 3 hours of flight time in the agricultural airplane, was taking off on the 
planned cross-country flight, which was the first flight after the installation of a digital engine 
data monitor (EDM) on the airplane 6 days previously. The pilot reported that the initial 
takeoff seemed normal but that, halfway down the runway, red warning lights illuminated on 
the EDM. Although he reported that he thought the airspeed was low, the pilot was able to 
climb the airplane to 150 ft. The airplane lost altitude, and the pilot landed in a field. The 
landing gear dug into the soft dirt, and the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted. The 
pilot added that, although he added full throttle, the engine never developed full power. 
Examination of the airplane did not reveal any anomalies that would have prevented the 
engine from producing normal power. A review of the airplane™s maintenance records showed 
that the EDM was installed under a supplemental type certificate, which included instructions 
and initial setup and installation checklists. However, a completed copy of neither the setup 
nor installation checklists were found in the records. The maintenance entry noted that ground 
runs and leak checks were completed, and no defects were noted.
Review of the EDM data revealed two files that contained engine starts; one from 3 days before 
the accident flight and one from the accident flight. The first data file showed that the engine 
propeller rpm reached a maximum of 950 rpm, indicating that this was a ground run and that 
the engine power setting was not increased above flight idle. During the accident flight, the 
engine propeller rpm reached a maximum of 1,730 rpm at an engine torque of 1,304 ft-lbs. 
Although the pilot said he advanced the throttle to obtain full power, a review of the EDM data 
revealed the torque was below its maximum value and was reduced several times during the 
flight.
Postaccident examination revealed that the EDM™s engine operating range for the propeller 
was correctly set at the maximum 1,700 rpm; rpm readings above 1,700 would have been 
indicated by red warning lights. Based on the information, it is likely that the aircraft 
manufacturer set the maximum propeller rpm higher than 1,700 rpm (using the airplane™s 
analog instruments), allowing the propeller rpm to exceed 1,700 rpm, which resulted in the red 
Page 2 of 7CEN15LA138
lights illuminating, as reported by the pilot. If maintenance personnel had followed the initial 
setup/installation checklists that were included in the installation instructions for the EDM, 
they likely would have identified that the maximum propeller rpm was not set properly and 
corrected it. The accident is consistent with the pilot reacting to the EDM™s warning 
indications, likely due to his lack of experience in the airplane make and model.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Maintenance personnel™s improper installation of the engine data monitor (EDM), which was 
not in accordance with the supplemental type certificate instructions and resulted in engine 
warning indications and the pilot™s subsequent reaction to the warning indications due to his 
lack of experience with the EDM and airplane.
Findings
Aircraft
Maintenance/inspections - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Total experience w/ equipment - Pilot (Cause)
Installation - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Use of available resources - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Environmental issues
Wet/muddy terrain - Contributed to outcome
Page 3 of 7CEN15LA138
Factual Information
On February 5, 2015, about 1510 central standard time, an Air Tractor AT-602, airplane, 
N602PB, impacted terrain shortly after departing the Slaton Municipal Airport (F49), Slaton, 
Texas. The commercial rated pilot was not injured and the airplane was substantially damaged. 
The airplane was registered to Neal Aircraft, Inc., Slaton, Texas and operated by Frontier Ag 
Inc., Oakley, Kansas, under the provisions of the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a 
cross country flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that prior to departure the airplane was filled with fuel.  After engine start, 
he taxied to runway 18, and conducted an engine run-up with no anomalies noted.  The initial 
takeoff appeared normal; however, about half way down the runway, he noticed a "lack of 
airspeed" and the engine monitor was flashing "several red lights".   About this time, the 
airplane became airborne.  The pilot added that he was able to climb to about 150 feet, before 
he noticed an additional power loss.   He kept adding throttle and even with full power 
selected, the airplane lost altitude.  The pilot was able to land in a field south of the airport; 
however, the landing gear dug into the soft dirt and the airplane nosed over, coming to rest 
inverted. The pilot added that the engine never developed full power, even after adding full 
throttle.
Examination of the airplane by the responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector revealed the vertical stabilizer and wings were substantially damaged, and the engine 
was fractured at the propeller reduction gearbox.  The airplane was equipped with an AmSafe 
airbag system; however, the airbags did not deploy during the accident.
The airplane was recovered to a nearby hangar for further examination.  The engine was 
removed from the airframe and sent to Pratt & Whitney, Service Investigation Center, in 
Bridgeport, West Virginia, for further examination.  The associated engine pressure line (Py) 
line was retained for examination, at Air Tractor's facility in Olney, Texas.   The Electronics 
International, MVP-50 Engine Monitor, which was recently installed, was downloaded for 
review. Pratt & Whitney, along with Air Tractor under the supervision of the FAA conducted an 
engine examination on April 1, 2015.  The engine a PT6A-65AG had accumulated 273 hours, 
per the engine maintenance record, dated January 30, 2015.  The gas generator module was 
deformed and had contact signatures with internal components.  The compressor and power 
turbine rotational signatures were indicative of rotation at impact; however, the level of engine 
power produced could not be determined.   Examination and bench testing of the fuel control 
unit, fuel pump and flow divider valve, did not reveal any defects.  Additionally, a visual 
examination and disassembly of the propeller governor did not reveal any anomalies.
The flexible air signal line  (Py) is a reference pressure line runs from the propeller governor on 
the forward end of the engine to the Fuel Control Unit (FCU).  The line pressure is used by the 
FCU to regulate fuel flow to the engine. Complete loss of this pressure results in the FCU 
reducing fuel flow. The flexible line was installed by Air Tractor during aircraft production 
under Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) #SE8652SW and is a replacement for the Pratt & 
Whitney rigid Py line. Examination of the Py line was conducted by Air Tractor, on September 
9, 2015, under the supervision of the NTSB.  The line was pressurized using standard shop air 
pressure (approximately 125 psi) and was submerged in water to check for leaks. No air leakage 
was noted during the test.
The engine examination did not reveal any pre-impact anomalies that would have precluded 
Page 4 of 7CEN15LA138
normal engine operation.
A review of the aircraft maintenance records revealed that the Electronics International Inc., 
MVP-50T, engine monitor's installation, was completed on January 30, 2015.  The log entry 
noted that the monitor was installed under STC # SA02135SE. The entry noted that ground 
runs and leak checks were completed and no defects noted.  The STC installation of the 
monitor included instructions, an initial setup, and installation checklists.  A completed copy of 
either the setup or installation checklists, were not found in the records. The accident flight 
was the airplane's first flight after installation of the engine monitor.  Review of the monitor's 
setup revealed the unit's clock was set to one hour earlier then local time, and the fuel flow 
calibration factor, was off by a factor of 10, meaning the monitor would indicate fuel flow ten 
times the actual fuel flow.
Each time electrical power is applied to the engine monitor a file is created.  Download of the 
data revealed 32 data files, with dates ranging from January 19, 2015 to February 5, 2015.  Only 
two of the files contained engine starts; February 2, 2015 and the accident flight on February, 
5, 2015.  The data for the February 2nd file, logged a maximum reading of 950 rpm for the 
engine propeller.
Reviewing the February 5 data obtained from the engine monitor, showed propeller rpm 
increasing at 14:10:27 (engine monitor time), consistent with start of the takeoff roll.  The rpm 
reading went to zero (propeller stops) at 14:11:41; about a one minute and fourteen second 
flight.
During the takeoff run, the propeller rpm reached 1,730 rpm at an engine torque of 1,304 ft-
lbs.  About 21 seconds after power was applied for the takeoff, the torque reached 1,492 ft-lbs, 
and was the maximum seen for the entire flight.  The torque then dropped to about 1,200 ft-lbs 
and remained there for about 20 seconds before further reduction was noted.   The propeller 
rpm remained at 1,730 rpm for about 32 seconds after maximum torque was reached, then 
dropped below 1,700 rpm, with a torque reading of 736 ft-lbs,  The torque then dropped into 
the 500 ft-lbs range, before a slight increase was noted about 10 seconds before the crash; the 
rise was followed by a decrease in the torque.
The engine's maximum torque was 3,245 ft lbs, with a propeller maximum limit of 1,700 rpm. 
The maximum rpm would have been set on the propeller governor at Air Tractor, using the 
standard airplane's analog instruments.
The engine monitor's engine operating range for the propeller was correctly set at 1,700 rpm.  
Rpm readings above the maximum of 1,700 would have been indicated to the pilot by red 
warning light.
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate and ratings for single engine-land and instrument- 
airplane. The pilot reported that he had 561 total flight hours and 3 hours in the accident 
airplane make and model.
Page 5 of 7CEN15LA138
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft maintenance event
Takeoff
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
23
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/29/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
561 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3 hours (Total, this make and model), 514 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 24.1 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10.5 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2.2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AIR TRACTOR INC
Registration:
N602PB
Model/Series:
AT 602 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
602-1233
Landing Gear Type: 
Unknown
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/07/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
273.1 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
PT-6A
Registered Owner:
Neal Aircraft Inc.
Rated Power:
Operator:
Frontier Ag Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Agricultural Aircraft (137)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
HIXG
Page 6 of 7CEN15LA138
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KLBB
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
310°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 25000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.25 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Slaton, TX (F49)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Oakley, KS (KOEL)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1510 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Slaton Muncipal (F49)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
3123 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4244 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.483611, -101.661111 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Craig Hatch
Adopted Date:
01/05/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Daniel Vengen; FAA FSDO; Lubbock, TX
Kyle Schroeder; Air Tractor; Olney, TX
Publish Date:
01/05/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90696
Page 7 of 7CEN15LA138
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
