National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Maryville, MO
Accident Number: GAA16CA357
Date & Time: 07/01/2016, 1912 CDT
Registration: N8704M
Aircraft: BEECH 23
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Controlled flight into terr/obj
(CFIT)
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that on final approach to runway 17, he was "distracted" by the runway composition and dimensions.
The pilot reported that he identified the high tension power lines just before impact.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage aft of the cabin, and the empennage.
The pilot reported that there were no mechanical failures or anomalies with any portion of the airplane during the flight that would have prevented normal flight operations.
The Airport/Facility Directory states the dimensions and composition of the runway, displaced threshold and the high tension power lines as: The first 630 feet of the runway is gravel and turf, and the width is 60 feet.
The next 1300 feet of runway is a 14 foot wide section of concrete with 18 feet of turf on both sides of the concrete.
The final 1120 feet of runway is a 12 to 25 foot wide section of gravel and asphalt chips, with 12.5 to17.5 feet of turf on both sides of the gravel and asphalt chips.
The displaced threshold is marked with 5 tires on each side of the runway.
High tension power line wires are about 1200 feet north of the runway threshold and do not have any safety markings.
The power lines that the airplane struck intersect and cross the approach end of runway 17 at approximately 30 degrees.
Furthermore, the power lines are depicted on the FAA Aeronautical Chart for the airport.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to see and avoid power lines on approach during landing, resulting a power line strike, uncontrolled descent, and collision with terrain.
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's inadequate pre-flight planning.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93536
