National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Midland, VA
Accident Number: NYC03LA187
Date & Time: 09/01/2003, 1830 EDT
Registration: N7615Z
Aircraft: Piper PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot departed with about 15 gallons of fuel in the airplane, and flew for about 1 hour 15 minutes, when the engine lost power, about 1 mile from the airport.
As the pilot prepared for a forced landing to a field, he noted the left fuel gauge read 1/8-full, and the right fuel gauge, indicated just less than 1/4-full.
During the landing rollout, the pilot applied right rudder to stay aligned with the field, and the airplane nosed-over.
An on-scene examination of the airplane revealed no pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.
The engine was test run on the airframe, using its own fuel system.
It started and ran through various power settings for several minutes, with no abnormalities noted.
According to the Piper PA-18 Owner's Handbook, the fuel consumption for the airplane was 9 gallons per hour.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Loss of engine power due to unknown circumstances.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND ---------- Occurrence #4: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Factual Information On September 1, 2003, at 1830 eastern daylight time, N7615Z, a Piper PA-18-150, was substantially damaged during a forced landing, following a loss of engine power in Midland, Virginia.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the flight which originated at the Horse Feathers Airport (53VA), Midland, Virginia.
The local personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that the accident flight was the airplane's first flight since the engine had undergone a field overhaul.
According to the pilot, after flying for about 1 hour 15 minutes, while in cruise flight, the engine lost power.
The airplane was at an altitude of 1,600-1,700 feet msl, and about 1 mile from the departure airport.
As the pilot prepared for a forced landing, he realized that the airplane would not be able to make it to the airport, and he attempted a forced landing to a field.
The pilot extended full flaps while on final approach, and the airplane touched down at the mid- point of the field.
During the landing rollout, the pilot applied right rudder to stay aligned with the field, and the airplane nosed-over.
The pilot reported that all preflight and in-flight engine indications appeared normal prior to the loss of engine power.
At the time of the power loss, the left fuel tank gauge indicated 1/8- full, and the right fuel tank gauge, which had been selected for the entire flight, indicated just less than 1/4-full.
The pilot departed with approximately 15 gallons of fuel for the flight.
The on-scene examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed no obvious pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.
The inspector was unable to visually inspect the fuel tanks due to the inverted position of the airplane; however, the surrounding vegetation in the area of the fuel tanks appeared discolored and had an odor consistent with aviation fuel.
During the recovery of the airplane, it was noted that "little" fuel was left in the fuel tanks; however, the fuel vent system consisted of drilled holes in the fuel tank caps.
The engine was test run on the airframe, using its own fuel system.
The engine started and ran at various power settings for several minutes, with no abnormalities noted.
According to the Piper PA-18 Owner's Handbook, the fuel consumption for the airplane was 9 gallons per hour.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 36, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
