National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Hillsboro, OR
Accident Number: SEA03LA182
Date & Time: 09/01/2003, 1115 PDT
Registration: N5301W
Aircraft: Pitts S-2A
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that due to the aircraft's configuration, she was unable to see the runway while on short final and in the flare.
The pilot intended to land as close to the numbers as possible.
The aircraft touched down short of the runway on the grassy embankment that descends below the runway elevation.
The aircraft bounced onto the runway, the landing gear collapsed and the aircraft slid on its belly to a stop.
A post-crash fire consumed the aircraft.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain the proper distance and altitude while on final approach which led to touching down short of the runway.
The pilot's restricted visual lookout was a factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: UNDERSHOOT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) VISUAL LOOKOUT - RESTRICTED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft was subsequently destroyed by a post-crash fire.
The private pilot, the sole occupant, received minor injuries.
The flight departed from Independence, Oregon, about 45 minutes prior to the accident.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that a standard pattern was flown for an approach and landing on runway 02.
While on final approach, the pilot noted that the runway "looked very up sloped toward the north (far) end and it seemed short,"  therefore she intended to land as close to the numbers as possible.
The pilot reported that due to the aircraft's configuration, she was unable to see the runway while on short final and in the flare.
The approach and landing was reported as normal until the aircraft touched down short of the runway edge on the grassy embankment that descends below the runway elevation.
The aircraft bounced onto the runway surface, the main landing gear collapsed and the aircraft slid to a stop on its belly.
The aircraft was on fire when the pilot exited the aircraft which was subsequently consumed.
After the accident, two main landing gear impressions were noted in the grassy embankment.
The aircraft came to rest about 125 feet from the runway edge and partially off to the right side of the runway.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 59, Female Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
