Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
DOS PALOS, CA
Accident Number:
LAX00LA062
Date & Time:
01/02/2000, 1430 PST 
Registration:
N7249T
Aircraft:
Cessna 172A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
While en route to the practice area, the student pilot performed several practice turns.  She 
noted a loss of altitude, added throttle to regain altitude, but did not receive corresponding 
power indication.  She checked the fuel selector to make sure it was in the on position, and 
then checked the engine gages.  No discrepancies were noted.  Carburetor heat was applied 
with no response and the rpm's continued to drop.  She crosschecked the engine instruments, 
and reapplied carburetor heat with no change.  With the rpm's continuing to drop, she made an 
emergency landing in a plowed dirt field.  The engine was inspected, and it was noted that the 
retaining nut that attaches the serrated throttle lever to the serrated throttle shaft of the 
carburetor was loose, and the cotter pin was missing.  The serrated portion of the throttle lever 
was unable to properly engage with the serrated stop of the throttle shaft.  The carburetor had 
been replaced during the annual inspection on June 6, 1999, to comply with Airworthiness 
Directives.  No further discrepancies were noted. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power due to the failure of maintenance personnel to properly install 
and safety the throttle arm to the carburetor throttle shaft. 
Page 2 of 6LAX00LA062
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR
2. (C) THROTTLE/POWER LEVER,LINKAGE - LOOSE PART/BOLT/NUT/CLAMP/ETC
3. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
5. LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - SHEARED
Page 3 of 6LAX00LA062
Factual Information
 On January 2, 2000, at 1430 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna 172A, N7249T, experienced 
a partial loss of engine power and came to rest inverted after making an emergency landing in 
an open dirt field near Dos Palos, California.  The airplane, owned and operated by the student 
pilot under 14 CFR Part 91, sustained substantial damage.  The pilot received minor injuries.  
Visual meteorological conditions existed for the instructional flight that had departed the 
Merced, California, airport at 1400.  No flight plan was filed.
In an interview with a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the student pilot 
reported that she had refueled the airplane several weeks prior to the accident flight.  The 
airplane was refueled with approximately 30 gallons, and she had not flown it since it had been 
refueled.  
The pilot stated that during the preflight she verified that she had "in excess of 15 gallons" of 
fuel in each wing by utilizing a graduated fuel gage.  She then checked for fuel contamination 
by taking a sample from the port of each wing with no discrepancies noted.  She reported that 
there were no problems encountered during the run-up or the departure from Merced. 
While en route to the practice area, she performed several practice turns.  About 30 minutes 
into the flight, she noted a loss of altitude and added throttle to regain altitude, but did not 
receive a corresponding power indication.  She noted the fuel selector was in the both position 
and attempted to troubleshoot the problem by switching to the left and then right fuel tank 
positions, and applying carburetor heat.  She stated that there was no change and the rpm's 
continued to drop.  The engine instruments were crosschecked and she reapplied carburetor 
heat with no change.  The pilot reported that the engine was not running rough or sputtering, it 
was just not producing enough power to sustain flight.  During the landing rollout, the nose 
gear dug into the plowed dirt field, collapsed, and the airplane nosed over and came to rest 
inverted.
The student pilot indicated that she had purchased the airplane in June 1999, without the 
logbooks.  The Airframe and Powerplant (A & P) mechanic who performed the annual 
inspection of the airplane sent a letter to the former owner requesting the logbooks.  The 
former owner responded by indicating that the logbooks had been accidentally burned with the 
trash.  In the last entry for the annual performed on June 6, 1999, the A & P mechanic indicates 
that the carburetor was replaced to comply with Airworthiness Directives 72-06-05, 93-19-04 
and 98-01-06.
An engine inspection was conducted at Plain Parts in Pleasant Grove, California, on February 
9, 2000.  It was noted that the retaining nut that holds in place the serrated throttle lever to the 
serrated stop of the throttle shaft of the carburetor did not have a cotter pin.  The retaining nut 
was found loose on the shaft, allowing the serrated portion of the throttle lever to not engage 
properly with the serrated stop of the throttle shaft.
Page 4 of 6LAX00LA062
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
47, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/26/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
64 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N7249T
Model/Series:
172A 172A
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
46849
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/09/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3177 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-300
Registered Owner:
LANA L. BALATTI
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
LANA L. BALATTI
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX00LA062
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MCE, 156 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
21 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
320°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
55°C / 30°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
MERCED, CA (MCE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1400 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TEALEYE    C CORNEJO
Adopted Date:
12/14/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
NORM   WILKINS; FRESNO, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX00LA062
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
