The pilot reported that the airspeed indicator failed during takeoff.  He elected to continue the 
takeoff because there was insufficient distance to stop on the remaining runway.  The pilot 
intended to remain in the traffic pattern and return for landing.  However, as the pilot turned 
to left crosswind the airplane became difficult to control, pitched down and impacted the 
ground.  A post accident examination revealed that the tubing from the pitot tube was 
disconnected from a mating length of tubing located at the left wing root.  The left wing root 
structure was intact and impact damage did not appear to have contributed to the pitot static 
system discontinuity.  No other anomalies associated with a pre-impact failure were observed.
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane due to an inadvertent stall. Contributing 
to the accident was the failure of the airspeed indicator due to separation of the pitot-static line 
at the left wing root.
On May 2, 2009, about 0740 central daylight time, an amateur-built Hawkins Aventura II 
airplane,N20GH, was substantially damaged during an in-flight collision with terrain after 
takeoff from runway 26 (4,900 feet by 75 feet, asphalt) at Griffith-Merrillville Airport (05C), 
Griffith, Indiana.  The flight was being conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
without a flight plan.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The pilot sustained serious 
injuries.  The local flight departed immediately prior to the accident.
The pilot stated that the airspeed indicator failed during takeoff.  He elected to continue the 
takeoff because there was insufficient distance to stop on the remaining runway.  The pilot 
intended to remain in the traffic pattern and return for landing.  However, as he turned to left 
crosswind the airplane became difficult to control, pitched down and impacted the ground.  
The pilot noted that he was briefly knocked unconscious.  When he regained consciousness, the 
engine was still running and he shut it off.  The airplane came to rest in a swampy area about 
600 feet south of the runway.
The amateur-built aircraft sustained damage to the left wing and left side of the nose.  A post 
accident examination revealed a discontinuity in the pitot-static system.  Specifically, tubing 
from the pitot tube was disconnected from a mating length of tubing located at the left wing 
root.  The left wing remained attached to the fuselage at the wing root and the wing root 
structure was intact.  Flight control continuity was confirmed.  No other anomalies associated 
with a pre-impact failure were observed.
