The commercial pilot was tasked with performing high-speed taxi tests and familiarization 
with the experimental airplane. After performing two high-speed taxis, the pilot requested taxi 
clearance to the active runway, received a takeoff clearance, and departed from the runway. 
Witnesses reported that, after departure and while in the traffic pattern, the airplane™s pitch 
oscillated and that, when it turned onto the final leg of the traffic pattern, it continued to pitch 
up and down. The airplane subsequently descended and impacted terrain about 1 mile from the 
approach end of the runway.
Images captured by an onboard video recorder provided information about where the pilot™s 
attention was directed, his interaction with the flight controls, and the status of cockpit 
instruments and engine indicators. The information indicated that the pilot did not pin his left 
arm to the armrest and that he used his entire forearm to move the airplane™s sidestick flight 
control. In addition, the pilot released and re-gripped the sidestick several times, which 
exacerbated the negative g maneuvers. These control inputs were indicative of the pilot 
overcontrolling the airplane. As the pilot flew the right-hand traffic pattern, he repeatedly 
turned his head right and/or reached right. These movements and distractions resulted in the 
airplane beginning to oscillate. In each of the pitch excursions, except for one that occurred 
during the takeoff, the pilot™s left arm moved fore and aft, and negative gs were present. During 
the flight, as the speed increased, each pitch oscillation increased; the final adjustment of the 
flight control by the pilot resulted in an overstress of the airframe and its subsequent in-flight 
breakup.
A postaccident examination of the airframe, flight controls, and engine revealed no evidence of 
mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. Although the 
pilot reported a high level of total flight experience, he had accumulated less than 1/2 hour of 
total flight experience in the accident airplane make and model at the time of the accident. The 
airplane manufacturer™s flight test policy indicated that, to gain experience, pilots should first 
taxi the airplane, then perform high-speed taxis, then perform high-speed taxis with the nose 
gear off the ground, and finally, after the pilot was comfortable with the airplane, to perform a 
takeoff. The pilot decided to perform the takeoff without the requisite experience; therefore, he 
Page 2 of 9ERA15FA175
was operating contrary to the manufacturer™s flight test policy.
The pilot's excessive pitch control inputs to the airplane™s sidestick control, which resulted in 
an overstress of the airframe and its subsequent in-flight breakup. Contributing to the accident 
was the pilot's decision to operate the airplane contrary to the manufacturer's flight test policy.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2015, about 1100 eastern daylight time, an experimental Bedecorp BD-22, N224BD, 
was destroyed when it impacted terrain while attempting to land at St. Lucie County 
International Airport (FPR), Fort Pierce, Florida. The airplane was owned and operated by 
Bedecorp, LLC. The commercial pilot was fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local test flight. The flight was conducted under 
the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 and originated at 1046 from FPR.
According to air traffic control data provided by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), 
the pilot completed a total of two high speed taxi operations on runway 32 at FPR and then 
taxied to the ramp. One of the high speed taxis was recorded by an on-board video camera. 
Approximately 30 minutes later, the pilot requested taxi clearance to the active runway, 
received a take-off clearance, and departed runway 28L. After turning onto the downwind leg 
of the traffic pattern, the airplane overtook another airplane. The tower controller attempted to 
contact the pilot three times while the airplane was on the downwind leg of the traffic pattern 
and never received a response. Then, the pilot reported that the airplane was on the left base 
leg of the traffic pattern turning onto the final leg of the traffic pattern. The tower controller 
communicated that the pilot had not answered his calls and he was cleared to land on Runway 
28L. The pilot read-back the landing clearance and the tower controller advised the pilot to call 
the tower after landing. The pilot responded that he "had a little unusual stuff" during the flight 
and apologized. Soon after, another pilot in the traffic pattern observed the accident airplane 
impact the ground.
The airplane manufacturer stated that the airplane was in the first stage of flight testing and 
the pilot was to only perform high speed taxi maneuvers so that he could become familiar with 
the airplane.
According to eyewitnesses, the airplane performed two taxi tests. Then, the airplane departed 
runway 28L, appeared to have "issues" because its pitch oscillated while in the traffic pattern. 
When the airplane turned on to the final leg of the traffic pattern, it continued to pitch up and 
down. Subsequently, the airplane descended and impacted terrain approximately one mile 
from the approach end of runway 28L.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane 
multiengine land, single-engine land, single-engine sea, instrument airplane, and a flight 
instructor certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine. The pilot reported, on his most 
recent second-class medial certificate application, dated December 11, 2013, a total flight 
experience of 4,500 flight hours and 50 hours in preceding six months. Furthermore, 
according to video evidence, the pilot had approximately 0.4 hours of experience in the 
accident airplane make and model, of which, 0.3 hours was taxiing. The pilot was employed by 
the operator as a test pilot, and the accident flight was the pilot's first in the airplane make and 
model.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the airplane was issued a special airworthiness certificate on 
February 11, 2015, and registered to Bedecorp, LLC. It was equipped with a Lycoming O-235-
L2C, 115-hp engine. At the time of the accident the airplane had accumulated about one hour of 
total time in service.
According to the manufacturer, the airplane was a prototype, and the flight testing had recently 
begun. In addition, during the previous flight, another test pilot had mentioned that the flight 
control "was too heavy" and it was not sensitive enough. Subsequently, the stabilator trim tab 
connecting rod ends were adjusted from the original position in order to provide more control 
authority. The airplane utilized a side-stick flight control, similar to other Bedecorp designed 
airplanes.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1053 recorded weather observation at FPR included wind from 280 at 8 knots, visibility 10 
miles, clear skies, temperature 22 degrees C, dew point 16 degrees C, and  barometric altimeter 
of 30.18 inches of mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
St. Lucie County International Airport was located 3 miles northwest of Fort Pierce, Florida. It 
had three runways designated 10R/28L, 14/32, and 10L/28R. The runway designated as 
10R/28L was 6,492 feet-long and 150 feet-wide, constructed of asphalt and noted in "good 
condition." At the time of the accident the airport had an operating air traffic control tower.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted terrain in a nose down attitude and came to rest inverted, on a 092 
degree magnetic heading. There was an impact crater approximately 18 inches deep. The on-
board camera, canopy, and seats separated from the airframe.
The leading edge of the right wing exhibited impact crush damage along the entire span of the 
wing. The wing tip was separated but located in the vicinity of the right wing. The right aileron 
was separated and located approximately 12 feet aft of the right wing. The inboard 6-foot 
forward section of the right wing was consumed by post impact fire. The inboard right wing 
flap remained attached to the right wing and the outboard section was impact separated.
The empennage remained attached to the fuselage. The right stabilator remained attached to 
the empennage and was bent in the positive direction. The right stabilator tip remained 
attached to the stabilator. The right stabilator exhibited crush damage on the outboard leading 
edge. The left stabilator was separated from the empennage and located about one foot aft of 
the main wreckage. The left stabilator tip remained attached at all attach points. The rudder 
remained attached to the vertical stabilizer at all attach points and exhibited crush damage at 
the top section of the rudder. The vertical stabilizer remained attached to the empennage and 
exhibited crush damage on the approximate top 12 inches of the vertical stabilizer.
The inboard 6 foot section of the left wing was consumed by post impact fire. The entire span 
of the left wing leading edge exhibited crush damage. The left flap remained attached to the 
wing. The left aileron remained attached to the wing at all attach points. The left wing tip was 
separated and located in the vicinity of the main wreckage.
The fuselage remained intact and the cabin area was consumed by post impact fire. The main 
landing gear remained attached to the fuselage and exhibited fire damage. The nose landing 
gear was separated from the fuselage and located approximately 6 feet forward of the main 
wreckage. Flight control continuity was confirmed from the ailerons, rudder, and stabilators to 
the respective flight controls. There were no malfunctions or abnormalities of the airplane 
noted that would have precluded normal operation prior to the accident.
The engine was located in the initial impact crater and remained attached to the fuselage 
through engine control cables. The oil pan, carburetor, oil filter, and a section of the engine 
driven fuel pump were impact separated from the engine and located in the initial impact 
crater. Cylinders Nos. 1 and 2 were impact damaged and bent aft. The push rod tubes for 
cylinders Nos. 1 and 2 were partially separated. Both magnetos and the starter remained 
attached to the engine. The spark plugs were removed and exhibited normal wear when 
compared to the Champion Check-a-Plug chart. The left and right magnetos were removed, but 
no spark was observed on any towers. Both magnetos were disassembled and the left magneto 
exhibited fire damage and there were no anomalies noted in the right magneto. A borescope 
was used to examine the cylinders and no anomalies were noted. The propeller hub remained 
attached to the propeller flange; however, both wooden propeller blades were impact separated 
from the propeller hub. Several wooden propeller blade sections were located within the 
impact crater.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Medical Examiner Department, District 19, of Florida, performed an autopsy on the pilot. 
The autopsy report indicated that the pilot died as a result of "multiple blunt trauma injuries" 
and the report listed those injuries.
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicological testing of the pilot. Fluid and tissue specimens from the pilot tested 
negative for cyanide, ethanol, and other drugs.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
A GoPro camera was shipped to the NTSB Recorders Laboratory for data download. The 
camera and the memory card were undamaged. The memory card was read out normally.
A Recorder Laboratory Specialist reviewed the video and prepared a transcript of the events 
from the video camera. The video revealed that the camera was mounted on a suction mount 
hanging from the top of the sliding canopy looking forward. It captured the taxi, takeoff, and 
the accident flight in the traffic pattern of FPR. Immediately after liftoff, the airplane began 
large pitch oscillations up and down. Loose objects would rise into view and fall, coincident 
with the observed pitch oscillations. This pattern continued throughout the flight. The pilot's 
left forearm was moving fore and aft to control the airplane. The forearm was not resting on 
and stationary to the metallic armrest area of the airplane, which indicated that the pilot was 
moving the sidestick control primarily through forearm motion rather than wrist action. 
Throughout the initial climb, there were several other pitch oscillations. Then, the pilot turned 
the airplane onto the crosswind leg of the traffic pattern and his attention was diverted to the 
right, and immediately the airplane again began pitch oscillations. Next, the pilot turned onto 
the downwind leg of the traffic pattern, and again, diverted his attention, and adjusted his grip 
on the sidestick. While his hand was not on the sidestick, the airplane began another pitch 
oscillation.
When the pilot maneuvered the airplane onto the final leg of the traffic pattern, he readjusted 
his grip on the sidestick and moved his right hand to the throttle, at which time the airplane 
began pitch oscillations and the pilot's right hand was noted moving upward, off the throttle. 
The pilot re-gripped the throttle and continued to line the airplane up with the intended 
runway for landing. A few seconds later, the airplane experienced a large pitch up, the pilot's 
hand moved downward and off the throttle, and the airplane had a positive pitch attitude. 
Immediately, the airplane experienced a large downward pitch oscillation and the canopy glass 
broke, the camera exited the airplane, and it rotated in the airstream behind the airplane. As 
the camera rotated, it captured the airplane until it impacted the ground, and soon after the 
camera came to rest in the vicinity of the airplane.
Throughout the accident flight, the airspeed of the airplane continuously increased to a 
maximum of about 160 mph while the airplane was on final approach to the runway.  The pitch 
control inputs, pitch excursions, and energy of the objects rising into and falling from the 
camera view were increasing throughout the flight.  The propeller was rotating, and the engine 
sound was smooth and continuous without interruption until the camera exited the airplane. 
In addition, during the video, the pilot was not observed utilizing any type of checklist.
Video Study
The GoPro video camera was mounted to the canopy of the airplane, aft and slightly to the 
right of the pilot. The instrument panel and both side stick controllers were in camera's 
recorded view. The pilot was using his left hand to control the left side stick.
Large fore/aft stick movements and corresponding pitch oscillations were observed from just 
after the takeoff to the end of the flight. There were periods where the stick movement and 
airplane pitch were relatively stable. The final pitch down culminated in a structural breakup 
where the seats separated from the airframe and the pilot was ejected through the airplane's 
canopy.
Overall, the pitch oscillations were consistent with the stick movements and both sticks moved 
in unison. Throughout the flight, the pilot did not rest his left arm to the armrest, rather the 
entire forearm was used to move the stick. In addition, the pilot released and re-gripped the 
stick several times. Repeatedly, the pilot would turn his head to the right and/or reach right, 
which resulted in the beginning of an oscillation. In each case, his left arm would move fore 
and aft and negative Gs were present in each of the pitch excursions except for the initial 
takeoff excursion. The speed of the airplane was steadily increasing throughout the flight, and 
on short final, the airspeed indicator indicated about160 mph. The recording included the final 
excursion, which was similar to a negative G excursion, although no G-meter was observed it 
appeared to be a greater force than the previous excursions.
The airplane manufacturer stated that the purpose of the taxi tests was for the pilot to become 
familiar with the control feel and characteristics of the airplane and the side-stick control. A 
representative of the company said that the pilot was expected to be able to carefully lift the 
nose gear off the runway without taking off and repeat this maneuver several times prior to 
being considered eligible to fly the airplane. This type of maneuver was not observed on the 
video of the accident flight.
Stabilator Spar and Bracket Examination
The stabilator spar and bracket were examined by the NTSB Materials Laboratory in 
Washington, DC. Magnified optical examinations of the fracture revealed features and 
deformation patterns consistent with an overstress separation with no indications of 
preexisting cracking such as fatigue. The stabilator brackets left bearing loop was fractured 
with features indicative of an overstress separation. Fracture deformation was to the left. The 
right hand bracket loop was intact. Deformation and contact marks were present at the bearing 
loop area consistent with leftward deflection of an attached clevis like structure. Both brackets 
showed shadow marks consistent with the presence of mounting hardware attaching the 
brackets to the common plate.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Bedecorp Œ Flight Handbook
The manufacturer's flight handbook contained "–information and guidelines for learning to fly 
a BD aircraft. These procedures required for test flying an aircraft, as well as new pilots 
checking themselves out in an aircraft." In addition, "as a general rule, it takes three days 
before the pilot is cleared for their initial take off and flight around the pattern. It is 
recommended that a majority of the flight testing be done in the early morning hours while the 
wind is calm. It is also important to give the pilot time to absorb and digest the information 
from each of the following steps. The list below is a minimum amount that the company 
requires a new pilot to perform in order to be checked out in the aircraft." The flight 
procedures checklist indicated that the pilot was to start learning the specifics of that make and 
model of airplane by first taxiing, then performing high speed taxies, performing high speed 
taxies with the nose gear off the ground, and finally, after he or she was comfortable with the 
airplane, to perform a takeoff.
