The student pilot was conducting a nighttime cross-country flight in dark night visual 
meteorological conditions. He flew to another airport and dropped a passenger off; during the 
return to his destination, the airplane impacted terrain. The debris field at the accident site 
suggests that the pilot may have been attempting to divert to a local airport rather than 
continue to his planned destination. However, it could not be determined why the pilot was 
diverting. 
A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not detect any anomalies that 
would have precluded normal operation. Local law enforcement personnel reported low, 
patchy fog near the accident site when they first began searching for the airplane. Further, 
given the elevation of the area of impact (1,025 ft) and of the nearest weather reporting station 
(463 ft), a meteorological study of the accident area found that clouds were likely present at 
500 ft above ground level (agl) with a broken layer at 1,400 ft agl and an overcast layer at 2,700 
ft agl. The moon was below the horizon at the time of the accident. There is no evidence that 
the pilot obtained a weather briefing before taking off. The pilot's logbook did not contain any 
recent log book entries, recent flight instruction, or nighttime flight. Although the pilot was 
able to successfully navigate to his initial destination, the circumstances of the accident are 
consistent with the noninstrument- rated pilot's controlled flight into terrain due to an 
inadvertent encounter with clouds while flying under visual flight rules.
The pilot's toxicology was positive for numerous substances, some of which were potentially 
impairing. It could not be determined the effect that The combination of psychiatric 
condition(s) indicated by the use of two antidepressants, chronic, high dose opioid use 
(hydrocodone), sedating antidepressant use (trazodone), and potentially ethanol use may have 
affected the pilot's performance. However, the extent that the effects contributed on the pilot's 
decision to conduct the flight on a dark night with the potential for marginal visual 
meteorological conditions without evidence of flight instruction or instrument rating and 
without obtaining a weather briefing could not be determined.
Page 2 of 9CEN15FA189
The noninstrument-rated pilot's controlled flight into terrain due to an inadvertent encounter 
with clouds in dark night conditions. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's decision to fly 
at night in marginal visual meteorological conditions without the proper training and without 
obtaining a weather briefing.
