National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: POINT LOOKOUT, MO
Accident Number: CHI98LA234
Date & Time: 07/01/1998, 1330 CDT
Registration: N5643L
Aircraft: American Aviation Corp. (AAC) AA-
1TW
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that during the landing roll the tailwheel began to vibrate.
The vibration increased and the airplane made a 'sharp yaw to the left.'
After about 30 degrees of turn, the right landing gear attach bracket bolts sheared and the right wing contacted the runway.
The airplane then skidded to the right side of the runway and exited the runway tail first.
Inspection of the airplane revealed the right arm of the tailwheel had failed approximately 1' from the center of the arm.
Corrosion was present on the factured surface.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the failure of the tailwheel assembly due to corrosion.
A factor associated with the accident was the overload failure of the right main landing gear.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TAILWHEEL ASSEMBLY - CORRODED 2.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TAILWHEEL ASSEMBLY - FAILURE 3.
DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
(F) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR ATTACHMENT - OVERLOAD Factual Information On July 1, 1998, at 1330 central daylight time, an American Yankee AA1-1TW, N5643L, impacted the terrain following a loss of directional control during a landing roll on runway 29 (3,539' x 100') at the Clark Airport, Point Lookout, Missouri.
The ATP pilot and passenger were not injured and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The airplane was being operated as a personal flight under 14 CFR part 91 when the accident occurred.
The flight originated Cape Girardeau, Missouri, at 1145.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot stated that during the landing roll, following a 3-point landing, the tailwheel began to vibrate.
He reported the vibration increased and the airplane made a "sharp yaw to the left."
After about 30 degrees of turn, the right landing gear attach bracket bolts sheared and the right wing contacted the runway.
The airplane then skidded to the right side of the runway and exited the runway tail first.
Inspection of the runway by the Clark Airport Operations Supervisor revealed tail wheel skid marks were present on the runway for a length in excess of 150 yards.
Inspection of the airplane by an Inspector from the Kansas City Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards District Office revealed the right arm of the tailwheel had failed approximately 1" from the center of the arm.
Corrosion was present on the factured surface.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 60, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
