National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ALEKNAGIK, AK
Accident Number: ANC98LA090
Date & Time: 07/01/1998, 1545 AKD
Registration: N456TA
Aircraft: Cessna 206G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The certificated commercial pilot was landing on a remote gravel runway.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge, on July 1, 1998, the pilot reported that while landing to the west, he inadvertently flew further down the runway and landed about midfield of the 1,150 feet long runway.
He stated that after touchdown he was unable to stop the airplane before it went down an embankment at the end of the runway, and nosed over.
In his written statement to the NTSB dated September 1, 1998, the pilot reported that while landing to the west, he encountered an unexpected 'wind change' from the east.
He said that the tailwind caused the airplane's ground speed to accelerate, and after touchdown, he was unable to stop prior to reaching the runway end.
The airplane's left wing sustained substantial damage.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to attain a proper touchdown point during landing.
A factor associated with the accident is the presence of a variable wind condition, and the pilot's decision not to perform a go-around.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - VARIABLE WIND 2.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) GO-AROUND - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DROP-OFF/DESCENDING EMBANKMENT Factual Information On July 1, 1998, about 1545 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Cessna 206G airplane, N456TA, sustained substantial damage while landing at the Aleknagik Airstrip, Aleknagik, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airplane is registered to, and operated by, Arctic Circle Air, Inc.
The certificated commercial pilot, and the one passenger aboard were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Dillingham Airport, Dillingham, Alaska, about 1530.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator- in-charge, on July 1, 1998, the pilot reported that while landing to the west, he inadvertently flew further down the runway and landed about midfield of the 1,150 feet long runway.
He stated that after touchdown he was unable to stop the airplane before it went down an embankment at the end of the runway, and nosed over.
In his written statement to the NTSB dated September 1, 1998, the pilot reported that while landing to the west, he encountered an unexpected "wind change" from the east.
He said that the tailwind caused the airplane's ground speed to accelerate, and after touchdown, he was unable to stop prior to reaching the runway end.
The airplane's left wing sustained substantial damage.
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 43, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 61 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 6746 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-520F Registered Owner: ARCTIC AIR GROUP, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
