National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ILIAMNA, AK
Accident Number: ANC98LA089
Date & Time: 07/01/1998, 1120 AKD
Registration: N4574F
Aircraft: Cessna 185E
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The certificated airline transport pilot was practicing touch-and-go landings on runway 17 in a tailwheel airplane.
He stated that at the time of the accident, he inadvertently failed to meet the pilot-in-command requirements for a tailwheel airplane.
The pilot rated passenger, seated in the right seat, was not a certificated flight instructor.
The pilot stated that wind conditions at the time of the accident were varied, and were last reported to be from 090 degrees at 9 knots.
The pilot stated that just after touchdown, the airplane veered to the right.
He said that he applied left rudder in an attempt to maintain heading, but the airplane continued to the right.
He stated that upon reaching the edge of the runway, he applied the brakes, and the left wheel lost traction in loose gravel.
He said that the right wheel maintained traction, and the airplane ground looped to the right.
During the ground loop, the left wing, aileron, and left elevator struck the runway and sustained substantial damage.
At 1153, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) was reporting in part: Wind, 159 degrees (magnetic) at 7 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for crosswind conditions.
Factors associated with the accident were a crosswind and the pilot's lack of recent experience in a tailwheel airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE IN KIND OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - LOOSE GRAVEL/SANDY 5.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On July 1, 1998, about 1120 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Cessna 185E airplane, N4574F, sustained substantial damage while landing at the Iliamna Airport, Iliamna, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a local area, visual flight rules (VFR) flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airline transport pilot, and the pilot rated passenger aboard, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with a National Transportation Safety Board investigator the pilot reported that he was practicing touch-and-go landings in a tailwheel airplane.
He stated that at the time of the accident, he inadvertently failed to meet the 90 day pilot-in-command currency requirements for a tailwheel airplane.
The pilot rated passenger, seated in the right seat, was not a certificated flight instructor.
In his written statement to the NTSB dated July 14, 1998, the pilot reported that that wind conditions at the time of the accident were varied, and were last reported to be from 090 degrees at 9 knots.
The pilot stated that just after touchdown on runway 17, the airplane veered to the right.
He said that he applied left rudder in an attempt to maintain heading, but the airplane continued to the right.
He stated that upon reaching the edge of the runway, he applied the brakes, and the left wheel lost traction in loose gravel.
The right wheel maintained traction, and the airplane ground looped to the right.
During the ground loop, the left wing, aileron, and left elevator struck the runway and sustained substantial damage.
The closest official weather observation station is Iliamna.
On July 1, 1998, at 1153, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) was reporting in part: Sky conditions and ceiling, 2,900 feet overcast; visibility, 10 statute miles; wind, 159 degrees (magnetic) at 7 knots.
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
