National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOMESTEAD, FL
Accident Number: ATL98LA089
Date & Time: 07/01/1998, 1130 EDT
Registration: N4331M
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis According to the pilot, he entered a left downwind for runway 36.
He touched down hard on the first landing, and the airplane bounced into the air.
The pilot then pulled back on the controls, and the airplane sank, collided with the runway, and bounced a second time.
The nose gear collapsed, and the propeller struck the ground on the second bounce.
The airplane touched down for a third time and veered off the left side of the runway.
According to the FAA, the airplane had wing damage and cracked engine mounts.
The inspector stated the airplane made too steep of an approach which led him to begin bouncing down the runway.
The pilot had 37 hours of total flying time.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper flare that resulted in a hard landing and porpoise, and his improper recovery from the bounced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 2.
(C) PORPOISE/PILOT-INDUCED OSCILLATION - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On July 1, 1998, at 1130 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-161, N4331M, executed a hard landing at Homestead General Aviation Airport, Homestead, Florida.
The solo, instructional flight was operated by the student pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
There was no flight plan filed.
The airplane was substantially damaged, and the pilot was not injured.
The flight departed Kendall-Tamiami Airport, Miami, Florida at 1115.
According to the pilot, he entered a left downwind for runway 36.
He touched down hard on the first landing, and the airplane bounced into the air.
The pilot then pulled back on the controls, and the airplane sank, collided with the runway, and bounced a second time.
The nose gear collapsed, and the propeller struck the ground on the second bounce.
The airplane touched down for a third time and veered off the left side of the runway.
According to the FAA, the airplane has wing damage and cracked engine mounts.
The inspector stated the airplane made too steep of an approach which led him to begin bouncing down the runway.
He also stated the pilot had only 37 hours of total time.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 32, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
