Page 1 of 2WPR16LA127
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Seattle, WA
Accident Number:
WPR16LA127
Date & Time:
06/02/2016, 0230 PDT 
Registration:
N301DM
Aircraft:
PIPER PA46
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On June 2, 2016, about 0230 Pacific daylight time, a Piper PA 46-350P, N301DM, was 
substantially damaged during a gear-up landing at Boeing Field/King County International 
Airport (BFI), Seattle, Washington.  The private pilot and the sole passenger were not injured. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and an instrument flight 
rules flight plan was filed and active. The cross-country flight, which had departed Reno, 
Nevada, about two and one-half hours prior to the accident, was being conducted in 
accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, with the destination airport being BFI.
In postaccident statements supplied to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge, and a Federal Aviation Administration aviation safety inspector, the pilot reported 
that just before he was given a final vector for the instrument landing system (ILS) 13R 
approach to BFI, and at an elevation of 2,200 feet mean sea level, he noticed that the two Tie 
Buss generator circuit breakers had popped; with no noticeable failures observed, he reset both 
by pushing them, and they stayed in. The pilot further reported that shortly thereafter when he 
was given a final vector to join the localizer, the whole panel went dark, with all of the post 
lights, backlit gauges, and engine instrument gauges having failed; the G500, both GNS530's, 
the 2 Garmin Transponders, the GMX200, the audio panel, and the autopilot were still 
functional. The pilot opined that this failure also affected the 3 green landing gear down and 
locked lights, and the landing gear warning horn. The pilot reported that he looked for the 
cause, but in the darkness it was difficult to see the position of the circuit breakers, and 
proceeded with the approach in order to get the airplane on the ground as soon as possible. 
When the autopilot joined the localizer and coupled with the glideslope, he lowered the flaps 
and extended the [landing] gear sequentially. The pilot stated that he thought he felt the gear 
[extend], but without the 3 green gear locked lights and without the gear warning horn, he was 
unable to determine if the gear was down and locked. The pilot subsequently made a gear-up 
landing on runway 13R at BFI, slid down the runway, and came to a stop upright, after which 
he shut down the engine.
The pilot reported that later that morning when a crane was used to lift the airplane, the 
landing gear was deployed to the down and locked position by gravity freefall. Subsequently, 
the pilot noticed that one of the two Tie Buss Main circuit breakers was popped out, which he 
had been unable to see in the darkness while making the approach.  The pilot further stated 
Page 2 of 2WPR16LA127
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
that when he reset the breaker, the panel light came back up, the gear warning horn came on, 
the landing gear cycled normally, and the 3 green [landing] gear lights illuminated.  The pilot 
also revealed during the postaccident interview with the NTSB IIC and the FAA IIC, that 
having encountered icing conditions en route, he activated the airplane's deicing equipment en 
route, which remained on throughout the entirety of the event, including the gear-up landing.
The airplane was recovered to a secured location for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N301DM
Model/Series:
PA46 350P
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
Gregory D. Zaser
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BFI, 21 ft msl
Observation Time:
0153 PDT
Distance from Accident Site:
Temperature/Dew Point:
16°C / 14°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2500 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
10 knots / 18 knots, 170°
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3100 ft agl
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Departure Point: 
Reno, NV (RNO)
Destination: 
Seattle, WA (BFI)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
47.530000, -122.301944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Little
Additional Participating Persons:
Donald Bacon; Federal Aviation Administration; Renton, WA
John Osborne; Federal Aviation Administration; Renton, WA
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
