Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fort Carson, CO
Accident Number:
CEN15LA300
Date & Time:
07/02/2015, 0704 MDT 
Registration:
N210GB
Aircraft:
BALONY KUBICEK SPOL BB60Z
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Hard landing
Injuries:
2 Serious, 6 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business - Sightseeing
Analysis 
The commercial pilot checked the weather before the air tour balloon flight. The Colorado 
Springs Municipal Airport (COS) automated weather system reported that the surface wind 
was 070 degrees at 7 mph. A National Weather Service meteorologist informed the pilot that a 
front north of Denver was expected to pass through Colorado Springs about 6 hours after the 
flight was going to take off. The pilot also attempted to contact Lockheed Martin Flight Service 
(LMFS) twice without success; LMFS reported that, on the morning of the accident, it 
experienced an abnormally high call volume, which resulted in long wait/hold times. About 15 
minutes before taking off, the pilot released a pilot balloon (pibal) from the launch site to check 
the wind aloft. At first, the pibal drifted toward the west slowly. However, when it reached 
about 1,000 ft above ground level (agl), it appeared to drift back toward the launch site. The 
pilot reported that he also noticed a slight breeze blowing in a tall treetop located on a rise 
south of the launch site. 
Before departure, the pilot rechecked the wind at COS, which was still 070 degrees at 7 mph. 
The balloon lifted off in calm wind conditions. However, as the flight continued, the balloon™s 
groundspeed began to increase rapidly. About 22 minutes into the flight, a crew chief for 
another balloon company called the pilot and told him that COS was now reporting wind at 18 
mph gusting to 26 mph. The pilot reported that he then began looking for a place to land and 
that, as he was doing this, the wind continued to increase to about 43 mph. The pilot located a 
large open field and set up for a high-wind landing, which involved descending to about 20 ft 
agl, at which point he intended to pull out the [parachute] top of the balloon envelope and 
make a steep, rapid descent to the ground. However, at 100 ft agl, the balloon encountered a 
drop in wind velocity from about 43 to 26 mph. The pilot had allowed the envelope to cool for 
the approach, which, along with the drop in wind velocity, caused the balloon™s descent rate to 
increase rapidly. The pilot subsequently fully engaged the burners, but he was unable to arrest 
the descent, and the balloon impacted the ground hard. One passenger was ejected from the 
basket but was not injured. Two of the passengers remained in the basket but sustained serious 
injuries. Because the pilot had fully engaged the burners before it landed, the balloon lifted off 
again and ascended rapidly. The pilot regained control of the balloon, flew it to an open field, 
and subsequently conducted a controlled high-wind landing.
Page 2 of 8CEN15LA300
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s improper burner control, which allowed the balloon™s envelope to cool, and the 
balloon™s subsequent encounter with a drop in wind velocity during a high-wind landing 
approach, both of which resulted in the balloon™s descent rate increasing too rapidly for the 
pilot to arrest it and led to a hard landing.
Findings
Aircraft
Descent rate - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
High wind - Effect on operation (Cause)
Organizational issues
Support/Oversight/Monitoring - Meteorological service
Page 3 of 8CEN15LA300
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 2, 2015, at 0704 mountain daylight time, a Balony Kubicek Spol Sro BB60Z ride 
balloon, N210GB, experienced a high-wind landing on a Fort Carson duded artillery range, 
near Fort Carson, Colorado. Two passengers sustained serious injuries. The pilot and five 
remaining passengers received minor injuries. The balloon was not damaged. The balloon was 
registered to the pilot and operated by High but Dry Balloons as a 14 CFR Part 91 air tour 
business flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight that originated 
from Colorado Springs, Colorado, at 0605.
Before the flight, the pilot checked the weather at Colorado Springs Municipal Airport (COS), 
and the National Weather Service in Pueblo, Colorado. COS reported the surface wind was 
070-degrees at 7 mph. The National Weather Service told the pilot that a front that was north 
of Denver was expected to pass through Colorado Springs around noon. The pilot also 
attempted to contact Lockheed Martin Flight Service twice, but was unable to get through to 
them. About 15 minutes before taking off, the pilot released a pibal from the launch site. At 
first, the pibal drifted toward the west slowly. However, about 1,000 ft, it appeared to drift back 
toward the launch site. He noticed a slight breeze blowing in a tall treetop located on a rise 
south of the launch site. Before departure he rechecked the winds at COS, which were still 070 
degrees at 7 mph.
The balloon lifted off at 0605 in calm wind conditions. As the flight continued, however, the 
balloon's speed began to increase rapidly. At 0627, and flying over the south entrance to COS, a 
crew chief for another balloon company called the pilot and told him that COS was now 
reporting wind at 18 mph, gusting to 26 mph and also discussed with the pilot what to expect 
for landing sites on Fort Carson. The pilot began looking for a place to land. As he was doing 
this, the wind continued to increase to 43 mph. The pilot located a large open field on Fort 
Carson to put the balloon down in. He set up for a high wind landing, descending to about 20 
ft. agl, where he would pull out the [parachute] top of the envelope and make a steep, rapid 
descent to the ground. However, at 100 ft agl, the balloon encountered a drop in wind velocity 
from 43 to about 26 mph. This caused the balloon's descent to increase rapidly. The pilot 
engaged the burners fully, but was unable to arrest the rapid descent before impacting the 
ground hard. A male passenger was ejected from the basket, but was not injured. Two of the 
female passengers in the basket sustained serious injuries. The balloon lifted off again, 
ascending rapidly. The pilot regained control of the balloon, and flew to an open field where a 
controlled high wind landing was accomplished.
ON BOARD RECORDING DEVICES
--- Global Positioning Satellite Receiver ---
A handheld Garmin GPS 12 Global Positioning Satellite receiver was on board the balloon 
during the accident flight. It recorded date, time, latitude, longitude, ground speed in knots, 
and course. Data derived from the unit showed the balloon's ground track for the entire flight. 
The device began recording the balloon's track at 0608:50. At this time, the balloon was in the 
vicinity of the intersection of North Academy Boulevard and North Carefree Circle, in the north 
central part of Colorado Springs. The balloon traveled along a predominantly south-southeast 
heading of about 167 degrees for the first half of the flight. At 0622:16, the balloon skirted the 
Page 4 of 8CEN15LA300
east side of COS and proceeded on a more southerly heading of about 175 degrees. About a mile 
south of COS runway 17R, the balloon turned and began to travel along a south-southwesterly 
heading of about 195 degrees. The balloon continued on this course until putting down on an 
artillery range on the U. S. Army Fort Carson at 0704:18, about 7 miles south of Butts Army 
Airfield (FCS), Fort Carson, Colorado. A route overlay for the entire flight is provided in the 
Global Positioning System Devise Specialist's Factual Report, which is provided in the docket 
to this report. The average groundspeed for the duration of the flight was approximately 20 
knots. The maximum derived ground speed between two sequential data points was 39 knots.
 
--- Handheld Personal Electronic Device ---
Video with audio retrieved from one of the passenger's handheld personal electronic device 
produced several short segment video files. The device was a Samsung SM-GM900A, better 
known by its marketing name, the Samsung Galaxy S5. The video files revealed the following:
About 0534, the ground crew was inflating the balloon's envelope with a large fan. There were 
no clouds visible over the terrain. The treetops captured in the recording showed no wind. The 
video segment duration lasted 4 minutes and 6 seconds.
About 0545, the video shows the hot inflation. The burners are engaged and the balloon's 
envelope rises. The video ends with the balloon upright. The video segment duration lasted 1 
minute and 55 seconds.
About 0632, the recording shows the balloon in flight. Some ground features are seen, but the 
balloon's rate of movement cannot be determined. The audio track recorded some wind noise. 
A female passenger is then heard saying, "We're moving." The video segment duration lasted 
16 seconds.
About 0633, the recording shows the camera looking up inside the balloon envelope from the 
basket. There is light wind noise and then the burner is seen firing. A male voice is then heard, 
"That must be the entrance to the base." The video segment duration lasted 20 seconds.
About 0637, the recording, which lasted 18 seconds, showed the balloon in flight and the field 
of view looking at an industrial facility. An exhaust output cloud was shown blowing in a 
southwest direction, which corresponded to the balloon's flight direction at the time. Treetops 
in the foreground were shown rustling. The balloon operator is heard saying, "I'm haulin' butt. 
I have no idea where I'm goin'. I can see one fifteen though [reference to a north-south state 
highway]." Shortly after, a male passenger says, "Holy smokes." The balloon operator is then 
heard saying, "I'm in a big flat area. I'm gunna drop down and land so hang on." The recording 
ends with the field of view showing a large green field forward and beneath the balloon. Wind 
noise was present throughout the recording.
About 0738, the recording showed the balloon operator standing next to the basket which is 
resting on the ground. The video panned around showing portions of the accident site. During 
the 5 minute and 16 second segment, the operator was heard making statements. Relevant 
statements were:
0738:52: "They lied about this front. [Maybe] they didn't lie about it but they were 
misinformed."
0741:02: [sound of a mobile telephone ringing]
Page 5 of 8CEN15LA300
0741:07: "Yeah, that's one time – I have no idea. The last I saw when I was landing was twenty 
six [knots]. No – nothing. There was nothing. I even called Pueblo. [He] saw nothing – but uh 
– the winds at the airport, the highest they [they got] –"
0742:13: "We're waiting for the helicopter to come. [I found] I was [gliding along] – drug, uh, 
drug a hundred feet – ripped the top out."
About 0747, the recording showed the accident site. There was a considerable amount of wind 
noise and tall grass seen surrounding the balloon basket was seen blowing in the wind. The 
video segment duration lasted 2 minutes and 16 seconds. 
Additional information can be found in the Image Specialist's Factual Report, which is 
provided in the docket to this report.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 0554, weather conditions at COS was wind 030 degrees at 5 knots, few clouds at 11,000 and 
18,000 feet, 25,000 foot broken ceiling, 10 miles visibility, temperature 57 degrees Fahrenheit 
(F), dew point 53 degrees F, and altimeter 30.18 inches Hg.
At 0640, weather conditions at COS was wind 360 degrees at 16 knots with gusts to 25 knots, 
scattered clouds at 2,100 and 11,000 feet, 18,000 foot broken ceiling, 10 miles visibility, 
temperature 63 degrees F, dew point 55 degrees F, and altimeter 30.24 inches Hg
At 0658, the weather conditions at FCS was wind 010 degrees at 27 knots with gusts to 38 
knots, clear skies, 10 miles visibility, temperature 63 degrees F, dew point 57 degrees F, and 
altimeter 3018 inches Hg. Remarks a peak wind of 38 knots from 010 degrees occurred 53 
minutes after the hour.
Lockheed Martin Flight Service (LMFS) reported that on the morning of the accident they 
experienced an abnormally high call volume, which resulted in long wait/hold times for users 
who called the 1-800-WXBRIEF number. Facility logs indicated that some time earlier an 
outage occurred that precluded the National Weather Service data feed for METAR reports and 
the Weather Message Switching Center Replacement (WMSCR) system. With this type of 
outage, most if not all aviation weather providers do not have current weather reports 
available. LMFS's call volume appeared to spike about the same time and subsided when the 
issue was resolved.
A meteorologist at the National Weather Service (NWS) Weather Forecast Office (WFO) in 
Pueblo, Colorado said that at about 0430, he took a call from the pilot and provided him the 
forecast wind information for the Colorado Springs area. He provided the pilot with the Pueblo 
Doppler Radar Velocity Azimuth Display (VAD) wind profile, which showed winds out of the 
south for the first few thousand feet agl, at a speed of 10 to 25 knots. He told the pilot there was 
a cold front located just south of Denver "racing" southward [toward Colorado Springs], but 
the stronger north winds would hold off until "later in the morning." Following the call, winds 
at COS continued to show "light" through 0540. The Terminal Area Forecast (TAF) at 0520 for 
COS indicated a wind shift and increase of winds at 0900, from 360 degrees at 10 knots, 
gusting to 20 knots.
Meteorological Terminal Aviation Routine Weather Reports (METARs) for COS showed light 
winds prior to 0600, and a marked change in conditions between 0600 and 0900. Reported 
winds at FCS were stronger with a peak wind of 46 knots at 0717.
Page 6 of 8CEN15LA300
In a post-accident interview, the meteorologist stated that fronts moving from the north in 
Colorado often slow down or stall and do not make it as far south as where the balloon pilot 
was flying, and "occasionally they will accelerate." He said the front on the morning of the 
accident was moving considerably faster than the model expected. He became more concerned 
when he realized the front was moving faster than what he conveyed to the balloon pilot, about 
10 to 15 minutes after their telephone conversation. He said he told his coworker, "I hope he 
[the accident pilot] calls back."
As to amending the TAF, the meteorologist said he often "will not jump" on a changing weather 
condition as that condition could change again and "flip-flop back and forth" and that he did 
not just use the model guidance to populate the TAFs that morning. For the TAF written for 
COS at 0520 on the morning of the accident, the model guidance had the wind coming in at 
1100, but he had forecasted a wind increase for 0800. The front crossed over the Palmer Divide 
(a 7,800 foot msl east-west running ridge located between Denver and Colorado Springs) about 
0640 to 0650.
The meteorologist said that to get real-time wind information he has to telephone the COS 
Automated Surface Observing Station, and that there is no specific local policy regarding the 
handling of weather briefings to pilots who call the WFO. He said that other balloon operators 
contact him two or three times a day, and that he did not know why they contact the WFO and 
not Flight Service.
History of Flight
Enroute
Other weather encounter
Landing
Hard landing (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
70, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
None
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Balloon
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
None Unknown
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/08/1991
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/16/2015
Flight Time:
4128 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1100 hours (Total, this make and model), 4128 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 14 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 7 of 8CEN15LA300
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BALONY KUBICEK SPOL
Registration:
N210GB
Model/Series:
BB60Z 
Aircraft Category:
Balloon
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Balloon
Serial Number:
779
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
8
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/26/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
 
Airframe Total Time:
493 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
Gary V. Born
Rated Power:
Operator:
High but Dry Balloons
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FCS, 5874 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0658 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
27 knots / 38 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.18 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Colorado Spring, CO 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Colorado Spring, CO 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0605 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Military Operation Area
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
2 Serious, 5 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious, 6 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
38.697222, -104.726111
Page 8 of 8
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
David C Bowling
Adopted Date:
06/01/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Mike Davey; Federal Aviation Administration; DEN FSDO; Denver, CO
Publish Date:
06/01/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91522
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
