National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GREYBULL, WY
Accident Number: FTW98LA201
Date & Time: 05/01/1998, 0900 MDT
Registration: N3316Q
Aircraft: Cessna 320D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 5 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis After landing, the pilot turned the airplane around and back taxied towards the ramp.
As he exited the runway, the left landing gear collapsed.
Postaccident inspection revealed that the left landing gear bellcrank assembly sustained a stress overload, causing the assembly to break and shear both assembly bolts.
The gear retract arm was also found broken.
When the gear collapsed, the left wing and left horizontal stabilizer struck the ground and were substantially damaged.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Stress overload  failure of the bellcrank assembly of the left landing gear.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,GEAR LOCKING MECHANISM - FAILURE,TOTAL Factual Information On May 1, 1998, approximately 0900 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 320D, N3316Q, operated by Star West Industries, Inc., was substantially damaged while taxiing after landing at Greybull, Wyoming.
The airline transport rated pilot and his four passengers were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the air taxi flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 135, and an IFR flight had been filed.
The flight originated at Evanston, Wyoming approximately 0745.
After landing on runway 33 at South Bighorn County Airport, the pilot turned the airplane around and back taxied towards the ramp.
As he exited the runway, the left landing gear collapsed.
Postaccident inspection of the landing gear performed by an FAA inspector revealed that the left landing gear bellcrank assembly sustained a stress overload, causing the assembly to break and shear both assembly bolts.
The gear retract arm was also found broken.
When the gear collapsed, the left wing and left horizontal stabilizer struck the ground and were substantially damaged.
: 5200 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 7 Hours Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 4536 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: TSIO-520-ECBB Registered Owner: STAR WEST INDUSTRIES, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
