National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BREWTON, AL
Accident Number: ATL98LA070
Date & Time: 05/01/1998, 1230 CST
Registration: N6645V
Aircraft: Bellanca BL-17-30A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot experienced a lost of  engine power and he made a forced landing in an a field There were no injuries to the pilot, and the aircraft was substantially damaged after colliding with a fence during the landing roll.
Examination of the engine revealed that the number 3 main bearing had spun, the crankshaft was broken at the number 3 cheek, and the crankcase exhibited fretting at the case mating surfaces, consistent with improper through-bolt torque.
The engine had undergone a top overhaul 197.4 hours prior to the failure of the crankshaft.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Improper maintenance procedures used to overhaul the engine, which led to the crankshaft failure.
Contributing to the severity of the accident was the fence.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - FAILURE 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,TOP OVERHAUL - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
(F) OBJECT - FENCE Factual Information On May 1, 1998, about 1230 central standard time a Bellanca BL17-30A, N6645V, collided with a fence during an emergency landing near Gainesville, Florida.
The airplane was operated by the pilot under Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The private pilot and sole occupant was not injured and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The flight originated in Jonesboro, Arkansas, about 1000 central standard time, with an intended destination of Destin, Florida.
According to the pilot, during cruise flight the propeller "quit pulling as if it was disengaged".
Repeated attempts to reengage the prop failed.
The pilot had contacted Eglin approach on 125.6 a few minutes  earlier to obtain clearance through Eglin's airspace.
While on that frequency the pilot declared an emergency, and gave the controller his approximate position.
He then made a forced landing in a nearby field, and collided with a wire fence.
On May 15, 1998, an engine teardown was conducted at the Bay Minette Airport by Clark Aviation Inc.
The teardown was witnessed by the FAA, the airplane owner, and Clark Aviation personnel.
The engine oil pan was removed and metal fragments were found.
The rod bolts were found loose as evidenced by shifting, and galling of the rod bearings, except for one which was found torqued to 400 ft.
lbs., factory manuals recommend 300 ft. lbs.
of torque for rod bolts.
Additionally, the crankcase had fretting at the mating surfaces.
The crankshaft was found broken at the number 3 cheek, and the number 3 main bearing had spun.
The engine's recommended overhaul time was 1700 hours, a top overhaul was accomplished at 1359.7 hours on 08/16/93, and the engine had accumulated 1557.1 hours at the time of the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
