National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HILLTOP LAKES, TX
Accident Number: FTW98LA207
Date & Time: 05/01/1998, 1730 CDT
Registration: N5462
Aircraft: Schrack STARDUSTER TOO
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During landing, the tailwheel-equipped biplane bounced and then touched down hard at which point the right main landing gear failed.
The airplane exited the left side of the runway and nosed down.
The pilot commented that the accident could have been prevented by less sink rate at touchdown.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to obtain/maintain the proper descent rate which resulted in a hard landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) PROPER DESCENT RATE - NOT OBTAINED/MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 2.
The airplane was registered to and operated by a private pilot, the sole occupant, who was not injured.
No flight plan was filed and visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal local flight.
The pilot reported that during a wheel landing, the tailwheel-equipped biplane "bounced at touchdown and a transition to a 3 point landing was made."
He further reported that "the resulting touchdown was hard, at which point the right gear apparently failed."
The airplane then exited the left side of the runway, the right main landing gear "dug into the sandy soil," and the airplane nosed down.
According to the pilot, the accident could have been prevented by "less sink rate at touchdown."
According to the FAA inspector who examined the airplane, the wood spars of the right lower wing and left upper wing were broken.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 65, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): Glider Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
