National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Mukilteo, WA
Accident Number: SEA08LA068
Date & Time: 02/02/2008, 1230 PST
Registration: N8794V
Aircraft: Bellanca 17-30A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While the pilot was on short-final for a touch-and-go landing, the airplane's engine lost all power.
Because he was at such a low altitude, he did not have time to go through a complete restart procedure, so after switching fuel tanks, he aligned the airplane to land on a paved road that was under his approach path.
While attempting to land on that road, the airplane clipped a power line and descended into the surface of the road.
An inspection of the engine, fuel system, and air induction system did not reveal any system or component anomaly that would have prevented the engine from producing rated horsepower.
Both the fuel tank that was selected prior to the power loss, and the fuel tank that was selected after the power loss contained sufficient fuel to maintain operation of the engine.
Fuel was also found in the fuel manifold valve.
The reason for the loss of power was not determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Loss of engine power while on final approach for undetermined reasons.
Contributing to the accident was a power line.
The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant of the airplane, received serious injuries, and the airplane, which was owned and operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage.
The local 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal pleasure flight, which departed the same airport about 15 minutes prior to the accident, was being operated in visual meteorological conditions.
No flight plan had been filed.
There was no report of an ELT activation.
According to the pilot, the airplane's engine lost all power while he was on short-final for a touch-and-go landing.
Because he was at such a low altitude, he did not have time to go through a complete restart procedure, so after switching fuel tanks, he aligned the airplane to land on a paved road that was under his approach path.
While attempting to land on that road, the airplane clipped a power line near the edge of the road.
After hitting the power line, the airplane rolled to a steep angle of bank, and descended into the surface of the road.
The engine, fuel system, and air induction system underwent a post-accident teardown inspection.
That inspection did not reveal any system or component anomaly that would have prevented the engine from producing rated horsepower.
In addition, both the fuel tank that was selected prior to the power loss, and the fuel tank that was selected after the power loss contained sufficient fuel to maintain operation of the engine.
Fuel was also found in the fuel manifold valve, and the use of water detection paste determined that there was no water present in the valve.
: 3325 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3155 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-520-K1B Registered Owner: Phillip D. Foshee, Jr.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
