Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Winterset, IA
Accident Number:
CEN12LA224
Date & Time:
04/01/2012, 1515 CDT 
Registration:
N3830G
Aircraft:
CESSNA U206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
7 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Skydiving
Analysis 
The pilot stated that he departed the airport with six parachutists for a jump flight. As the 
airplane approached 1,000 feet above ground level, he noticed that the airplane wasn™t 
climbing. He checked the engine gauges and noticed that the engine analyzer was flashing 
ﬁCHTﬂ and the cylinder head temperature was 454 degrees F. As the pilot pitched the nose 
down and turned back to the airport, he heard a muffled ﬁthudﬂ sound and saw white smoke 
pour from the engine. As he prepared for a forced landing, four of the parachutists jumped 
from the airplane. The pilot then performed a forced landing in a field, coming to a stop near a 
dirt berm. An examination revealed a hole in the engine crankcase, near the No. 4 cylinder. 
Various pieces of metal, including part of a ﬁquick oil drain plugﬂ were found in the engine oil 
sump. The No. 4 connecting rod journal appeared distorted and displayed extensive heat 
signatures. The crankshaft journals on either side of the No. 4 rod journals did not appear to be 
distorted or to contain the same heat signatures and were coated with engine oil. The rod and 
crankshaft bearings were scored. The signatures on the engine were consistent with the loss of 
lubricant to the No. 4 connecting rod journal. A reason for the loss of engine oil to the journal 
was not found.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of oil pressure to the No. 4 connecting rod journal and the subsequent loss of engine 
power.
Findings
Aircraft
Power plant - Failure (Cause)
Oil - Not specified (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN12LA224
Factual Information
On April 1, 2012, about 1515 central daylight time, a Cessna U206B airplane, N3830G, 
experienced a loss of engine power shortly after departure from the Winterset Municipal 
Airport (3Y3), Winterset, Iowa. The commercial rated pilot and six passengers were not injured 
and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The airplane was registered to and operated by 
Des Moines Skydivers, LLC, Des Moines, Iowa under the provision of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulation Part 91 as a parachute jump flight. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and the airplane was not on a flight plan.
 
The pilot reported that he departed the airport on a jump flight and turned crosswind, and 
headed north. When the airplane was about 1,000 feet above ground level, the airplane seemed 
to stop climbing, so he looked at the engine gauges and everything seemed normal. However, 
as he turned back to the engine analyzer, the analyzer was flashing ﬁCHTﬂ and the cylinder 
temperature read 454 degrees F. The pilot then pitched the airplane™s nose down to cool the 
engine, and turned back towards the airfield. The pilot heard a muffled ﬁthudﬂ sound and white 
smoke poured from the engine. The pilot pulled the mixture control, turned the ignition and 
master switches off.  He then yelled for the jumpers to get out, and four of the parachutists 
were able to exit the airplane. He performed a forced landing in a plowed field and the airplane 
came to stop near a dirt berm.
  
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector reported that the airplane 
sustained extensive firewall damage, when the nose landing gear was torn from the airplane 
during the forced landing. The inspector also noted that there was a hole in the engine™s 
crankcase near the number four cylinder.
The engine was removed from the airframe and sent to Continental Motor™s engine test facility, 
in Mobile, Alabama. The engine was examined under the supervision of the NTSB Investigator 
in Charge, and technical representatives from Continental Motors.
 
A visual exam of the engine confirmed the hole in the crankcase near the number four cylinder; 
the engine was then disassembled. Various pieces of metal, including part of a ﬁquick oil drain 
plugﬂ was found in the engine oil sump. The number four connecting rod journal appeared 
distorted and had displayed extensive heat signatures. The crankshaft journals on either side of 
the number four rod journals did not appear distorted nor contain the same heat signatures 
and were coated with engine oil. The rod and crankshaft bearings appeared scored. The 
crankcase and crankshaft oil galleys appeared open. A reason for the loss of engine oil to the 
journal was not found.
A review of the engine maintenance log book revealed that the engine had approximately 3,233 
total hours and about 1,730 hours since major overhaul.
Page 3 of 5CEN12LA224
History of Flight
Enroute-climb to cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/29/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/09/2011
Flight Time:
1045 hours (Total, all aircraft), 177 hours (Total, this make and model), 981 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 18 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N3830G
Model/Series:
U206B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
U206-0830
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/22/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6966 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO 520 SERIES
Registered Owner:
DES MOINES SKYDIVERS LLC
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
DES MOINES SKYDIVERS LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN12LA224
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KDSM
Distance from Accident Site:
19 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1454 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
45°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 25000 ft agl
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.54 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Winterset, IA (3Y3)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Unknown
Destination: 
Winterset, IA (3Y3)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Winterset Municipal Airport (3Y3)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
6 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
7 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Craig Hatch
Adopted Date:
04/25/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Harrison McNaughton; FAA FSDO; Des Moines, IA
John Kent; Continential Motors; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
04/25/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=83294
Page 5 of 5CEN12LA224
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
