Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Tallahassee, FL
Accident Number:
ERA09LA152
Date & Time:
02/01/2009, 1415 EST 
Registration:
N2424A
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-18 -150
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Ground collision
Injuries:
2 Fatal, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he had previously performed a maneuver where a jeep and motorcycle 
would depart traveling down the runway, and he would then depart in the same direction and 
perform a low pass over them. On the day of the accident there was no briefing about the 
maneuver before the motorcycle, jeep, and he departed. The motorcycle departed first, 
followed by the jeep with two occupants, and finally the airplane. The pilot stated that he 
estimated he was flying at 75 mile-per-hour (mph) and the jeep was driving at 35 to 40 mph. 
He attempted to pass the right side of the jeep, but felt a bump and he knew he had hit the jeep. 
He also noticed the left wing navigation light was hanging down. He performed a 180-degree 
turn and landed on the runway, while the jeep veered off the runway and collided with trees. 
The pilot further reported there was no preimpact failure or malfunction with the flight 
controls. Toxicology testing performed on specimens obtained from the pilot after the accident 
was positive for 11-Nor 9 carboxy delta 9 tetrahydrocannabinol 8.1 ng/mL, and negative for 
ethyl alcohol. The finding of carboxy tetrahydrocannabinol was consistent with the pilot having 
used marijuana within the previous days or weeks but it cannot be concluded that the use was 
contributory to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's decision to initiate takeoff in close proximity to other vehicles which were operating 
on the runway resulting in collision with a vehicle during takeoff.
Findings
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Ground vehicle - Decision related to condition
Page 2 of 6ERA09LA152
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 1, 2009, about 1415 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-18-150, N2424A, registered 
to Flightline Group, Inc., collided with a vehicle during takeoff from Ayavalla Field, near 
Tallahassee, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan 
was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal, local flight from the 
private airstrip. The airplane was substantially damaged and the commercial-certificated pilot 
and one passenger in the airplane were not injured, while the two occupants of the vehicle were 
killed. The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that before he began the takeoff roll, a dirt bike type motorcycle, then a jeep 
with the two occupants began driving down the runway in the same direction  that he was 
departing. The runway orientation was later determined to be north/south. After becoming 
airborne he remained close to the runway and passed to the right side of the jeep. He felt a 
bump and knew he had impacted the jeep. He also noted that the left wing navigation light was 
hanging down. He performed a 180 degree turn and landed uneventfully to the east.
The pilot further stated that at the time of the collision he was flying at 75 mph, and estimated 
the jeep was traveling at 35 to 40 mph. There was no briefing before takeoff though they knew 
he was going to takeoff and he (the pilot) had seen the dirt bike and jeep depart before he 
applied power to takeoff. The pilot also reported that he had performed this same type of 
procedure many times in which the dirt bike and jeep would drive down the runway, and he 
would then depart in the same direction and fly low over them. He stated there were no 
preimpact failure or malfunction with the airplane or flight controls.
According to law enforcement personnel, following the collision the jeep veered to the left and 
impacted trees.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 54, holds an airline transport pilot certificate with a airplane multi-engine land 
rating, and a commercial pilot certificate with an airplane single engine land and single engine 
sea ratings. He also holds a private pilot certificate with a glider rating. He was issued a second 
class medical certificate on January 15, 2007, with a limitation to wear corrective lenses.
The rear seat occupant of the airplane does not hold any FAA issued pilot certificates.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was manufactured in 1993 by Piper Aircraft, Inc., as model PA-18-150, and was 
designated serial number 1809075. The airplane was last inspected in accordance with an 
annual inspection on October 15, 2008.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A surface observation weather report taken at Tallahassee Regional Airport, at 1353, or 
approximately 22 minutes before the accident indicates the wind was from 180 degrees at 11 
knots, the visibility was 10 statute miles, scattered clouds existed at 4,300 feet, broken clouds 
existed at 7,000 feet, the temperature and dew point were 16 and 08 degrees Celsius 
respectively, and the altimeter setting was 30.19 inches of mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Page 3 of 6ERA09LA152
The private airstrip named Ayavalla Field has a single grass runway oriented north and south. 
The runway is 3,800 feet long and 300 feet wide. The pilot reported that the runway was dry at 
the time of the accident, and there were no restrictions to the visibility.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the runway by representatives of Leon County Sheriff™s Office revealed two 
parallel oriented tracks associated with the jeep™s tires. The tracks were oriented along a 
southerly direction, and then begin an arcing left turn off the east side of the runway. The jeep 
came to rest upright near a pine tree which exhibited damage to the trunk near the base. A 
semi-circular indentation associated with tree contact was noted to the right side of the jeep™s 
hood. The jeep exhibited greater damage to the right side. Further examination of the runway 
revealed the jeep™s windshield came to rest before the parallel marks begin an arcing left turn. 
The airplane was stopped on the runway facing a southeasterly direction located about the 
midpoint of the arching turn.
Examination of the airplane by a representative of the airframe manufacturer with FAA 
oversight revealed damage to the leading edge of the left wing from just outboard of the 
landing light outboard to the wingtip. Fuselage tube deformity was noted at the wing root to 
fuselage attach point. Aileron, elevator, and rudder flight control continuity was confirmed 
from each respective control surface to the fore and aft control sticks.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Postmortem examinations of the driver and passenger of the vehicle were performed by the 
District Two Medical Examiner™s Office. The cause of death for the driver was listed as ﬁBlunt 
traumatic injuries of head and neckﬂ, while the cause of death for the passenger was listed as 
ﬁBlunt head trauma.ﬂ
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens of the pilot by the Florida Department of Law 
Enforcement. The result was positive in the submitted blood specimen for 11-Nor 9 carboxy 
delta 9 tetrahydrocannabinol 8.1 ng/mL, and negative for ethyl alcohol.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens of the driver of the vehicle by the University 
of Florida Diagnostic Reference Laboratories. The results were negative in the submitted blood 
specimens for volatiles and a comprehensive drug screen, while an unquantified amount of 
Metoprolol was detected in the submitted urine specimen.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Ground collision (Defining event)
Page 4 of 6ERA09LA152
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial; 
Private
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/15/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/17/2008
Flight Time:
7000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 350 hours (Total, this make and model), 30 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N2424A
Model/Series:
PA-18 -150 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
1809075
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/15/2008, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
435 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
FLIGHTLINE GROUP INC
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
FLIGHTLINE GROUP INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ERA09LA152
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TLH, 81 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1353 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4300 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 7000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.19 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Tallahassee, FL 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Tallahassee, FL 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1415 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Ayavalla Field 
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
100 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3800 ft / 300 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
30.562222, -84.306944
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
11/09/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
James G McConnell; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL
Ron Maynard; Piper Aircraft, Inc.; Vero Beach, FL
Publish Date:
11/21/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ERA09LA152
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
