National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Sugar Grove, IL
Accident Number: CHI01LA255
Date & Time: 08/01/2001, 1131 CDT
Registration: N136GR
Aircraft: Beech A36
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
 Analysis The pilot/mechanic performed a forced landing on a bean field after a total loss of engine power during departure from the airport.
The pilot/mechanic reported that he was performing a maintenance test flight when the engine quit at approximately 500 feet agl.
He reported that the no fuel leaks were noted during a ground test run and no anomalies were noted during a run up prior to departure.
The main fuel line to the flow divider was reported to have backed off.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the inadequate maintenance inspection and the unsuitable terrain encountered by the pilot mechanic.
The fuel system leak was a contributing factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE - LEAK 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OWNER/PILOT MECHANIC 3.
The pilot reported a total loss of engine power during climb from runway 18 (3,199 feet by 75 feet, asphalt) at the Aurora Municipal Airport, Sugar Grove, Illinois.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 maintenance test flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The private pilot reported no injuries.
The local flight originated from the Aurora Municipal Airport, Aurora, Illinois at 1129.
The pilot/mechanic reported that the airplane had received an annual inspection.
A ground test run was performed prior to the maintenance test flight with no fuel leaks noted.
He reported that during a postaccident inspection of the airplane, a fuel line loosened but did not come completely off the fitting.
He also stated that there was evidence of a small fire in the engine compartment area.
The pilot reported in a written statement, "Ground run up after annual [inspection] ok.  No leakage noted.
Run up before flight ok.  Full power attained at takeoff.
[Approximately] 500 [feet] engine quit.
Changed fuel tanks [and] turned on fuel pump.
Engine restarted [and] quit after [approximately] 5 [seconds].
Put down landing gear and landed straight ahead in a bean field.
Beans collapsed nosegear [and] damaged wings [and] firewall.
No injuries.
Found main fuel line to flow divider had backed off about 3-4 turns.
Fuel stain evident."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Glider Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
