National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Healy, AK
Accident Number: ANC01LA099
Date & Time: 08/03/2001, 1250 AKD
Registration: N9794M
Aircraft: Cessna 207
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 6 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The certificated commerical pilot was flying the second airplane in a flight of two airplanes, within an area of mountainous terrain.
Shortly after takeoff he lost sight of the first airplane, but was able to maintain radio contact.
As the flight progressed, it began to rain, accompanied by diminished visibility and low ceilings.
He then became disoriented to his exact position, and he mistakenly turned into a small valley.
The pilot said that once he entered the valley, the terrain began rising, so he initiated a climb.
The valley became too narrow to turn around, and the clouds began to close around the airplane as he continued to climb.
The terrain continued to rise, and he noticed his airspeed was decreasing.
Shortly thereafter, the airplane collided with rising terrain, and sustained substantial damage.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's continued flight into adverse weather conditions after becoming lost/disoriented.
Factors in the accident were rising terrain, a blind/box canyon, low clouds, and rain.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CLOUDS 2.
(C) BECAME LOST/DISORIENTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - RAIN 4.
(C) FLIGHT INTO ADVERSE WEATHER - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: CLIMB Findings 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY 6.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - RISING 7.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - BLIND/BOX CANYON Factual Information On August 3, 2001, about 1250 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Cessna 207 airplane, N9794M, sustained substantial damage during an in-flight collision with terrain, about 15 miles east of Healy, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on- demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was registered to Ronald D. Rosso, and operated by Denali Air Taxi, Inc., Denali Park, Alaska.
The certificated commercial pilot, and the five passengers aboard, were not  injured.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed in the area of the accident,  and VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated from the Denali Wilderness Lodge about 1240, en route to the Denali Airstrip.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator- in-charge on August 4, the pilot reported that his airplane was the second airplane in a flight of two airplanes transporting lodge guests to the Denali Airstrip.
He stated that shortly after takeoff he lost sight of the first airplane, but maintained radio contact.
He added that the standard route to the Denali Airstrip was through mountainous terrain.
As the flight progressed, it began to rain, accompanied by worsening visibility and low ceilings.
The pilot said that he became disoriented to his exact position, and mistakenly turned into a small valley.
He said that once he entered the valley,  the terrain began rising, so he initiated a climb.
The valley became too narrow to turn around, and the clouds began to close around the airplane as he continued to climb.
The terrain continued to rise, and he noticed his airspeed was decreasing.
Shortly thereafter, the airplane collided with rising terrain, and sustained substantial damage.
The emergency locator transmitter (ELT) activated, and personnel from a local helicopter operator at Denali Park, began a search, and found the airplane wreckage.
The pilot stated that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
