Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
COALINGA, CA
Accident Number:
LAX00LA112
Date & Time:
03/01/2000, 1600 PST 
Registration:
N8170S
Aircraft:
Piper PA-32R-301T
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The landing gear collapsed during a precautionary landing following a complete electrical 
system failure.  The airplane experienced a complete electrical failure during cruise.  The pilot 
decided to make a precautionary landing and diverted to an alternate airport.  He shut down all 
electrical items when he became aware of the electrical system failure.  As he neared the 
alternate airport, he slowed the airplane down to the normal gear extension speed, lowered the 
gear with the automatic switch, and felt the landing gear extend.  He stated that because there 
were no landing gear lights illuminated he could not verify that the landing gear was in the 
locked position.  He then conducted the emergency gear extension checklist, and noted that his 
airspeed and power were consistent with what he associated with the landing gear being in the 
down position.  Touchdown was normal, but on the landing rollout, the nose and left main 
landing gear collapsed and the left wing struck a taxi light.  Prior to exiting the airplane, the 
pilot shutoff the master switch.  During the recovery of the airplane, it was raised on jacks and 
the landing gear was extended with no discrepancies noted.  During repair work on the 
airplane, a landing gear extension/retraction test was conducted, with no system anomalies 
noted.  The inspection of the airplane was unable to determine the cause of the electrical 
failure. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the landing gear for undetermined reasons to go into the locked position after the 
pilot conducted a manual and emergency gear extension.  A factor in the accident was the 
undetermined failure of the electrical system. 
Page 2 of 6LAX00LA112
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. ELECTRICAL SYSTEM - FAILURE,TOTAL
2. REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
3. LANDING GEAR,EMERGENCY EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - MALFUNCTION
4. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
5. LANDING GEAR,GEAR INDICATING SYSTEM - INOPERATIVE
6. GEAR DOWN AND LOCKED - INFORMATION INSUFFICIENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - UNLOCKED
8. LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - UNLOCKED
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
9. OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT
Page 3 of 6LAX00LA112
Factual Information
 On March 1, 2000, at 1600 hours Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-32R-301T, N8170S, lost 
electrical power and made a precautionary landing at the Harris Ranch airport, Coalinga, 
California.  The airplane, owned and operated under 14 CFR Part 91 by the pilot, sustained 
substantial damage after the gear collapsed and the left wing impacted a runway light as it 
veered off runway 32.  The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions existed for the personal flight and no flight plan was filed.  The flight 
had departed from the Santa Maria, California, airport at 1500, and was scheduled to terminate 
at the Fresno-Yosemite International Airport, Fresno, California, on the day of the accident.
In a telephone interview with an investigator from the Safety Board, the pilot indicated that the 
airplane had been dropped off in Santa Maria in December 1999 to receive a new interior and 
paint job.  The purpose of the flight was to return the airplane back to its home base in Fresno.  
The pilot stated that he conducted a thorough preflight.  There were no discrepancies noted 
with the run-up, and all of the engine gages were in the green, including the electrical system.  
After takeoff and a climb to 10,500 feet, he engaged the autopilot.  The pilot reported that the 
airplane pitched up and he disengaged the autopilot.  He made an unsuccessful attempt to re-
engage the autopilot, and simultaneously heard crackling over the speaker, which he noted was 
not selected on the audio panel.  He stated that Los Angeles Center reported to him that they 
had lost his transponder code on radar, and that he had exited their coverage area, but to 
remain on the current transponder code.  The pilot reported that the ammeter was now 
indicating zero.  He attempted to contact Los Angeles Center; however, the radio transmission 
was fuzzy, like he had lost contact.  According to the radio communications transcript provided 
by Los Angeles Air Route Traffic Control Center, radio and radar contact was lost at 1528.
The pilot reported that he shut all electrical items down and decided to make a precautionary 
landing at Harris Ranch.  Prior to lowering the landing gear, he slowed the airplane down to 
125 knots.  Then he lowered the gear normally with the automatic switch, and felt the gear go 
down.  He stated that because of the electrical failure, there were no landing gear indicator 
lights.  He conducted the emergency landing gear extension checklist, which included slowing 
the airplane down to 92 knots, engaging the emergency manual gear extension handle, and 
fishtailing the airplane to get the landing gear down and in a locked position.
Approximately 10 miles from Harris Ranch, the pilot noted that his airspeed and power were 
consistent with what he historically associated with the gear being in the down position.  After 
entering the airport environment, he checked the windsock and determined that runway 32 
was in use.  He stated that the touchdown was normal, but on the landing rollout, the nose gear 
collapsed.  The pilot reported that the propeller was still spinning, and contacted the runway.  
After the nose section impacted the runway, the left main landing gear collapsed and the 
airplane started to veer off the left side of the runway where the left wing subsequently struck a 
runway light.  Prior to exiting the airplane, the pilot stated that he shutoff the master switch 
and the fuel.
The airplane was retrieved by Fresno Jet Center.  The maintenance technician who performed 
the work stated that the airplane was raised on jacks to extend the landing gear to remove it 
from the runway.  He said that the right main landing gear was already in the down and locked 
position.  As the airplane was raised, the left main landing gear extended and locked, but the 
nose landing gear would not extend.  He then went inside the cockpit to relieve the system 
Page 4 of 6LAX00LA112
pressure on the emergency gear extension lever to assist in getting the nose gear to come down 
and lock in position.
Fresno Jet Center maintenance shop repaired the airplane.  During the repairs, the nose 
landing gear spring mechanism was inspected and found to be within manufacturer's limits.  A 
landing gear extension/retraction functional test was also conducted, with no discrepancies 
noted.
According to the airplane manufacturer's Pilot Operating Handbook (POH), the landing gear 
system is a retractable tricycle landing gear that is hydraulically actuated by an electrically 
powered reversible pump.  In the emergency landing gear extension section, it states that if 
electrical power is lost, the landing gear extension lights will not illuminate, and the pilot has to 
follow the emergency gear extension procedures to ensure that the landing gear is in the down 
and locked position.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector from the Fresno, California, Flight 
Standards District Office examined the airplane.  He stated that a cause could not be 
determined for the electrical failure.  
A law enforcement officer, who later responded to the airplane accident call, stated that he was 
traveling southbound on Interstate 5, about 1554, when he observed an airplane, which he later 
identified as the accident airplane, flying in the opposite direction.  He stated that the landing 
gear was lowered and the airplane was in level flight.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/06/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
692 hours (Total, all aircraft), 400 hours (Total, this make and model), 641 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX00LA112
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N8170S
Model/Series:
PA-32R-301T PA-32R-301
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32R-8029067
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/28/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
44 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2191 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540-5IAD
Registered Owner:
NORTHERN CENTRAL 
DISTRIBUTION
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
NORTHERN CENTRAL 
DISTRIBUTION
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FAT, 336 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
45 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1556 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
210°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
140°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
SANTA MARIA, CA (SMX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
FRESNO, CA (FAT)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
HARRIS RANCH (3O8)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
470 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
32
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2820 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing; 
Traffic Pattern
Page 6 of 6LAX00LA112
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TEALEYE    C CORNEJO
Adopted Date:
06/25/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
GREG   SCHMIDT; FRESNO, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
