Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
NEWARK, NJ
Accident Number:
NYC00LA086
Date & Time:
03/01/2000, 0347 EST 
Registration:
N302FE
Aircraft:
McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The airplane was taxiing to the runway for departure when the APU door light illuminated.  
The airplane returned to the loading dock, the engines were shut down, and the APU door was 
closed and secured.  The airplane's engines were then restarted, and the airplane began 
another pushback. One maintenance technician was wearing a headset, and was located off the 
right side of the airplane.  Another technician was driving the tug.  After receiving clearance to 
push, the tug driver made a gradual turn to avoid equipment and minimize jet blast to other 
gates.  Halfway down the ramp, the airplane contacted the loading dock, and suffered an 8-foot 
gash along the left side, below the cockpit area.  The tug operator stated that the tug's drive 
mechanism was sticking in a '2-wheel,' or 'crab' mode.  Post-accident investigation of the tug 
revealed no discrepancies, although other technicians subsequently complained of the same 
intermittent problem.  Components were removed for testing, with no anomalies found.  
However, once those components were replaced, there were no additional problems with the 
tug.  A representative from the tug's manufacturer stated that regardless of system status, the 
operator would always have had front wheel steering and braking. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The tug operator's inadequate visual lookout. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: TAXI - PUSHBACK/TOW
Findings
1. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - DRIVER OF VEHICLE
Page 2 of 5NYC00LA086
Factual Information
 On March 1, 2000, at 0347 Eastern Standard Time, a McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30F, 
N302FE, operated by Federal Express, was substantially damaged during pushback at Newark 
International Airport (EWR), Newark, New Jersey.  On the airplane, the captain, first officer, 
flight engineer and two couriers were uninjured.  On the ground, three maintenance 
technicians were also uninjured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident.  An instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed for the cargo flight, between 
Newark and Memphis International Airport (MEM), Memphis, Tennessee.  The flight was to be 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector, the airplane was taxiing to 
the runway for departure when the APU door light illuminated.  The airplane returned to the 
loading dock, the engines were shut down, the APU door was closed, and the APU was secured.  
The airplane's engines were then restarted at the dock, and the airplane began another 
pushback.  During that pushback, it contacted the loading dock, and suffered an 8-foot gash 
along the left side, below the cockpit area.
According to a company safety analyst, for the pushback, one of the maintenance technicians 
was "on a headset," next to the right side of the airplane.  Another technician was acting as a 
"wing walker," aft of the airplane, and a third technician was driving the tug.  The "headset 
man" stated that the crew gave permission to push back.  Halfway through the pushback, the 
captain told him to stop because he thought the airplane had contacted the loading dock.  The 
headset man walked to the left side of the airplane and then saw the gash.
The tug operator stated that he was using a different tug than the one used during the first 
pushback.  The tug had a "2-wheel working fault" indication.  After receiving clearance to push, 
the tug operator "made a gradual turn to avoid equipment and minimize jet blast to other 
gates.  Halfway down the ramp, [I] received [a] stop signal." 
The safety analyst further stated that, originally, the tug operator had insisted that there were 
problems with "the tug's drive mechanism sticking in 2-wheel mode or the crab mode."  Post-
accident investigation of the tug revealed no anomalies, although other mechanics 
subsequently complained about the same intermittent problem.  Components were removed 
for testing, with no anomalies found; however, once those components were replaced, there 
were no additional problems with the tug.
A representative from the tug's manufacturer stated that "regardless of...system status, the 
operator will always have control of the front wheel steering and braking."
Page 3 of 5NYC00LA086
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/14/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
6842 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4745 hours (Total, this make and model), 1572 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 110 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
McDonnell Douglas
Registration:
N302FE
Model/Series:
DC-10-30F DC-10-30F
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
46801
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2000, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
565000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
3 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
64258 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
GE
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
CF6-502C
Registered Owner:
FEDERAL EXPRESS CORP
Rated Power:
52000 lbs
Operator:
FEDERAL EXPRESS CORP
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Air Cargo
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
FDEA
Page 4 of 5NYC00LA086
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
EWR, 18 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0351 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
3°C / -3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (EWR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
MEMPHIS, TN (MEM)
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
0000 
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
NEWARK INTL AIRPORT (EWR)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
PAUL       R COX
Adopted Date:
11/29/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
DOMINICK   DELEO; TETERBORO, NJ,
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5NYC00LA086
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
