Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MACOMB, IL
Accident Number:
CHI00LA085
Date & Time:
03/01/2000, 1900 CST 
Registration:
N9552T
Aircraft:
Cessna 210
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
Analysis 
A Cessna 210 sustained substantial damage on impact with rough terrain during a forced 
landing following an in-flight loss of power.  The pilot rated passenger reported minor injuries 
and the pilot was uninjured.  A bank repossessed the airplane.  The bank was informed that the 
engine was reportedly making metal.  The bank's broker requested a ferry permit from the FAA 
for being out of annual only.   An aircraft purchase agreement was completed between the 
bank, the aircraft broker, and the pilot rated passenger for the buyer of record.  The agreement 
stated, 'Aircraft sold as-is, where is.'  The bank's representative said that no representations 
were made to the purchasers, that no reports of the airplane status were passed on to the 
purchasers, and that the ferry permit was faxed to his location.  A special flight permit 
limitation stated that '1. Carriage of persons other than essential crewmembers is prohibited.'  
The accident pilot said that his medical certificate had been expired at the time of the accident.  
The pilot rated passenger was an Airframe and Powerplant mechanic.  The passenger endorsed 
the airplane's logbook, 'I have inspected this aircraft [and] found it to be airworthy for a one 
time ferry flight in accordance with this ferry permit.'  The accident engine was examined and 
found to have a hole in its case near the number two cylinder.  Disassembly revealed silver 
colored and silver and copper colored debris in the oil sump pan.  The oil screen assembly was 
found secured by twisted safety wire.  That safety wire was coated with oil like substance and a 
dust like substance was found adhering those twists.  The screen and oil cooler contained 
debris. The crankshaft's cheek was found separated between the number two connecting rod 
and the number two main bearing. The cheek was discolored and deformed.  The number two 
main bearing was found with its left half not in place.  The aft crankshaft section was sent to 
the Materials Laboratory for detailed examination.  The lab report stated, 'Fracture features for 
the fatigue region emanated from multiple origins on the surface of the aft radius of the second 
main journal, with primary initiation approximately in the center of the origin area.  The 
boundary of the fatigue region was obliterated by mechanical damage.  The surface of the aft 
second main journal cheek radius was scored and burnished.  Ladder cracks were also 
observed in the cheek radius.' 
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 8CHI00LA085
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the inadequate maintenance inspection prior to the ferry flight by the pilot/mechanic rated 
passenger who endorsed the airplane as airworthy, the shift in the number two main bearing 
left half, and the fractured crankshaft.  A factor was the rough/uneven terrain and the ferry 
permit's procedures not followed by the pilot in command. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,BEARING - SHIFTED
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OWNER/PILOT MECHANIC
3. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - FRACTURED
4. (F) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
5. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
Page 3 of 8CHI00LA085
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On March 1, 2000, about 1900 central standard time, a Cessna 210, N9552T, piloted by a 
commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage on impact with rough terrain near a fence line 
during a forced landing following an in-flight loss of power near Macomb Municipal Airport, 
Macomb, Illinois.  The ferry flight was operated under 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and the flight was not operating on a flight 
plan.  The pilot rated passenger reported minor injuries and the pilot was uninjured.  The flight 
originated from Joliet Regional Airport, near Joliet, Illinois, at about 1730 and was enroute to 
Wichita Mid-Continent Airport, near Wichita, Kansas.
A representative of a Fixed Base Operator (FBO), where the accident airplane was hangared at 
Frankfort Airport, near Frankfort, Illinois, stated, "The aircraft landed at the Frankfort airport 
in late June possibly early July.  The pilot was a man who identified himself as only 'J.D.'  J.D. 
had not made prior arrangements with airport management to hangar the aircraft prior to 
arriving.  ...  J.D. said that he was looking for a corporate size hangar so that he would have 
enough space so that a couple mechanics that he knew could change the engine.  I informed 
him that this would not be possible unless he provided us with a certificate of insurance or he 
allowed our mechanics to assist in the engine change.  ...  Prior to this, he told me that the 
aircraft was producing a considerable amount of metal.  ...  I also recall that when J.D. landed, 
he was asking an aircraft that was in the pattern if there was any other aircraft in the pattern 
and if they would mind if he did a straight in approach, because he was concerned about having 
to do a go around."  The representative said, "We were expecting to start the job in mid 
November and around that time, we moved the aircraft to our maintenance hangar.  Towards 
the end of November, a man who represented himself as a private investigator that was 
working for an attorney ... came to the airport looking for N9552T.  Later that day, I talked to 
[the attorney] on the phone.  He informed me that he was hired by [a bank] to repose N9552T 
and he faxed me a copy of replevin....  At this time, I showed the aircraft to the private 
investigator and informed him of the condition of the aircraft as reported by J.D.  A few weeks 
later, I was approached by [a representative of the bank].  He was given access to the aircraft, 
which was still in the maintenance shop, and I told him exactly what J.D. had said about the 
condition of the aircraft.  I told him that the aircraft was in the maintenance shop for an engine 
change and that the engine was producing metal.  I offered our services to verify the condition 
of the aircraft.  I also told him that I had a mechanic that could sign the aircraft off for a one-
time ferry flight, if need be.  He then informed me that he had talked to [an aircraft broker], 
located in Janesville WI, about taking a look at the aircraft and possibly flying it to Janesville to 
be sold.  I told him that I thought that it would be wise to have the aircraft looked at by a 
mechanic before any flight.  This was due to the reported condition of the aircraft and the fact 
that it had not flown in six months.  His comment to me was, 'that he was sure that [the aircraft 
broker] knew what he was doing and that they might like to have a mechanic around whenever 
[the aircraft broker] came to Frankfort.'"
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector stated, "On March 1, 2000 a ferry permit 
was requested by a banks agent for service....  The information given to this office indicated 
that the ferry permit was necessary to fly the aircraft which did not have a current Annual 
Inspection.  The aircraft would be flown from Frankfort Illinois, to Los Angeles, California, 
where Annual Inspection would be performed by the new owner."  (See appended FAA Form 
Page 4 of 8CHI00LA085
8130-6, APPLICATION FOR AIRWORTHINESS CERTIFICATE.)
On March 1, 2000, an aircraft purchase agreement was completed between the bank, the 
aircraft broker, and the pilot rated passenger for the buyer of record.  The agreement stated, 
"Aircraft sold as-is, where is."  (See appended agreement.)
The representative of the bank said that no representations were made to the purchasers, that 
no reports of the airplane status were passed on to the purchasers, and that the ferry permit 
was faxed to his location.
A special flight permit limitations for this airplane stated that "1. Carriage of persons other 
than essential crewmembers is prohibited."
The FBO representative stated, "It just so happened that I was in Frankfort on March 1st and I 
saw a few guys looking at the airplane.   It appeared that they were looking over the aircraft and 
its general condition."  The airplane was flown from Frankfort Airport to Joliet Regional 
Airport, near Joliet, Illinois.
A lineman at the FBO at Joliet Regional Airport said, "The plane came in and a one of the men 
asked if we could jump start the plane if needed.  I put 51 galloons of 100LL and it only holds 
65 gallons.  I also put 35-40 psi of air in each tire.  They added 3 qts of 100-50 SAE Aeroshell 
oil and took two quarts for later.  They had just gotten the plane from Frankfort airport and 
were still unsure on how to work somethings like the gear doors and such.  I did have to jump 
their plane so they could leave.  It was around 5:30 pm."
The pilot stated, "Departed Joliet IL approx 5:00 climbed to 4500 everything normal, then 
climbed to 6500, while cruising near Macomb, IL engine quit, called center, they suggested one 
airport then I spotted beacon and center said it was closer so I turned towards it maintained 
glide speed but landed short of runway in plowed field."
INJURIES TO PERSONS
The sheriff's accident report indicated "that [the passenger] broke his right middle finger."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was an instrument rated commercial pilot.  He held a flight instructor rating for 
single engine airplanes.  He stated that he had a total of 1,387 hours of flight time, 400 hours of 
flight time in this make and model, and 523 hours of flight time at night.  He said that his 
medical certificate had been expired at the time of the accident.  The pilot held an Airframe 
mechanics rating.
The pilot rated passenger was a private pilot and held an Airframe and Powerplant mechanic 
rating.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The aircraft was a Cessna 210, production date of March 24, 1960, serial number 57352.  
According to airplane logbook entries, the last annual inspection was performed on February 5, 
1999.  On that date, the airplane had a recorded tachometer time of 4,198 hours.  An entry in 
the logbook dated March 1, 1999 stated, "I have inspected this aircraft [and] found it to be 
airworthy for a one time ferry flight in accordance with this ferry permit."  The entry was 
endorsed with the name and mechanics certificate number of the pilot rated passenger.  (See 
appended logbook pages.)
Page 5 of 8CHI00LA085
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1853, the Burlington Regional Airport, near Burlington, Iowa, weather was: Wind 290 
degrees at 4 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition clear; temperature 6 degrees C; 
dew point -1 degree C; altimeter 30.18 inches of mercury.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
On March 29, 2000, the accident engine, marked IO470E(13) s/n CS88696.73.E.R, was 
disassembled and examined at Macomb, Illinois.  General observations revealed a hole in the 
case on its upper side near the number two cylinder.  The examination revealed silver colored 
and silver and copper colored debris in the oil sump.  (See appended photo.)  The debris was 
consistent with bearing material.  The debris was deformed in a curved fashion that was similar 
to the radius between the crankshaft journal and cheek.  Chrome cylinders were found installed 
in the number one and four positions.  The oil screen assembly was found secured by twisted 
safety wire.  That safety wire was coated with an oil like substance and a dust like substance 
was found adhering between those twists.  The removed screen revealed debris, similar in color 
to the debris found in the sump.  The oil cooler was removed and debris, similar in color to the 
sump debris, was found.  The crankshaft's cheek was found separated between the number two 
connecting rod and the number two main bearing.  The mating surfaces of the separation 
revealed areas of discoloration and deformation of metal in a semicircular pattern.  The aft 
section of the separated crank was found angularly displaced from its centerline position at the 
point of separation.  The number two connecting rod cap was found deformed and held in its 
location by one of its two bolts.  The number two main bearing was found with its right half in 
place and its left half not in place.  The fuel pump was rotated by hand and expelled a liquid 
when rotated.  Both magnetos produced spark when rotated.
The aft crankshaft section was sent to the National Transportation Safety Board's Materials 
Laboratory for detailed examination.  The lab report stated, "Fracture features for the fatigue 
region emanated from multiple origins on the surface of the aft radius of the second main 
journal, with primary initiation approximately in the center of the origin area.  The boundary 
of the fatigue region was obliterated by mechanical damage.  The surface of the aft second main 
journal cheek radius was scored and burnished.  Ladder cracks were also observed in the cheek 
radius."  (See appended National Transportation Safety Board Materials Laboratory report.)
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The parties to the investigation included the FAA and Teledyne Continental Motors.
The engine parts were shipped back to an owner's representative
Page 6 of 8CHI00LA085
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Unknown Expired
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1387 hours (Total, all aircraft), 400 hours (Total, this make and model), 1265 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N9552T
Model/Series:
210 210
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
57352
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/05/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-470E
Registered Owner:
CATHERINE JOHNSON
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8CHI00LA085
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BRL, 698 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1853 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
309°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
JOLIET, IL (JOT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
WHICHITA, KS (ICT)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1730 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
MACOMB MUNICIPAL AIRPORT (MQB)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
705 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
EDWARD     F MALINOWSKI
Adopted Date:
04/19/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
ROBERT E SCOTT; SPRINGFIELD, IL
GEORGE M HOLLINGSWORTH; RESTON, VA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8CHI00LA085
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
