National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ALBUQUERQUE, NM
Accident Number: FTW96TA195
Date & Time: 05/01/1996, 2140 MDT
Registration: N773W
Aircraft: Rockwell NA-265-80
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 5 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Public Aircraft
 Analysis The captain was taking off on runway 21 with the wind from 330 degrees at 6 knots.
After the airplane had attained about 120 knots and had traversed about half the 10,000 foot runway, the captain aborted the takeoff, when he heard a loud noise and felt a severe vibration.
Subsequently, the airplane angled off the departure end of the runway and encountered soft terrain.
It came to rest about 300 feet beyond the end of the runway with the nose landing gear collapsed.
According to a tire analysis report, the left outboard tire failed in fatigue, followed by the left inboard tire, 'as the result of operation in an overdeflected condition.'
The report stated, 'Over-deflection is caused by operating the tire overloaded or underinflated.'
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TIRE - PRESSURE TOO LOW 2.
(F) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE 3.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TIRE - FATIGUE 4.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TIRE - FAILURE ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT Factual Information On May 1, 1996, approximately 2140 mountain daylight time, a Rockwell International NA- 265-80, N773W, owned and operated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service Aviation, was substantially damaged when the pilot aborted takeoff at Albuquerque, New Mexico.
There were no injuries to the airline transport rated captain and first officer and three passengers.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company VFR flight plan had been filed.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the operator, takeoff was initiated on runway 21 (10,000 ft x 150 ft., concrete).
Approximately 90 to 100 knots, the aircraft moved to the left of the runway centerline, requiring right aileron correction.
When the airplane had achieved approximately 120 knots and was about 5,000 feet down the runway, there was a loud noise followed by a severe vibration, and the airplane pulled hard to the right.
The captain initiated aborted takeoff procedures by applying brakes and reverse thrust.
The aircraft tracked across and departed the left side of the runway.
The nose landing gear collapsed and the aircraft came to a halt 300 feet beyond the departure end of the runway.
Federal Aviation Administration inspectors reported there was evidence that the left main tires blew out at the 3,800-foot mark.
At the 5,000-foot mark, the airplane went onto the right shoulder of the runway.
At the 9,800-foot mark, the airplane departed the left side of the runway.
In addition to the blown left tires, the right tires were found flattened.
Three runway lights were also damaged.
A Sabreliner Corporation report noted that there was no evidence of failure or malfunction of the aircraft brakes or thrust reversers.
According to the Aircraft Braking Systems Corporation, all of the wheel flanges fractured in tensile overload.
Although some fatigue cracking was noted in several flange segments, "there was no fractographic evidence to show that these cracks had initiated the primary fractures."
Goodyear Aviation Products reported the left outboard tire failed in fatigue, followed by the left inboard tire, "as the result of operation in an overdeflected condition."
The report added, "Over-deflection is caused by operating the tire overloaded or underinflated."
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
