National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: DILLINGHAM, AK
Accident Number: ANC96LA067
Date & Time: 05/01/1996, 1200 AKD
Registration: N1828C
Aircraft: Cessna 170
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis After completing a fish spotting flight, the pilot landed the airplane at the Dillingham Airport.
While taxiing back from landing, the pilot applied the brakes.
During the deceleration, a tire rotated on the rim shearing the valve stem.
The tire and portions of the rim separated from the landing gear and the airplane's wingtip dragged the ground.
The airplane was equipped with 8:50 size tires.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: rotation (slippage) of the tire on the rim, and shearing of the valve stem, which allowed the rim to contact the ground and then separate.
Findings Occurrence #1: DRAGGED WING,ROTOR,POD,FLOAT OR TAIL/SKID Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TIRE - SHEARED Factual Information On May 1, 1996, at 1200 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Cessna 170 airplane, N1828C, registered to and operated by the pilot, lost a tire while taxiing after landing and dragged a wingtip at the Dillingham Airport, Dillingham, Alaska.
The business flight, operating under 14 CFR Part 91 for the purpose of fish spotting, departed Togiak, Alaska, and the destination was Dillingham.
No flight plan was filed and visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The certificated commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured and the airplane received substantial damage.
During a telephone conversation with the pilot on May 4, 1996, he stated that after landing, while taxiing to the ramp and applying the brakes, the tire rotated on the rim and sheared off the valve stem.
The tire and rim then separated from the landing gear and the wingtip dragged the ground.
According to the NTSB form 6120.1/2, submitted by the pilot, he stated that the bonding failed and the rim separated.
He did not submit the rim for examination.
The airplane was equipped with 8:50 size tires.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
