National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PEYTON, CO
Accident Number: FTW96LA197
Date & Time: 05/01/1996, 2145 MDT
Registration: N175WW
Aircraft: Piper PA-28R-201T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said that after making a normal landing, the airplane began wobbling.
It then veered slowly to right and the right wing struck a taxiway sign.
The pilot said he had checked the tire pressures two weeks before the accident and found them correctly inflated to 30 psi.
Also, the tires appeared normal during his preflight inspection prior to the accident flight.
Postflight inspection, however, revealed the right tire was flat.
When the hub cap was removed, the valve stem fell out.
It had separated from the tire tube.
The pilot said it appeared the valve stem had not completely bonded to the tube.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the failure of the right main tire due to valve stem separation.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TIRE - FAILURE ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
OBJECT - AIRPORT SIGN/MARKER Factual Information On May 1, 1996, approximately 2145 mountain daylight time, a Piper PA-28R-201T, N175WW, owned and operated by a private owner, was substantially damaged during landing at Peyton, Colorado.
There were no injuries to the private pilot and two passengers.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated at Pueblo, Colorado, at approximately 2125 mountain daylight time.
The pilot said after making a normal landing, the airplane began wobbling.
It then veered slowly to the right and the right wing struck a taxiway sign.
The pilot said he had checked the tire pressures two weeks before the accident and found them correctly inflated to 30 psi.
Also, the tires appeared normal during his preflight inspection prior to the accident flight.
Postflight inspection, however, revealed the right tire was flat.
When the hub cap was removed, the valve stem fell out.
It had separated from the tire tube.
The pilot said it appeared the valve stem had not completely bonded to the tube.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
