Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Brooksville, FL
Accident Number:
ERA10LA009
Date & Time:
10/01/2009, 1400 EDT 
Registration:
N81FW
Aircraft:
BUTLER AIRCRAFT COMPANY 
AEROSTAR
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing gear collapse
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot/owner selected the landing gear to the extended position in preparation for landing. 
The amber light, which was designed to illuminate temporarily to indicate that the gear was in 
transit, did not illuminate during the gear extension, but all other indications were normal. 
After touchdown on the paved runway, the nose gear did not remain extended and the airplane 
pitched down until the nose contacted the runway surface. The airplane came to a stop on the 
runway and sustained substantial damage. Preliminary examination revealed that the cockpit 
landing gear position indicator lights functioned properly. However, lack of replacement parts 
availability had prevented the repair of the airplane through at least January 2011, and the 
detailed functional checks and examinations that were planned to be conducted concurrently 
with the repair have not been accomplished. Maintenance records documented several recent, 
preaccident repairs to the nose and main landing gear systems, but it could not be determined 
whether the nose gear collapse was related to those maintenance activities.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The collapse of the nose landing gear during landing rollout for undetermined reasons.
Findings
Aircraft
Nose/tail landing gear - Failure (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 6ERA10LA009
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On October 1, 2009, about 1400 eastern daylight time, a Butler Aircraft Aerostar 601, N81FW, 
was substantially damaged when the nose gear collapsed on landing at Hernando County 
Airport (BKV), Brooksville, Florida. The certificated private pilot/owner, the sole person on 
board, was not injured. The personal flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan 
was filed for the flight. 
According to the pilot, he departed in the mid-wing, twin-engine airplane from Albert Whitted 
Airport (SPG), St. Petersburg, Florida for the flight to BKV, a non-towered airport. He set up 
for a landing on runway 3, which was charted as a concrete surface 5,015 feet long and 150 feet 
wide. The airplane was equipped with three green lights, one for each landing gear, that were 
designed to illuminate when the three landing gear were properly extended for landing. The 
pilot reported that after he selected the landing gear to the down position, he observed that the 
three green lights were illuminated.
 
The pilot reported that the airplane touched down "normally" on the main landing gear, but 
when he lowered the nose to place the nose gear on the runway for the rollout, the airplane 
continued to pitch down until the nose structure contacted the runway surface. The propeller 
tips contacted the runway, and the airplane slid to a stop on its main landing gear and the nose 
structure. The airplane did not depart the paved runway surface, and there was no fire. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records indicated that the pilot held a private pilot 
certificate with airplane single-engine and multi-engine land ratings, and an instrument 
airplane rating. He had approximately 1,847 total hours of flight experience, which included 
approximately 51 hours in the accident airplane make and model, and approximately 8 hours 
in the accident airplane. His most recent flight review was completed in August 2008, and his 
most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued in September 2008.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 1970, and was equipped with two 
Lycoming IO-540 series piston engines. Previous registration numbers assigned to this 
airplane included N7482S and N31FW. The accident pilot purchased the airplane in June 
2009. The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed in January 2009, and at 
that time, it had accumulated a total of 4,232 hours in service. The pilot reported that at the 
time of the accident, the airplane had accumulated a total time in service of 4,255 hours. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
The 1353 BKV recorded weather observation included winds from 010 degrees at 5 knots, 10 
Page 3 of 6ERA10LA009
miles visibility, clear skies, temperature 28 degrees C, dew point 9 degrees C, and an altimeter 
setting of 29.99 inches of mercury. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
According to information provided by the FAA inspector who examined the airplane, the nose 
gear doors, the lower forward nose skins and the underlying structure exhibited crush and 
abrasion damage from the runway contact.
Post-accident discussions with the pilot revealed that an amber light normally illuminated to 
denote when the landing gear was in transit to the extended position, but on the accident flight, 
the amber light did not illuminate when the gear was in transit. The airplane was also equipped 
with a warning horn designed to sound when the throttles were retarded whenever the landing 
gear was not extended. The pilot stated that there was no pre-takeoff check of this warning 
horn system, and that the horn did not sound during the accident approach and landing.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Previous Maintenance Activity
Review of FAA records revealed that in 1989, a major repair was accomplished on the lower 
nose section of the airplane. The repairs included replacement of webs, skins, and nose landing 
gear door assemblies. The reason for the repair was not determined.  
Review of maintenance records indicated that concurrent with the most recent annual 
inspection, which was completed in January 2009, several discrepancies were identified and 
corrected. Discrepancy number 15 was cited as "Nose gear doors hang open about 4 inches," 
and the stated corrective action was reported as "Checked and found rigging not correct and 
incorrect attach bracket installed. Installed correct attach bracket on nose gear and rigged and 
adjusted doors as needed." The correct, newly-installed component was part number 5462014-
1. Subsequent discussions with the maintenance facility technician who conducted the subject 
maintenance revealed that the nose gear doors were opened and closed by a series of 
mechanical sequencing links that were driven by the retraction or extension of the nose gear, 
without any additional actuation or control system components. The technician stated that it 
was one of those sequencing links that was the component referred to as the "attach bracket" in 
the corrective action write-up for the discrepancy. 
Discrepancy number 16 was cited as "Nose gear oleo strut leaking," and the stated corrective 
action was "resealed and serviced nose gear strut." Discrepancy number 31 was "hydraulic leak 
coming from belly," and the sources were identified as the landing gear actuating valve and the 
flap actuating valve. The stated corrective action was "removed and resealed valves."
Airplane Examination
Subsequent to the accident, the airplane was partially hoisted, the nose gear was manually 
extended and locked, and the airplane was placed in a hangar on its gear. An FAA inspector 
conducted a preliminary examination of the airplane in this condition. He reported that when 
electrical power was applied to the airplane, the three green landing gear lights on the 
instrument panel illuminated, which was the normal indication that all three landing gear were 
properly extended. The amber "gear in transit/unsafe" light was equipped with a push-to-test 
Page 4 of 6ERA10LA009
feature, and illuminated when pushed.
According to the pilot, he has had the airplane scheduled for repair since the October 2009 
nose gear event, but as of January 2011, lack of available replacement parts has prevented the 
start of that maintenance activity. As a consequence, certain investigative activities that were 
contingent upon the planned maintenance activities have not been accomplished. Those 
investigative activities included functional checks of the landing gear aural warning system, 
and the landing gear retraction and extension system. Therefore, to date, no failure 
mechanisms or component failures, including the items repaired during the most recent 
annual inspection, have been identified as contributory or causal to the accident sequence.
History of Flight
Landing-landing roll
Landing gear collapse (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/25/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/11/2008
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1847 hours (Total, all aircraft), 51 hours (Total, this make and model), 1633 hours 
(Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 71 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA10LA009
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BUTLER AIRCRAFT COMPANY
Registration:
N81FW
Model/Series:
AEROSTAR 601
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
61-0049-94
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/26/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5700 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
23 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4232 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540
Registered Owner:
AIR 906 LLC
Rated Power:
290 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BKV, 76 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
St Petersburg, FL (SPG)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Brooksville, FL (BKV)
Type of Clearance:
Unknown
Departure Time:
1230 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Hernando County Airport (BKV)
Runway Surface Type:
Concrete
Airport Elevation:
76 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
03
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5015 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Page 6 of 6ERA10LA009
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
28.473611, -82.455278 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael C Huhn
Adopted Date:
07/18/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Frank Schaefer; FAA/FSDO; Tampa, FL
Publish Date:
07/18/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=74867
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
