During the maintenance test flight, the flight crew moved the landing gear handle to the 
ﬁdownﬂ position but did not observe the three green landing gear down-and-locked lights 
illuminate. After cycling the landing gear ﬁseveralﬂ times they observed a gear down-and-
locked indication in the cockpit. After landing, while taxiing to parking, the right main landing 
gear collapsed, and the right wing and aileron struck the ground and sustained substantial 
damage. 
The right landing gear side brace fractured near the fuselage attach forging due to fatigue, 
which initiated near the weld between the large end fuselage attach forging and the outer tube. 
No obvious discontinuities such as porosity or undercutting were visually noted in the weld 
adjacent to the fracture. 
The failure of the right main landing gear side brace due to fatigue, which resulted in a collapse 
of the right main landing gear. 
On July 2, 2013, about 1600 Alaska daylight time, a twin-engine Curtiss Wright, C-46F 
airplane, N1837M, sustained substantial damage while taxiing to parking at the Fairbanks 
International Airport, Fairbanks, Alaska. The commercial certificated captain and the airline 
transport certificated first officer were not injured. The airplane was registered to and operated 
by Evert's Air Fuel, under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal regulations Part 91, as a 
visual flight rules (VFR) maintenance test flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, 
and no flight plan had been filed.
The operator reported that during the maintenance test flight, the flight crew moved the 
landing gear handle to the "down" position, but did not observe the three green landing gear 
down-and-lock lights illuminate. After cycling the landing gear "several" times they observed a 
gear down-and-locked indication in the cockpit. After landing, while taxiing to parking, the 
right main landing gear collapsed, and the right wing and aileron sustained substantial 
damage. 
A postaccident examination, of the landing gear system revealed that both inner and outer 
tubes of the right landing gear side brace, separated near the fuselage attach forging. The 
fractured main landing gear side brace assembly was sent to the NTSB's Materials Laboratory 
in Washington, D.C. for examination. 
A senior Safety Board metallurgist reported that a magnified optical examination of the landing 
gear side brace assembly fracture surfaces revealed ratchet marks, arrest lines, and flat fracture 
regions consistent with fatigue propagation. No obvious discontinuities such as porosity or 
undercutting were visually noted in the weld adjacent to the fracture. A complete copy of the 
NTSB's materials laboratory factual report is included in the public docket for this accident.
In the recommendation section of the NTSB Accident/Incident Reporting Form 6120.1, the 
operator stated that the accident may have been prevented if the flight crew would have shut 
down the airplane clear of the runway, and had the landing gear inspected before taxiing to 
parking. They also noted, that three green down-and-lock lights illuminated is the normal 
indication for a positive lock.
