Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Palm Coast, FL
Accident Number:
ERA15FA003
Date & Time:
10/03/2014, 0935 EDT 
Registration:
N461MM
Aircraft:
MILLER RAYMOND A SONEX WAIEX
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The accident flight was the pilot's first solo flight in the experimental amateur-built airplane, 
which had not been flown for about 6 months. The airplane departed without incident; 
however, about 10 minutes after takeoff, it experienced a total loss of engine power (as 
reported by a witness) and subsequently impacted in a tidal marsh. Postaccident examination 
of the airplane, which included disassembly of its engine, did not reveal evidence of any 
preimpact mechanical malfunctions; however, the fuel system was completely compromised 
and the majority of the ignition system was not recovered. While the airplane had a reported 
history of fuel system issues, the logbooks were not located, and the airplane's maintenance 
and operational history could not be verified. Therefore, the reason for the loss of engine power 
could not be determined.
The pilot had no record of a Federal Aviation Administration medical certification 
examination. A limited autopsy did not identify any natural disease. Toxicology testing 
detected ethanol in muscle (0.082 gm/dl) and liver (0.082 gm/dl), as well as n-butanol and n-
propanol. While the distribution of ethanol in the muscle and liver is not inconsistent with 
ingestion, decomposition and the finding of n-butanol and n-propanol in tissues suggests that 
some or all of the ethanol came from microbial action after death. 
Additionally, diphenhydramine and citalopram and its metabolite were detected in liver and 
muscle. Although diphenhydramine can cause significant psychomotor impairment, no blood 
was available for analysis, thus it could not be determined if the pilot was impaired by the 
diphenhydramine at the time of the accident. Citalopram is an antidepressant that is not 
generally considered impairing; however, it was unknown if the pilot's underlying psychiatric 
condition was under control.
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 8ERA15FA003
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power during cruise flight for reasons that could not be determined due 
to the postaccident condition of the engine and its associated fuel and ignition systems.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 8ERA15FA003
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On October 3, 2014, about 0935 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Sonex 
Waiex, N461MM, owned and operated by a private individual, was substantially damaged 
when it impacted terrain about 10 minutes after takeoff from the Flagler County Airport (XFL), 
Palm Coast, Florida. The private pilot was fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the local personal flight that was conducted 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The XFL airport manager reported that the airplane had been based at the airport for about 6 
months.
According to air traffic control information obtained from the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA), the airplane was cleared for a northeast departure from runway 6, at 0926, which the 
pilot acknowledged. Approximately 3 minutes later, the pilot was instructed to proceed on 
course and report clear of the "class delta" airspace. There were no further communications 
received from the pilot. Primary radar targets consistent with the accident flight revealed that 
the airplane made a left turn after takeoff and flew northbound, before turning westbound 
about 0933, where it flew for about 2 minutes, before radar contact was lost. The last two radar 
targets indicated a northbound turn; however, the accident site was located approximately 1/4 
mile west-southwest of the last radar target.
A witness, located in a residential community about 2.5 miles south of the accident site 
reported that he observed a white/silver single-engine airplane flying overhead sometime 
between 0900 and 1000. The airplane was approximately 1,000 feet above the ground, and 
flying to the north when it experienced a sudden, complete loss of engine power. The airplane 
turned to the left and completed two circular patterns before disappearing from his view. He 
did not hear any engine noise or sounds associated with an accident, and assumed that the 
pilot of the airplane performed a successful emergency landing to a nearby former golf course.
According to the pilot's son, when the pilot failed to meet a family member on the evening of 
October 3rd, local authorities were contacted. The pilot's car was subsequently found in front 
of his hangar at XFL. The hangar doors were open and the pilot's son believed the pilot most 
likely elected to make a local solo flight in the airplane, which he had not flown solo previously. 
Radar data and mobile telephone position information were utilized to help determine the 
airplane's location. The airplane was subsequently found on October 4th, in a tidal marsh near 
Pellicer Creek, about 13 miles north-northwest of XFL. It was recovered on October 9th.
Page 4 of 8ERA15FA003
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
77, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
None 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
150 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5 hours (Total, this make and model)
The pilot, age 77, held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land 
that was issued in 1972. The pilot's logbook was not recovered. The pilot reported 150 hours of 
total flight experience, which included 5 hours in the make and model of the accident airplane 
on an insurance application dated February 12, 2014.
A search of FAA airman medical records did not reveal any medical certification records for the 
pilot; however, it was noted that airman medical records with no identified pathology from 
prior to about 1998 were not uploaded into the current electronic system. The pilot held a 
Florida driver's license, and did not hold any FAA-issued mechanic or repairman certificates.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MILLER RAYMOND A
Registration:
N461MM
Model/Series:
SONEX WAIEX NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2013
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
W0156
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
AeroVee
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
2180
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
80 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 8ERA15FA003
According to FAA records, the single-engine, fixed-gear, all-metal, "Y-tail," two-seat 
monoplane, serial number WO156, was built by the pilot from a kit that was purchased during 
September 2010, and issued an FAA special airworthiness certificate as an experimental 
amateur-built airplane on January 15, 2013. The airplane was equipped with an 80-
horsepower, AeroVee 2180 engine, with a Sensenich two-blade wood propeller assembly.
The airplane's maintenance logbooks were not located, and it total hours of operation and 
progress through phase I flight testing could not be confirmed. The pilot's son indicated that 
the airplane was likely last flown when it was repositioned from Fort Pierce, Florida, to XFL, 
about 6 months prior to the accident. According to XFL fueling records, the only fuel 
purchased by the pilot for the airplane was 5 gallons of 100-low-lead aviation gasoline, on 
September 11, 2014. Recovery personnel reported that the airplane's 16-gallon fuel tank was 
half-full of fuel at the time of the recovery.
A friend of the pilot reported that the airplane was originally built and was being maintained by 
the pilot. He believed that the airplane had been operated for a total of 5 total hours, and that 
the pilot had flown in it with a flight instructor for less than 3 hours. He further reported that 
the airplane had been experiencing issues with its fuel system since prior to its departure from 
Fort Pierce; which included fuel leaks, and required the pilot to perform several adjustments to 
the fuel metering system.
The engine was not equipped with a traditional carburetor. It utilized an AeroInjector with a 
"throttle slide" to meter combustion air and fuel, and a tapered needle valve to control in-flight 
mixture adjustments and serve as an idle cut-off valve.
Page 6 of 8ERA15FA003
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
XFL, 33 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
11 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0950 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
345째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 5500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
150째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.05 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26째C / 23째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Palm Coast, FL (XFL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Palm Coast, FL (XFL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0925 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
A weather observation taken at XFL, at 0950, reported: wind from 150 degrees at 3 knots, 7 
statute miles visibility, a broken cloud ceiling at 5,500 feet, temperature 26 degrees Celsius (C), 
dew point temperature 23 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.05 inches of mercury.
Airport Information
Airport:
Flagler County Airport (XFL)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
33 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
29.653889, -81.272500 (est)
Page 7 of 8ERA15FA003
The majority of the airplane was buried in mud/water. The empennage and portions of 
structure associated with both wings were visible to varying degrees depending on the tide. The 
rudder, both stabilizers and elevators remained attached and were relatively undamaged 
except for aft compression along the left stabilizer leading edge.
The wreckage was examined by FAA inspectors on October 17, 2014. According to an FAA 
inspector, the examination revealed that all major portions of the airframe were accounted for. 
The engine was separated from the airframe, and the cockpit and cabin areas were destroyed. 
Both wings were crushed aft and bent back to the fuselage. The rudder and elevator control 
surfaces remained attached to the airframe and connected to the respective control surfaces; 
however, due to significant impact damage, flight control continuity could not be confirmed.
The propeller was separated from the engine and displayed no evidence consistent with 
rotation. One blade was fractured near the hub and the other propeller blade remained 
attached to the hub and was undamaged.
The engine sustained significant impact damage. The front of both valve covers were impact 
damaged and the exhaust tubes were crushed and bent back. The engine's crankshaft could not 
be rotated due impact damage and contamination from mud; however, all cylinder valves were 
intact and could be manually actuated by depressing their respective springs. In addition, the 
valve assemblies and cylinders were disassembled for inspection, which revealed no anomalies. 
The crankshaft was intact. All connecting rods were intact and remained connected with no 
evidence of abnormal distress. The engine's AeroInjector fuel metering unit was impact 
damaged. Its fuel line assembly remained intact and the inline throttle valve was in the open 
position. The fuel mixture position could not be determined. The ignition system data plate 
was recovered; however, no other components from the ignition system except the spark plugs 
and portions of the spark plugs ignition leads were recovered. All spark plugs were removed. 
Their electrodes were undamaged and free of contamination.
Medical And Pathological Information
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Office of the District 23 Medical Examiner, St. 
Augustine, Florida, on October 10, 2014. No natural disease was identified; however, the 
autopsy was limited due to the condition of the recovered remains. The autopsy report 
identified the cause of death as multiple blunt force injuries.
Toxicological testing performed on the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical Science Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, detected ethanol in muscle (0.82 gm/fl) and liver 
(0.082 gm/dl), as well as n-butanol and n-propanol; however, the samples displayed 
putrefaction. Additionally, diphenhydramine, citalopram, and its metabolite n-
desmethylcitalopram were detected in liver and muscle.
Page 8 of 8ERA15FA003
A representative from the pilot's family stated that the pilot lived an active lifestyle and was in 
good health. He was not aware of any medical conditions that may have contributed to the 
accident.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Luke Schiada
Adopted Date:
10/24/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Marco Grillo; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL
Publish Date:
10/24/2016
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90205
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
