 The airplane was observed flying down the centerline of the runway between 150 to 200 feet 
agl, and commence an abrupt steep bank to the left.  Once into the 45 to 50 degree bank, the 
nose dropped, and the ballistic recovery parachute was seen to partially deploy.  The airplane 
continued in the descending spiral until impact with the ground.  No evidence of  precrash 
malfunctions of flight controls were found. 
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during a low altitude maneuver resulting in the 
aircraft's uncontrollable descent until impact with the terrain. 
 On November 1, 1998, about 1600 central standard time, an experimental, Ferguson 
Rans S-10 Sakota, N383FF, registered to a private individual, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 
91 personal flight, crashed while maneuvering overhead Pisgah Airstrip, Pisgah, Mississippi. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The amateur-built 
airplane was destroyed and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, sustained fatal injuries. 
The flight originated from the private strip about 20 minutes before the accident.
According to a witness, the pilot's father, the flight was performing a flyby maneuver at 
about 150 to 200 feet agl, on a heading of 180 degrees down the centerline of the runway, and 
at about the 2/3 point of the runway the flight entered an abrupt 45-to 50-degree left bank. 
During the left bank, the nose dropped and the ballistic recovery chute (BRS), was observed to 
deploy.  The left bank continued for about 270 degrees, the nose dropped 25 to 30 degrees 
below the horizon trailing the partially deployed BRS, and the airplane impacted the terrain in 
a nearly vertical attitude.  The engine sounded normal the whole time. The father mentioned 
that he thought the pilot had no acrobatic experience. 
A friend of the pilot who helped build the airplane and who had given dual instruction to 
the pilot about 5 to 6 weeks previously in the same airplane stated they performed maneuvers 
and steep turns above 5,000 feet agl.
Examination of the airplane by FAA personnel revealed the airplane impacted the 
ground in a near vertical attitude, upright, heading about 180 degrees. The ballistic recovery 
system, (BRS) drogue chute was about 60-feet forward of the wreckage and the main canopy 
was deployed behind the left wing and both appeared undamaged.  Severe fuselage crushing 
extended rearward to aft of the pilot's seat.  The wings, aft fuselage and empennage were 
minimally damaged.  
Flight control continuity from the cockpit control stick about the roll axis was 
impossible to confirm due to impact damage to rod ends under the cockpit floor, but was 
confirmed using control linkage outward of the damage to the flight controls. Pitch control 
continuity was confirmed from stick to elevator.  Rudder control path continuity was 
confirmed from pedals to control surface.  Engine control continuity was not possible due to 
impact damage. The Hobbs meter indicated 64.9 hours.  The two composite fuel tanks had 
been compromised, and the wreckage smelled of fuel.  The fuel lines and carburetors contained 
fuel and the pilot's father said the tanks were nearly full at takeoff.  The main fuel valve and the 
right fuel valve were found in the "on" position and the left valve was in an intermediate 
position.  Seat belts and harnesses were intact and still attached to their respective anchoring 
points.  The pilot was found with seat belt and harness fastened.  (For additional information 
see attached FAA Inspector's Statement).
Postmortem examination of the pilot was performed by Steven T. Hayne, M.D., Deputy 
Coroner, Rankin County, Pearl, Mississippi, on November 1, 1998, and revealed cause of death 
to be attributed to multiple traumatic injuries suffered in the crash.  No findings that could be 
considered causal were noted. Toxicological testing was conducted at the Federal Aviation 
Administration Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The tests were negative for 
ethanol, carbon monoxide, basic, acidic, and neutral drugs.
