The airplane impacted a rice harvesting combine during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power. The pilot stated that during cruise flight the 'engine rpm dropped rapidly' and 
turning on the fuel boost pump, switching the fuel selector from left to right then back to left, 
and checking the magneto switch did not restore engine power. The pilot did not recall 
checking the carburetor heat or the mixture control. During the final approach to a dirt road, 
which ran between two rice fields, the pilot realized that he was not going to clear the rice 
combine parked adjacent to the dirt road and leveled the wings just prior to impact. 
Examination of the engine revealed that there was a broken fuel line fitting on the output side 
of the engine driven fuel pump. The fitting was replaced and the engine was test-run for 20 
minutes at various power and mixture settings. No anomalies were noted during the test-run. 
An NTSB metallurgist found that the fracture surface of the fuel line fitting 'contained ductile 
dimple features, typical of overstress separations.' 
Loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 2, 1998, approximately 1630 central standard time, a Morris Rutan Long EZE 
homebuilt experimental airplane, N21EE, co-owned by five private individuals and operated by 
one of the co-owners, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a complete 
loss of engine power near Alvin, Texas.  The private pilot received serious injuries and his 
passenger sustained fatal injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan 
was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal flight.  The local 
flight departed at approximately 1600 from the Clover Airport near Houston, Texas.
During interviews conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) and another NTSB 
investigator, the pilot stated that on the day of the accident, he had completed a preflight 
inspection of the airplane which included checking the fuel tanks for water.  Prior to the 
accident flight, he took a friend flying for about 40 minutes.  Neither he nor the friend reported 
any discrepancies during that flight.  Another friend, who added fuel to the aircraft, stated that 
the left tank was 3/4 full and that the right tank was full prior to the accident flight.  
The pilot further reported that during cruise flight at about 2,500 feet msl, the engine rpm 
decreased "like pull[ing, the] throttle quick."  He asked the passenger if he had pulled the 
throttle to idle, and the passenger answered in the negative.  He then engaged the electric fuel 
boost pump, and the fuel pressure increased to 8 p.s.i.  He then rotated the fuel selector handle 
from the left tank to the right tank.  He did not notice a change in rpm and switched the fuel 
selector back to the left tank.  He also stated that he checked the magnetos.  The pilot stated 
that he did not remember checking the carburetor heat or mixture control.  He then pumped 
the engine fuel primer which produced a 300 to 400 RPM increase.  The primer was not 
returned to the locked position prior to the impact. 
The pilot also reported that he turned the airplane toward the Clover Airport; however, 
realizing the airplane would not be able to reach the airport, he elected to make a forced 
landing to a dirt road that ran between two rice fields and parallel to a water canal.  During 
final approach, he realized that the airplane would not clear an International Farm Combine 
(utilized for harvesting rice) that was parked adjacent to the dirt road.  He leveled the wings 
just prior to impacting the farm equipment.
Local authorities reported that during the rescue operations, "the pilot stated that the engine 
quit."  Witnesses located approximately one mile from the accident site reported hearing a 
"sudden shut off of engine noise" as they observed the airplane.
When the airplane did not return to the non-towered Clover Airport, pilots at the airport 
initiated a search.  At 0900 the following morning, the airplane was located by a man driving to 
work.  Local authorities responding to the site reported that the seat belts were not secured on 
the occupants.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, who was occupying the front seat, held a private pilot certificate and was issued a 
third class medical certificate on May 27, 1997.  According to the pilot's logbooks, he had 
accumulated 224 total flight hours, of which 38 hours were in the same make and model as the 
accident aircraft.  The pilot, who was one of the builders of the airplane, completed a biennial 
flight review on July 9, 1997, in a Stinson 108-1 airplane. 
The 76-year-old passenger, who was occupying the rear seat, was the certified repairman for 
the experimental aircraft.  The passenger was issued a commercial pilot certificate in January 
1985.  However, his application for a medical certificate was denied on June 6, 1996.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The canard wing, pusher engine, all composite airplane, serial number 1270, was issued an 
airworthiness certificate on December 18, 1991.  The aircraft's maintenance records indicated 
that in February 1995, the airplane experienced an engine fire.  During the engine fire, the 
cowling, lower fuselage, and the electrical wiring next to the engine compartment were 
damaged.  The fire damage was repaired between 1995 and 1998.  According to the 
maintenance records, the certified repairman for the Long EZE endorsed a condition 
inspection on June 16, 1998.  On October 28, 1998, the pilot made the first solo test flight 
(Hobbs time of 79.8 hours) since the occurrence of the engine fire.  The flight lasted 
approximately 40 minutes and no discrepancies were noted.
The airplane was powered by a Lycoming O-235-C engine, serial number 1089-15.  An Ellison 
Fluid Systems, Inc., EFS-3 (serial number 1083) pressure carburetor was installed on the 
engine.  
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The fuselage, with the engine intact, came to rest (29 degrees 25 minutes North; 095 degrees 17 
minutes West) inverted against the upslope of the water canal dyke which ran parallel with the 
dirt road that the pilot had selected for the forced landing.  The initial impact point was the rice 
combine parked adjacent to the dirt road.  The wreckage distribution path extended on a 
measured magnetic heading of 064 degrees for a distance of 86 feet.  Numerous pieces of 
fiberglass from the forward canard and left wing were found on the combine.  The right main 
landing gear and gear struts were also found on the combine.  Physical evidence indicated that 
the left main tire struck a hinged inspection door of the combine.  Both wings were separated 
from the fuselage.  The left wing was found 27 feet from the combine, and the outboard portion 
of the right wing was found 43 feet from the combine.  The nose gear, front canard, emergency 
locator transmitter, and the inboard portion of the right wing were found along the edge of the 
drainage ditch, which ran along the south side of the dyke.  See the wreckage diagram for 
additional information.
Flight control continuity was compromised where the wings separated from the fuselage.  The 
cables at the wing roots were pulled by hand and proper movement of the flight controls was 
observed.  The speed brake (located on the bottom of the fuselage) was found in the deployed 
position; however, the speed brake contained impact scrapes that matched scrapes found on 
the bottom of the fuselage, indicating that it was stowed at the time of impact.
During an examination of the cockpit, the throttle and mixture controls were found in the full 
forward position, and the carburetor heat was in the off position.  The fuel selector was found 
selected to the left tank and the primer pump was found in the unlocked position.  The 
magneto switch was in the both position and the fuel pump switch was found in the off 
position.  
The integrity of the composite fuel tanks was compromised, and physical evidence of fuel in the 
drainage ditch water was noted.  It was estimated by the NTSB investigator that the total 
amount of fuel on board at the time of the accident was 39.5 gallons.
Initial examination of the engine revealed that the engine was still attached to the engine 
mounts.  The wooden propeller was attached to the crankshaft, and there was no leading edge 
damage or scraping on either blade.   During the examination, it was noted that the fuel line 
fitting at the output side of the engine driven fuel pump was separated.  The fuel fitting was 
photographed and removed for further examination at the NTSB Materials Laboratory in 
Washington, D.C.
The airplane was moved to the owner's hangar for further examination and an engine test run.  
When the propeller was hand rotated, valve movement was observed on all cylinders and 
continuity was confirmed to the accessory case at the rear of the engine.  Fuel was found in the 
engine driven fuel pump line.    When the engine gascolator filter was removed and examined, 
no evidence of water or debris was found.  The automotive gasoline tank and filter that the 
owners used to fuel the airplane were examined, and no evidence of water or debris was found 
in the tank.  The gasoline tank was then connected to the engine fuel line where it attaches to 
the fuel selector.  The airplane fuselage was secured to a trailer prior to the engine run.  The 
separated fuel fitting was replaced with a serviceable fitting.  The engine was primed using the 
airplane's electric fuel boost pump.  The engine was started using an outside power source to 
operate the starter.  The engine was operated for a total of 20 minutes through its power range 
utilizing the front and aft seat throttle controls.  No discrepancies were noted during the engine 
run.
The magneto test could not be performed during the engine test run because the ignition 
switch lines had been cut during the rescue operation.  However, no discrepancies were noted 
during the engine test run.  For more information on the engine test run see the enclosed 
manufacturer's engine report.
The integrity of the fuel lines and the fuel vent lines was tested by applying compressed air 
through the fuel lines.  Fuel tank screens were clear and no blockage was detected in the fuel 
system.  Examination and disassembly of the engine driven fuel pump did not reveal any 
anomalies.  
The Ellison Fluid Systems carburetor was removed after the test run for subsequent 
examination at the manufacturer's facility.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1650, the weather observation for Ellington Field (located 15 miles northeast of the accident 
site) was wind from 290 degrees at 8 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, sky clear, temperature 
72 degrees Fahrenheit, dewpoint 52 degrees Fahrenheit, altimeter setting 29.82 inches of 
Mercury.
At 1653, the weather observation for Galveston Airport (located 25 miles southeast of the 
accident site) was wind from 270 degrees at 8 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, sky clear, 
temperature 73 degrees Fahrenheit, dewpoint 54 degrees Fahrenheit, altimeter setting 29.82 
inches of Mercury.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the passenger by Forensic Pathology Services in Texas City, 
Texas.  Aviation toxicological testing was performed by the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute 
(CAMI), Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  Toxicology tests for drugs and alcohol were negative, 
except for Salicylate (aspirin) found in the urine.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
Search and rescue operations were initiated after the pilots at the airport reported the overdue 
airplane.  Units of the Civil Air Patrol flew over the area in search of an emergency locator 
transmitter (ELT) signal.  The airplane's ELT was destroyed upon impact.  Its pre-impact 
location was in the nose section of the airplane.  Examination of the manufacturing blue prints 
revealed that the recommended location of the ELT was in the wing root area.  
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The carburetor (Ellison Fluid Systems model EFS-3, serial number 10830) was examined at 
the manufacturer's facility under the supervision of an NTSB investigator.  A tear-down 
inspection was performed to check for internal anomalies, and an operational test was 
conducted to confirm that the carburetor supplied adequate fuel to the engine.  No anomalies 
were found which would have caused intermittent operation of the carburetor.  See the 
enclosed manufacturer's examination report for more information.
The ignition switch was disassembled and examined by an NTSB investigator and an FAA 
inspector.  The ignition switch was found in a clean condition and did not show any signs of 
corrosion or carbon tracking.  A continuity test was conducted on the ignition switch on June 
10, 1999.  No anomalies were noted that would have prevented the operation of the ignition 
switch. 
The NTSB metallurgist reported that examination of the engine fuel line fitting under a 
scanning electron microscope, revealed that the fracture surface "contained ductile dimple 
features, typical of overstress separations."  See the enclosed metallurgy report for more 
information. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The aircraft was released to one of the airplane's co-owners on November 4, 1998.  The 
maintenance and pilot records were released to the FAA inspector on November 5, 1998.
