On the takeoff roll the pilot's seat slid back.  The aircraft made an abrupt turn to the left, while 
the pilot was attempting to move the seat back into place.  After the unsuccessful attempt was 
made to move the seat back into place, the pilot retarded the throttle and the aircraft came to a 
stop after a ground loop.  The seats were inspected and found to be stiff and difficult to move 
fore and aft.  The seat rails and latching mechanisms were inspected and no deficiencies were 
noted. 
Failure of the pilot to properly secure the seat which subsequently slid back on the takeoff roll 
and lead to the pilot's loss of aircraft control. 
 On November 2, 1998, at 1100 hours mountain standard time, a Cessna 185E, N185Z, ground 
looped and departed runway 11L on the takeoff roll at the Tucson, Arizona, airport.  The 
aircraft sustained substantial damage.  The airline transport pilot, the sole occupant, was not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions existed for the personal flight operated under 14 
CFR Part 91, and no flight plan was filed.  
The pilot reported that as he was on the takeoff roll his seat slid out of the detents.  He stated 
that "this pulled my feet off the rudder pedals and my hands off the controls."  The pilot 
reported that the aircraft made a turn to the left as he was attempting to move the seat forward 
to regain use of the rudders or the brakes.  He reached up to retard the throttle and the aircraft 
came to a stop after a ground loop.  No further mechanical malfunctions were noted with the 
aircraft.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector who examined 
the aircraft at the airport, the seat was stiff and was difficult to move fore and aft.  He reported 
that the detents in the seat rails did not show any signs of wear, and the pilot may have thought 
he had the seat locked into place because of the stiffness of the seat.  The FAA did note that the 
aircraft was 40 hours out of annual, but that the condition of the seat and seat rails would have 
passed an annual inspection.
