A preflight inspection was conducted in the hangar.  The airplane was then pulled from the 
hangar by use of a tow bar. The pilot and two passengers boarded the airplane and departed on 
a local flight.  During the landing gear retraction a loud bang was heard.  Attempts to extend 
the gear were unsuccessful and an emergency landing was initiated.  During the final approach 
the engines were shut down.  When it was obvious that the airplane would touch down short of 
the runway an attempt to regain power was initiated; however, restoration of power was not 
sufficient to avoid impact with the terrain 750 feet short of the runway.  An examination 
subsequent to the accident found the tow bar adjacent to the airplane in the field. 
The pilot's inadequate preflight inspection in which he failed to remove the tow bar from the 
nose gear.  Also causal was his misjudgment of distance and altitude from the runway which 
resulted in both his premature shutdown of the engines and an undershoot of the runway. 
 On November 1, 1998, at 2001 central standard time, a Cessna 310I, N8069M, sustained 
substantial damage during an undershoot to runway 4 (6,701' X  150' dry/asphalt) at Rock 
County Airport, near Janesville, Wisconsin.  The pilot said that because the nose landing gear 
would not extend an emergency landing was initiated.  He said that during the emergency 
landing the engine power was reduced to zero and the landing was short of the runway.  The 
pilot and one passenger reported no injuries, while the pilot rated passenger reported minor 
injuries.  The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.  
No flight plan was on file.  The local flight departed at 1825.
In his written statement, the owner/pilot indicated that the pre-flight was conducted in the 
hangar.  He said he decided to pull the airplane out of the hangar by use of a tow bar, after 
which using an auxiliary power unit the engines were started.  The pilot was in the left seat 
during the engine startup.  After stowing the auxiliary power unit, the other passengers 
boarded the airplane and the airplane departed on a local flight.  During the landing gear 
retraction a "... loud bang was heard... ."  He said that when he attempted to lower the landing 
gear utilizing both normal and emergency landing gear extension procedures; he was unable to 
obtain a safe gear down indication.  After making a low pass over the airport, it was determined 
that the nose landing gear  was not extended.  He said he then decided that an emergency 
landing would have to be conducted.  He stated that during the final approach the engines were 
shut down, and the fuel and electrical switches were turned off.  The pilot said that it then 
became apparent that the airplane would touch down short of the runway.  At that point the 
pilot/passenger in the right seat took the controls and an attempt to regain power was 
initiated; however, the airplane impacted the terrain 750 feet short of the runway, prior to 
restoration of sufficient power to avoid the undershoot.
After the accident the tow bar was found adjacent to the airplane in the field.  A subsequent 
examination of the airplane revealed no pre-accident anomalies.
