The pilot said the tail wheel-equipped airplane began yawing to the left as he brought the 
airplane onto its main landing gear during takeoff.  He said he over corrected with right rudder 
and then left rudder.  The pilot said a yaw oscillation followed and the airplane departed the 
runway's left edge.  Shortly after departing the runway's edge, the airplane's right main gear 
tire dug into the ground.  The airplane ground-looped to the right and came to a stop on its 
right wing tip and nose.  The pilot said he had 19-hours total time in the airplane and about 
255-hours in a tail wheel-equipped home built airplane that was similar to the accident 
airplane except with about half the horse power. 
was the pilot not maintaining control of the airplane.  A factor in this accident was the pilots 
lack of total experience in the airplane. 
 On November 1, 1998, at 1200 eastern standard time (est), a Piper PA-22-20-150, N5908D, 
piloted by a private pilot, was substantially damaged during a ground loop event that occurred 
while on the initial takeoff roll.  The airplane was taking off on runway 09 (3,503' X 75' dry 
asphalt) at the Mason-Jewett Field, Mason, Michigan.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating on a 
flight plan. The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.  The flight was departing Mason, 
Michigan, at 1200 est.  
The pilot said the airplane began yawing to the left as he brought it onto its main gear for 
takeoff.  He said he over- corrected with right rudder and the airplane yawed rapidly to the 
right and then over-corrected to the left.  According to the pilot, he caused the airplane to 
occillate about its yaw axis due to another over-correction. The airplane departed the runway's 
left edge into the grass and ground looped to the left.  The pilot said "The right wheel dug into 
the soil on the left side of the runway and the airplane tipped up... ."
The pilot said he may have applied too much right rudder as he brought the airplane onto its 
main landing gear.  According to the pilot, he had 19-hours in the accident airplane.  He said he 
had about 255-hours in a homebuilt tail wheel airplane that was about the same size as the 
accident airplane.  He said the experimental airplane had a 70-HP engine on it.  The accident 
airplane was equipped with a 150 horse power engine.  The pilot said he had about 1-hour of 
dual instruction in N5908D before flying it as pilot-in-command.
