National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Visalia, CA
Accident Number: WPR10LA271
Date & Time: 06/01/2010, 1320 PDT
Registration: N4399J
Aircraft: SHAFFER WILLIAM C QUICKSILVER
MX II SP
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis A witness observed the airplane in a field moving back and forth across a make shift dirt landing strip.
He then observed the airplane take off and fly in a ﬁcircling maneuverﬂ for approximately one hour.
The witness stated that the airplane was flying eastbound over the makeshift landing strip and he watched as it attempted to land in windy conditions.
He observed the airplane blown by the wind slightly to the south of the landing strip and crash, flipping over an unknown number of times.
Further damage to the airplane occurred when the pusher propeller cut through a tail support tube of the airplane.
The pilot did not hold any pilot or medical certificate.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for the gusty crosswind conditions and failure to maintain runway alignment while landing.
The non-certified pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was uninjured.
The airplane had recently been purchased and was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
In a witness statement obtained by the Visalia Police Department, the witness observed a yellow airplane in a field moving back and forth across a dirt landing strip.
He then observed the airplane take off and fly in a ﬁcircling maneuverﬂ for approximately one hour.
The witness stated that the airplane was flying eastbound over the makeshift landing strip and he watched as it attempted to land in windy conditions.
He observed the airplane blown by the wind slightly to the south of the landing strip and crash, flipping over an unknown number of times.
The pilot stated to the Visalia Police Department that he had just purchased the airplane and that he had flown this type of airplane in the past.
The responding officer indicated in the police report that this may have been the pilot™s first actual flight in this airplane.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed that the airplane landed on a soft/rough surface which resulted in the collapse of the right main gear.
Further damage to the airplane occurred when the pusher propeller cut through a tail support tube of the airplane.
