Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Chandler, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX02LA121
Date & Time:
04/01/2002, 0955 MST 
Registration:
N21901
Aircraft:
Rotorway Exec 165F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The helicopter collided with the ground following a loss of tail rotor drive during a steep 
approach.  After performing various maneuvers, the certified flight instructor (CFI) and the 
student began traffic patterns to a landing zone (LZ).  On short final, approximately 40 feet agl, 
and 40 mph, the helicopter yawed left slowly.  When the helicopter had reached a 45-degree 
left yaw, the CFI took the controls.  As the helicopter approached a 90-degree left yaw, the CFI 
had applied full right pedal.  Simultaneously, he lowered the collective and reduced power.  
The helicopter rotated 360 degrees about 3 times before impact.  Post accident inspection 
revealed incorrect installation of the forward end of the intermediate drive belt on the 
intermediate pulley group.  The tail rotor drive system uses three belts, interconnected via 
pulleys at various points within the tail boom, to drive the tail rotor.  The forward and aft belts 
and pulleys were normal.  The intermediate belt was found shredded, burned, and separated.  
The aft end of the intermediate belt was positioned correctly on the rear pulley; however, the 
forward end was around the wrong pulley, the one meant for the forward belt, which induced a 
large misalignment of the intermediate belt and consequent rub between it and the pulley side.   
All pulleys were installed with specified tightness and with fore/aft play as stated in the 
maintenance manual.  Maintenance records for the helicopter indicated that the belts were 
replaced twice in the past 8 months, both times by the manufacturer.  The first time was in 
August 2001, for a heavy maintenance rebuild.  The second time was in November 2001 
following a tail rotor strike.  The belts had about 200 hours operating time since their last 
replacement in November.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The tail rotor drive system failure as a result of incorrect installation procedures by the 
manufacturer's personnel.
Page 2 of 6LAX02LA121
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) ROTOR DRIVE SYSTEM,TAIL ROTOR DRIVE SHAFT - FAILURE
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - MANUFACTURER
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
3. (C) TAIL ROTOR/ANTI-TORQUE CONTROL - NOT AVAILABLE
4. DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6LAX02LA121
Factual Information
On April 1, 2002, at 0955 mountain standard time, a Rotorway Exec 165F helicopter, N21901, 
collided with the ground following a loss of tail rotor drive during a steep approach near 
Chandler, Arizona.  The helicopter, owned and operated by Rotorway International under 14 
CFR Part 91, was on a local area instructional flight.  The helicopter sustained substantial 
damage.  The commercial pilot/flight instructor sustained serious injuries, and an airline 
transport pilot student sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan was filed.  The flight departed from Stellar Airpark, Chandler, about 0900.
The CFI reported that after performing various maneuvers, he and the student began traffic 
patterns to a landing zone (LZ).  On short final, approximately 40 feet, and 40 miles per hour 
(mph), the helicopter yawed left slowly.  When the helicopter had reached a 45-degree left yaw, 
the CFI took the controls.  As the helicopter approached a 90-degree left yaw, the CFI had 
applied full right pedal.  Simultaneously, he lowered the collective and reduced power.  The 
helicopter rotated 360 degrees about 3 times before impact.  The helicopter impacted the 
ground, collapsing the right skid, and coming to rest on its right side.
The helicopter was examined at Rotorway International in Chandler under the auspices of the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector.  He reported that the tail rotor drive system 
uses three belts, interconnected via pulleys at various points within the tail boom, to drive the 
tail rotor.  The forward and aft belts and pulleys were normal.  The intermediate belt was found 
shredded, burned, and separated.  The aft end of the intermediate belt was positioned correctly 
on the rear pulley; however, the forward end was around the wrong pulley, the one meant for 
the forward belt, which induced a large misalignment of the belt and consequent rub between it 
and the pulley side.   All pulleys were installed with specified tightness and with fore/aft play as 
stated in the maintenance manual.  The engine, clutch, drive belt system, and transmission 
were found in working order.
Maintenance records for the helicopter indicated that the belts were replaced twice in the past 
8 months.  The first time was in August 2001, for a heavy maintenance rebuild.  The second 
time was in November 2001 following a tail rotor strike.  The belts had about 200 hours 
operating time since their last replacement in November.
On April 4, 2002, Rotorway International issued a Mandatory Compliance Bulletin M-20 that 
required immediate inspection to verify proper routing of tail rotor drive belts through the tail 
boom.  Any belt not properly routed into the correct idler pulley groove required immediate 
replacement.
Page 4 of 6LAX02LA121
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/26/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/30/2000
Flight Time:
1600 hours (Total, all aircraft), 800 hours (Total, this make and model), 1500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial; Flight 
Engineer
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/18/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/17/2001
Flight Time:
17000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1 hours (Total, this make and model), 13000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 180 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX02LA121
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Rotorway
Registration:
N21901
Model/Series:
Exec 165F 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
6035
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/18/2002, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
12 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1776 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotorway
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
162F
Registered Owner:
Cobb International, Inc.
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
Cobb International, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
Rotorway International
Operator Designator Code:
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KCHD, 1243 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0947 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
60°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 20000 ft agl
Visibility
35 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.87 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Chandler, AZ (P19)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0900 TL
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
33.269167, -111.811111
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JEFF RICH
Adopted Date:
02/05/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
John Eller; Federal Aviation Inspector; Scottsdale, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
