The pilot reported that after touchdown, the airplane suddenly veered off the left side of the 
runway. During the runway excursion, the airplane struck the precision approach path 
indicator light system, resulting in substantial damage to both wings. Postaccident 
examination of the airplane revealed that a rod end bearing on the nosewheel steering pushrod 
failed. As a result, the pilot was unable to operate the nosewheel steering.
The failure of the nosewheel steering pushrod, which resulted in a loss of airplane directional 
control and runway excursion.
On February 2, 2012, about 1310 central standard time, a Bellanca model 17-30 airplane, 
N6564V, veered off of the left side of the runway while landing at the Charles B. Wheeler 
Downtown Airport (MKC), Kansas City, Missouri. During the runway excursion, the airplane 
struck the precision approach path indicator (PAPI) light system resulting in damage to both 
wings. The private pilot and flight instructor were not injured. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage to the fuselage and right wing. The aircraft was registered to and operated 
by the private pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an 
personal flight. The pilot was receiving flight instruction at the time the accident occurred. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not operating on a flight 
plan. The local flight originated about 1145.
The pilot reported that after the previous takeoff, the red in-transit landing gear indicator light 
remained illuminated. He said that he cycled the landing gear and the light went out. The pilot 
reported that when he lowered the gear for landing at MKC, only two of the three green gear-
down indicator lights illuminated. The landing approach was aborted and the pilot cycled the 
landing gear three times. At that point, all three green gear-down indicator lights illuminated. 
The pilot reported that the subsequent landing was normal, but as soon as the nose wheel 
touched down the airplane veered sharply to the left and off the runway. 
A postaccident examination revealed a fractured spherical rod end for the nosewheel steering 
pushrod. The rod end was fractured in the threaded portion of the shank. The threaded portion 
of the rod end, along with the jam nut remained attached to the steering pushrod.
