Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Decatur, IL
Accident Number:
CEN11LA090
Date & Time:
12/02/2010, 1406 CST 
Registration:
N415US
Aircraft:
SOUTHERLAND FREEBIRD 
LITESPORT U
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot was performing a high-speed taxi in his amateur-built airplane when it inadvertently 
became airborne. The inadvertent flight was the airplane's first flight. The pilot requested a 
landing clearance and was given one. The pilot reported that he had trouble getting the 
airplane's nose down. He reported a MAYDAY and indicated that he had no control of the 
airplane. He was given a clearance to land on any runway. During his last transmission, the 
pilot reported that he could not keep the nose down. The airplane was observed descending 
tail-end down and then nose down. The airplane impacted the ground, coming to rest about 
two miles east of the airport. An on-scene examination of the airplane revealed that the wing 
separated from the fuselage. The separation was consistent with overload. No other anomalies 
were detected. The on-scene investigation did not document center of gravity or trim settings.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's reported inability to control his amateur-built airplane for undetermined reasons 
after the airplane inadvertently became airborne while conducting a high-speed taxi.
Findings
Aircraft
Pitch control - Attain/maintain not possible (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN11LA090
Factual Information
On December 2, 2010, about 1406 central standard time, an experimental amateur-built 
Southerland Freebird Litesport Ultra airplane, N415US, sustained substantial damage when it 
impacted terrain following an in-flight loss of control while maneuvering after climbout from 
runway 18 at the Decatur Airport (DEC), near Decatur, Illinois. The personal flight was 
operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident. No flight plan was on file. The pilot was fatally injured. 
The local flight departed about 1359 and was returning to DEC at the time of the accident.
The pilot had requested a high-speed taxi clearance and the air traffic control tower cleared 
him to perform a high-speed taxi on runway 18. During the high-speed taxi, the airplane 
became airborne. The pilot requested a landing clearance and was given one. The pilot 
reported that he had trouble getting the airplane's nose down. He subsequently told the control 
tower that he had a MAYDAY. He indicated that he had "no control" of the airplane. He was 
given a clearance to land on any runway. His last transmission was that he "can't seem to keep 
the nose down." The airplane was observed by airport rescue and firefighting personnel to 
come "tail-end down" and then "nose down."
The airplane came to rest about two miles east of DEC in a field near the 7300 block of Ridge 
Road. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)inspectors examined the wreckage on-scene. The 
airplane's right wing separated from the fuselage in flight and it came to rest about 285 feet 
east of the main wreckage. The pilot was found about 63 feet west of the main wreckage.  The 
examination and review of photographs taken of the wreckage revealed the separation was 
consistent with overload. No other anomalies were detected.
A FAA designated pilot examiner issued the pilot a FAA sport pilot certificate with an airplane 
single-engine land rating on November 1, 2010, after the pilot had passed his airman 
examination using the designated examiner's Flightstar IISC airplane. The pilot reported on 
the application for that sport pilot certificate that he had accumulated a total flight time of 60.7 
hours of which 15.2 hours were as pilot-in-command flight time.
N415US was a single-engine, high-wing, experimental amateur-built Southerland Freebird 
Litesport Ultra airplane. Airworthiness documents indicated the airplane was powered by a 
Chevy Geo Metro G10 three cylinder 4 stroke engine. A FAA designated airworthiness 
representative inspected the airplane and issued its special airworthiness certificate on October 
15, 2010. The inadvertent flight was the airplane's first flight.
At 1354, the recorded weather at DEC was: Wind 230 degrees at 6 knots; visibility 10 statute 
miles; sky condition few 1,400 feet, overcast 4,300 feet; temperature 1 degree C; dew point -3 
degrees C; altimeter 30.17 inches of mercury.
An autopsy was performed on the 55-year-old pilot by the Macon County Coroner's Office. The 
cause of death was listed as multiple injuries due to an aircraft accident.
The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute prepared a Final Forensic Toxicology Accident 
Report. The report, in part, stated:
Desmethylsertraline detected in Spleen
Desmethylsertraline detected in Spinal Fluid
Page 3 of 5CEN11LA090
Desmethylsertraline detected in Gastric
1.101 (ug/mL, ug/g) Desmethylsertraline detected in Blood (Cavity)
Desmethylsertraline detected in Muscle
Desmethylsertraline detected in Kidney
Desmethylsertraline detected in Vitreous
Desmethylsertraline detected in Brain
Sertraline detected in Gastric
1.323 (ug/mL, ug/g) Sertraline detected in Blood (Cavity)
Sertraline detected in Muscle
Sertraline detected in Kidney
Sertraline detected in Brain
Sertraline detected in Spleen
Sertraline detected in Spinal Fluid
A family member indicated that the pilot was taking an antidepressant for work stress.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Sport Pilot
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Sport Pilot None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
61 hours (Total, all aircraft), 15 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5CEN11LA090
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
SOUTHERLAND
Registration:
N415US
Model/Series:
FREEBIRD LITESPORT U 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
1
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Chevy Geo Metro
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DEC, 682 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1354 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
263째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 1400 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 4300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.17 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
1째C / -3째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Decatur, IL (DEC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Decatur, IL (DEC)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1359 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Decatur Airport (DEC)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
682 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 5 of 5CEN11LA090
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.835278, -88.840278 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Edward F Malinowski
Adopted Date:
04/20/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Brian L Lands; Federal Aviation Administration; Springfield, IL
Publish Date:
04/20/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77929
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
