Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Wittmann, AZ
Accident Number:
WPR11LA067
Date & Time:
12/01/2010, 1045 MST 
Registration:
N4122F
Aircraft:
PIPER PA 28-181
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel starvation
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The student pilot was making a solo cross-country flight involving four flight legs. Before 
beginning the final return leg, he completed multiple full stop landings and touch-and-go 
landings that he had not included in his preflight planning. During the final leg, the engine 
began to lose power. The student pilot switched the fuel selector valve to the left tank, but then 
switched it back to the right tank after a short period of time. The engine subsequently lost all 
power, and the student pilot made a forced landing in rough terrain. Postaccident examination 
revealed that the right fuel tank was not breached and was empty of fuel. The left fuel tank was 
breached, and the soil beneath the tank was wet with fuel. After the wreckage was recovered, a 
fuel delivery system was rigged, and the engine was started and continued to run as the fuel 
selector was positioned to both the right and left fuel tank positions. According to the pilot 
operating handbook for the airplane, if the pilot allows a tank to run dry and the engine loses 
power, it may take up to 10 seconds for fuel to reach the engine after the other tank is selected. 
It is likely that, after running the right tank dry, the pilot did not leave the selector in the left 
tank position for long enough to allow fuel to reach the engine.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s improper fuel management, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due to 
fuel starvation.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Fuel - Fluid level (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR11LA067
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 1, 2010, about 1045 mountain standard time (MST), a Piper PA 28-181, N4122F, 
experienced a loss of engine power, and the pilot made a forced landing near Wittmann, 
Arizona.  TransPac Aviation Academy was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.  The student pilot sustained minor injuries; the 
airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage and right wing.  The solo cross-country 
instructional flight departed Deer Valley Airport (DVT), Phoenix, Arizona, about 0700, with a 
planned route of flight to Wickenburg, Arizona (E25), to Gila Bend, Arizona, back to E25, and 
then back to DVT. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
The student pilot reported that during the solo cross-country flight, specifically the last leg 
from E25 to DVT, the engine started to run rough and he was unable to maintain altitude. He 
made a forced landing in the desert near Wittmann.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) accident coordinator responded to the scene, and 
documented the accident site. During the recovery it was noted that the right fuel tank was not 
breeched, but contained no fuel. The left fuel tank™s drain had been damaged during the crash 
sequence. No fuel was found in the tank; however, the ground below the damaged fuel drain 
smelled of fuel, and was wet for several inches down in the dirt, covering an area of at least a 
12ﬂ diameter.
The student pilot was interviewed by the (FAA) accident coordinator. The student pilot related 
that he had intended to only complete one full stop landing with a taxi back for takeoff. 
However, during the second time at E25 on his return, the student pilot made two additional 
full stop taxi backs and two touch-and-goes. The student pilot stated that he felt the engine 
vibrate during the final approach to E25. The FAA coordinator asked him why he did not land 
at E25 and call for maintenance. The student pilot said he ﬁdidn™t feel it was that bad.ﬂ The 
student pilot also stated that he needed to return to DVT. The student pilot attempted to return 
to DVT. However, while en route, the engine lost partial power. The student pilot said he 
switched to the left tank, but only for a short period of time. He then switched it back to the 
right tank. Prior to landing, the engine completely quit, and the airplane landed in a desert 
wash. The airplane sustained damage to the left wing, both main landing gear, and the nose 
gear.
On December 8, 2010, investigators conducted an exam of the wreckage at Air Transport, Inc., 
Phoenix. During the examination, the airframe and engine were secured, and a temporary fuel 
delivery system was configured. The engine was started using both the left and right fuel 
selection positions.
No abnormalities were noted that would have precluded normal operations.
The Piper PA28-181 Pilot Operating Handbook addressed a loss of engine power. It states if the 
engine quits due to fuel exhaustion, it will take up to 10 seconds for fuel to reach the engine 
with the fuel pump on.
Page 3 of 5WPR11LA067
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Fuel starvation (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Enroute-descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
21, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/15/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
61 hours (Total, all aircraft), 61 hours (Total, this make and model), 7 hours (Pilot In Command, 
all aircraft), 61 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 33 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 3 hours 
(Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N4122F
Model/Series:
PA 28-181 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2843118
Landing Gear Type: 
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/28/2010, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
24 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8558 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A4M
Registered Owner:
BIRD ACQUISITION LLC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
TransPac Aviation Academy
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5WPR11LA067
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LUF, 1085 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
16 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1056 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
162°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
1 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.19 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / -8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Wickenburg, AZ (E25)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Phoenix, AZ (DVT)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1030 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
33.790278, -112.482778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Patrick H Jones
Adopted Date:
08/15/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Steve L Meisner; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Charles Little; Piper Aircraft, Inc.; Chino Hills, CA
Chris Glassmeyer; TransPac Aviation Academy; Phoenix, AZ
Travis Trexler; TransPac Aviation Academy; Phoenix, AZ
Publish Date:
08/15/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77916
Page 5 of 5WPR11LA067
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
