National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Griffith, IN
Accident Number: CEN09LA276
Date & Time: 05/02/2009, 0740 CDT
Registration: N20GH
Aircraft: HAWKINS AUGUST E AVENTURA II
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that the airspeed indicator failed during takeoff.
He elected to continue the takeoff because there was insufficient distance to stop on the remaining runway.
The pilot intended to remain in the traffic pattern and return for landing.
However, as the pilot turned to left crosswind the airplane became difficult to control, pitched down and impacted the ground.
A post accident examination revealed that the tubing from the pitot tube was disconnected from a mating length of tubing located at the left wing root.
The left wing root structure was intact and impact damage did not appear to have contributed to the pitot static system discontinuity.
No other anomalies associated with a pre-impact failure were observed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane due to an inadvertent stall.
Contributing to the accident was the failure of the airspeed indicator due to separation of the pitot-static line at the left wing root.
The flight was being conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 without a flight plan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The pilot sustained serious injuries.
The local flight departed immediately prior to the accident.
The pilot stated that the airspeed indicator failed during takeoff.
He elected to continue the takeoff because there was insufficient distance to stop on the remaining runway.
The pilot intended to remain in the traffic pattern and return for landing.
However, as he turned to left crosswind the airplane became difficult to control, pitched down and impacted the ground.
The pilot noted that he was briefly knocked unconscious.
When he regained consciousness, the engine was still running and he shut it off.
The airplane came to rest in a swampy area about 600 feet south of the runway.
The amateur-built aircraft sustained damage to the left wing and left side of the nose.
A post accident examination revealed a discontinuity in the pitot-static system.
Specifically, tubing from the pitot tube was disconnected from a mating length of tubing located at the left wing root.
The left wing remained attached to the fuselage at the wing root and the wing root structure was intact.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
No other anomalies associated with a pre-impact failure were observed.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
