National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Addison, TX
Accident Number: CEN09LA274
Date & Time: 05/03/2009, 2106 CDT
Registration: N528BM
Aircraft: BEECH 35-C33
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Fuel exhaustion
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The two commercial pilots (one of which was the owner) flew to the accident location and dropped off a passenger.
Prior to the first flight the owner pilot had checked the fuel levels and determined there was enough fuel to make their desired flights.
Neither pilot ensured the fuel selector was selecting the fullest tank prior to the second takeoff.
On departure and about 200 feet above the ground the engine began sputtering and then lost power.
The pilots switched fuel tanks in-flight, but the engine did not restart.
The airplane landed short of the runway, resulting in substantial damage to the airplane and serious injuries to both pilots.
Examination of the airplane revealed the right main tank was empty and the fuel selector was selected to the left main tank.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power in flight due to fuel starvation as a result of the pilots' inadequate fuel management.
Both commercial pilots were seriously injured.
The flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 without a flight plan.
The repositioning flight was originating from ADS, and was en- route to Hicks Airfield (T67), Fort Worth, Texas.
Night, visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot was flying in the left seat to build high performance pilot in command (PIC) time.
His first flight in the airplane was the afternoon of the accident, when he and the airplane owner, who was also a commercial pilot, flew the owner™s son from T67 to ADS.
The pilot stated he was unfamiliar with the airplane.
The owner-pilot, who was in the right seat, stated he had checked the fuel before flying to ADS and determined each main tank had between 15 and 20 gallons of fuel and the fuel selector was on the right main tank.
The airplane was on departure from initial takeoff and about 200 feet above the ground when the engine started sputtering.
The owner-pilot immediately suspected the problem was that the fuel selector was still on the right main tank and it should have been switched to the left main tank.
He reached for the fuel selector switch, which was located under the pilot™s left leg, but he could not reach it.
He then took control of the airplane and the pilot switched the fuel selector.
The pilot stated he could not recall which tank it was on.
The owner-pilot then attempted to return to ADS and land, but the airplane landed short of the runway on airport property.
The owner-pilot stated on the Accident/Incident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) ﬁI believe we took-off on the [right main fuel tank] and ran it empty.
There [was not] time for the fuel in the [left main fuel tank] to restart the engine before we hit the ground.
The left horizontal stabilizer was damaged and the fuselage was partially buckled.
Investigators on scene found the left wing tank was intact and contained approximately five to six gallons of fuel and the right wing tank was empty.
The fuel selector was found in the left tank position.
A post accident engine inspection revealed the fuel inlet line and fuel vapor line were both dry and did not contain any fuel.
Fuel was observed in the fuel manifold.
The inspection did not reveal any abnormalities that would have prevented normal operation.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
