Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Anoka, MN
Accident Number:
CEN17LA212
Date & Time:
06/02/2017, 1911 CDT 
Registration:
N1854F
Aircraft:
CESSNA 210F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing gear not configured
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot, who was the owner of the airplane, reported that the airplane's landing gear 
did not fully retract when he raised the gear handle after takeoff. He attempted to lower the 
landing gear using emergency procedures without success. He subsequently conducted a full-
flap landing, and as the airplane settled onto the runway, the main landing gear retracted into 
the landing gear bay. The airplane veered off the runway and the right horizontal stabilizer was 
substantially damaged as the airplane skidded to a stop.
Examination of the airplane revealed that there was insufficient hydraulic fluid in the system to 
manually pump the landing gear into the fully-extended position. The pilot reported that the 
airplane's hydraulic system had been over-pressurized by a mechanic a few years before the 
accident and that there had been trouble with hydraulic leaks ever since. He reported that he 
added hydraulic fluid to the reservoir every 12 flight hours; however, there were no aircraft 
maintenance logbook entries concerning the work performed. He also reported that, a few days 
before the accident, he had filled the hydraulic reservoir and then flew the airplane for between 
45 and 60 minutes. He did not recheck the hydraulic fluid level after that flight.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the landing gear to fully extend due to insufficient hydraulic fluid in the hydraulic 
system as a result of inadequate maintenance by the airplane owner. 
Page 2 of 6CEN17LA212
Findings
Aircraft
Main landing gear - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Action - Owner/builder (Cause)
Maintenance - Owner/builder (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN17LA212
Factual Information
On June 2, 2017 about 1911 central daylight time, a Cessna 210F, N1854F, sustained 
substantial damage during landing at the Anoka County-Blaine Airport (ANE), Anoka, 
Minnesota. The pilot was not injured. The airplane was owned and operated by the pilot under 
the provisions of the Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the flight, which was not operated on a flight 
plan. The flight was departing at the time of the accident with Park Rapids Municipal Airport 
(PKD), Park Rapids, Minnesota, as the destination. 
The pilot reported that the airplane's landing gear did not fully retract when he raised the gear 
handle during the takeoff climb. The pilot reported that he attempted to lower the landing gear 
using emergency procedures without success. He returned to ANE and continued to fly over 
the airport for about an hour to burn off more fuel, and to continue trying to lower the landing 
gear using emergency procedures. He stated that he tried manually extending the landing gear 
with the master switch in the On and OFF position, but without effect. The ANE tower 
controller confirmed that the main landing gear were in a partially retracted position, and that 
the nose wheel was in the down position.
The pilot conducted a full flap landing to runway 18. As the airplane settled onto the runway, 
the main landing gear retracted into the landing gear bay. The airplane veered off the runway 
and the right horizontal stabilizer was substantially damaged as the airplane skidded to a stop.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector's examination of the airplane revealed that there 
was insufficient hydraulic fluid in the system to manually pump the landing gear into the fully 
extended position. The hydraulic hoses were original equipment from 1966 but they appeared 
functional. No obvious hydraulic fluid leaks were observed. 
The pilot reported that the airplane's hydraulic system had been over pressurized by a 
mechanic a few years before the accident, and that there had been trouble with hydraulic leaks 
ever since. He reported that he added hydraulic fluid to the reservoir every 12 hours, but there 
were no aircraft maintenance logbook write-ups concerning the work performed. He reported 
that a few days before the accident, he had filled the hydraulic reservoir and then flew the 
airplane for about 45 to 60 minutes. He did not recheck the hydraulic reservoir after that flight. 
The airplane's owner reported that the last annual maintenance inspection was performed on 
December 1, 2016, and the airplane had a total airframe time of 6,736 hours. However, the 
mechanic reported that he conducted the last annual maintenance inspection of the airplane 
on December 20, 2016. He stated that he gave the airplane's owner a maintenance entry on a 
"sticky note" that indicated that an annual maintenance inspection had been performed. The 
mechanic did not have a copy of the maintenance entry. The mechanic reported that although 
the airplane has a history of hydraulic system leaks due to an apparent over pressurization of 
the system by another mechanic in the past, during the last annual inspection, the landing gear 
operated satisfactorily with no obvious leaks. The mechanic stated that he was unaware that 
the pilot had to continually add hydraulic fluid. The mechanic stated that about a year earlier, 
he replaced an O-ring in the hydraulic filter screen. 
Page 4 of 6CEN17LA212
History of Flight
Initial climb
Landing gear not configured (Defining event)
Landing
Landing gear not configured
Landing-flare/touchdown
Landing gear collapse
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/06/2017
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 500 hours (Total, this make and model), 1300 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N1854F
Model/Series:
210F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1966
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
21058754
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/01/2016, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6736 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN17LA212
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ANE, 912 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1916 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.85 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31째C / 13째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Blaine, MN (ANE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Park Rapids, MN (PKD)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Anoka County Airport (ANE)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
912 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4855 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
45.145000, -93.210278
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
James P Silliman
Adopted Date:
11/15/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
David Nelson; FAA Minneapolis FSDO; Minneapolis, MN
Publish Date:
11/15/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=95299
Page 6 of 6CEN17LA212
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
