Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Louisville, KY
Accident Number:
NYC06TA190
Date & Time:
08/02/2006, 1320 EDT 
Registration:
N520AP
Aircraft:
MD Helicopter Inc. 500N
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The flight instructor was providing initial helicopter training to the student, a commercial pilot 
with fixed wing ratings.  The student, with the flight instructor "following closely" on the 
controls, was practicing approaches to a hover in an open field.  After several approaches, they 
decided to practice a steep approach.  About 600 feet above the ground the student began a 
stabilized approach at 40 knots indicated airspeed, and at a descent rate about 1,000 feet per 
minute.  He then brought the helicopter to a hover about 5 to 10 feet above the ground.  The 
helicopter hovered for between 5 and 15 seconds, before it "drop[ed] to the ground," and rolled 
onto its right side.  The flight instructor further reported that prior to the accident, the 
helicopter was operating with "no indication of [a] mechanical problem," and the engine 
seemed to be producing power normally.  A witness stated that as the helicopter got close to 
the ground, "it all of the sudden pitched nose down," and impacted the ground.  Examination 
of the wreckage revealed that both right landing gear struts fractured in ductile overload, 
consistent with a single impact.  Flight control continuity was established, with no anomalies 
noted.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the helicopter and the flight instructor's inadequate 
supervision, which resulted in a hard landing and subsequent rollover.
Page 2 of 7NYC06TA190
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT
2. (C) SUPERVISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
----------
Occurrence #2: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
----------
Occurrence #3: ROLL OVER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7NYC06TA190
Factual Information
On August 2, 2006, at 1320 eastern daylight time, a MD Helicopter Inc. 500N, N520AP, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during an uncontrolled descent, near 
Louisville, Kentucky.  The certificated flight instructor was not injured, and the certificated 
commercial pilot sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed for the local instructional flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the flight instructor, he was providing initial helicopter training to the student, a 
commercial pilot with fixed wing ratings.  The student, with the flight instructor "following 
closely" on the controls, was practicing approaches to a hover in an open field.  After several 
approaches, they decided to practice a steep approach.  About 600 feet above the ground, the 
student began a stabilized approach at 40 knots indicated airspeed, and at a descent rate about 
1,000 feet per minute.  He then brought the helicopter to a hover about 5 to 10 feet above the 
ground.  The helicopter hovered for between 5 and 15 seconds, on a northerly heading, before it 
"seemed to drop to the ground."  The flight instructor recalled that the helicopter dropped 
straight down, with no lateral movement, then rolled onto its right side.  The engine continued 
to run for about 10 seconds until it shut down.
The flight instructor further reported that prior to the accident, the helicopter was operating 
with "no indication of [a] mechanical problem," and the engine seemed to be producing power 
normally.  At the time of the accident, the winds were from the northwest at a velocity of about 
10 to 15 knots.
According to the student, they approached the field in a stabilized descent about 60 knots 
indicated airspeed.  He then arrested the descent, and entered a hover about 10 feet above the 
ground.  While stabilizing the hover, the student felt a sensation of descending very rapidly.  
The next thing he remembered, the helicopter was on its side, and the engine and rotor blades 
were coming to a stop.
Two witnesses observed the helicopter before and during the accident.  One witness reported 
seeing the helicopter as she drove on a road adjacent to the landing field.  She described that 
the helicopter looked like it was going to land "normally," but that as it got close to the ground, 
"it all of the sudden pitched nose down," and impacted the ground.  When asked if the 
helicopter had hovered or paused in the air, she stated that it continually moved forward and 
down during the approach, then "just hit the ground."
The other witness reported seeing the helicopter as it approached the field.  She stated that the 
helicopter descended, paused for a moment near the ground, then impacted the ground.
The flight instructor held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine 
land and rotorcraft-helicopter, and a flight instructor certificate with a rating for rotorcraft.  He 
reported 2,028 total hours of flight experience, 1,860 hours of which were in rotorcraft, and 
740 hours of which were in the accident helicopter make and model.
The student held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single and multiengine 
land, and instrument airplane.  He reported 345 total hours of flight experience, 5 hours of 
which were in rotorcraft, all in the accident helicopter make and model.
Representatives from the airframe and engine manufacturers, as well as a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector, examined the wreckage following the accident.  The helicopter 
Page 4 of 7NYC06TA190
came to rest on its right side, and both the right forward and rear landing gear struts were 
fractured about 14 inches from the fuselage.  Examination of the forward strut fuselage access 
hole revealed that it was elongated in the forward and aft direction.  There was damage to the 
right chin bubble and associated structure directly below the right side pedal assembly, and the 
pitot tube was bent slightly left and caked inside with mud.  All of the main rotor blades 
exhibited extensive damage consistent with ground contact, and there were several ground 
scars nearby that were of a similar width as the main rotor blades.  Flight control continuity 
was established, with no anomalies noted. 
Both portions of the front and rear fractured landing gear were removed and sent to a 
laboratory for further analysis.  No evidence of corrosion or fatigue was found on any of the 
fracture surfaces.  Examination of both the front and rear struts revealed that they exhibited 
signatures consistent with ductile overload during a single impact.
The weather reported at Bowman Field Airport (LOU), Louisville, Kentucky, located about 8 
nautical miles northwest, at 1253, included winds from 280 degrees at 9 knots, temperature 91 
degrees Fahrenheit, dewpoint 73 degrees Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting of 30.02 inches 
of mercury.
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/01/2005
Flight Time:
2028 hours (Total, all aircraft), 740 hours (Total, this make and model), 1781 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 28 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 6 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 7NYC06TA190
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
None None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2003
Flight Time:
345 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5 hours (Total, this make and model), 203 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 3 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MD Helicopter Inc.
Registration:
N520AP
Model/Series:
500N 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
LN095
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/01/2006, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
4116 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20R/2
Registered Owner:
Louisville Metro Police 
Department
Rated Power:
450 hp
Operator:
Louisville Metro Police 
Department
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7NYC06TA190
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LOU, 546 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
330°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 4800 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.02 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
33°C / 23°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Louisville, KY (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (NONE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1230 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
38.139722, -85.539167
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
David S Muzio
Adopted Date:
06/27/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Sam Weatherford; FAA/FSDO; Louisville, KY
Roger Carlin; MD Helicopters Inc.; Mesa, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7NYC06TA190
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
