Page 1 of 4
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Anaktuvuk Pass, AK
Accident Number:
ANC06LA109
Date & Time:
08/01/2006, 1730 AKD 
Registration:
N4040W
Aircraft:
de Havilland DHC-2 MK.1
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
6 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The airline transport certificated pilot was transporting passengers from a remote lake in a 
float-equipped airplane under Title 14, CFR Part 135.  He said that during takeoff he passed his 
predetermined point to abort the takeoff without becoming airborne, and felt that he had to 
proceed with the takeoff or hit the shoreline. The pilot said that he was able to become 
airborne, but struck the shore of the lake with the airplane's floats just after liftoff.  He stated 
that he was concerned about damage to the floats from the impact with the shore, and elected 
to land on a hard surface runway at the destination airport.  The float structure collapsed 
during landing, resulting in substantial damage to the fuselage.  There were no known 
mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to abort the takeoff at his predetermined reference point, which resulted in a 
collision with the shore during takeoff-initial climb, and structural damage to the airplane.
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. TERRAIN CONDITION - DIRT BANK/RISING EMBANKMENT
2. (C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Page 2 of 4ANC06LA109
Factual Information
On August 1, 2006, about 1730 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped, de Havilland DHC-2 
Mk.1 airplane, N4040W, sustained substantial damage when it struck the shore during takeoff 
from a remote lake, about 50 miles south of Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated by Brooks Range Aviation, Bettles, Alaska, as a visual flight rules (VFR) passenger 
flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The airline transport 
certificated pilot and the five passengers were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and company flight following procedures were in effect.  
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on August 1, the Bettles Airport manager said the float-equipped 
accident airplane landed on the hard-surfaced runway at Bettles.  The manager said the pilot  
told her that he had struck the shore during takeoff from a lake, and feared the floats would not 
support the airplane during a water landing, and elected to land on the hard-surface runway.  
The manager reported that during landing the float's supporting structure collapsed, and the 
airplane sat on its tail.
On August 3, the director of operations for the company told the IIC he believed that damage to 
the airplane was limited to the floats and support structure, however the airplane had been put 
back on wheels, and the airplane was being ferried to a repair facility to have the fuselage 
examined and repaired, if necessary.
On August 10, an FAA maintenance inspector who examined the repairs made to the airplane, 
told the IIC that an aft fuselage bulkhead had to be cut and spliced at the bottom, and that 
several additional fuselage stringers had to be cut and repaired, or replaced.
In a written statement to the NTSB dated August 27, the pilot wrote that he "hesitated" at the 
takeoff abort point long enough that he felt he had no choice but to continue the takeoff, and 
that the floats hit the bank just as the airplane became airborne.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine 
Sea; Single-engine Land; Single-
engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/01/2006
Flight Time:
16631 hours (Total, all aircraft), 422 hours (Total, this make and model), 8610 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 99 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 97 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 3 of 4ANC06LA109
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
de Havilland
Registration:
N4040W
Model/Series:
DHC-2 MK.1 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1147
Landing Gear Type: 
Float
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/01/2006, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5090 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
56 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
127000 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney Canada
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
R-985-14G
Registered Owner:
Jesperson Aircraft Services 
Inc.
Rated Power:
450 hp
Operator:
BROOKS RANGE AVIATION INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Brooks Range Aviation
Operator Designator Code:
FWOA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
16°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Anaktuvuk Pass, AK 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Bettles, AK (PABT)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1730 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Page 4 of 4ANC06LA109
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
5 None
Aircraft Fire:
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
Total Injuries:
6 None
Latitude, Longitude:
68.251944, -154.088889
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lawrence R Lewis
Adopted Date:
02/26/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Gary Hunt; Fairbanks FSDO-01; Fairbanks, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
