Page 1 of 3ERA16LA200
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Toughkenamon, PA
Accident Number:
ERA16LA200
Date & Time:
06/01/2016, 0900 EDT 
Registration:
N83547
Aircraft:
AERONCA 7AC
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
On June 1, 2016, about 0900 eastern daylight time, an Aeronca 7AC, N83547, was substantially 
damaged after impacting an aircraft hangar following a total loss of engine power during a go-
around at New Garden Airport (N57), Toughkenamon, Pennsylvania. The flight instructor and 
a student pilot received minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan was filed for the local instructional flight operated under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the student pilot, they were practicing takeoffs and landings on the grass parallel 
to runway 6, for about 1 hour when on the downwind leg of the traffic pattern, the flight 
instructor directed him to demonstrate a simulated engine failure The student pilot initiated a 
simulated forced landing which included a steep turn to the base and then final legs of the 
traffic pattern. The airplane was about one-quarter of the way down the runway, still over the 
grass, when he initiated go-around. The flight instructor then told him to move over to the 
center of the paved runway. At this point the engine sputtered and then lost power. The flight 
instructor took over the flight controls and made a left turn about 100 feet above the ground 
with the intent of flying over a hanger. The student pilot added that the engine "was now 
completely off."
According to the flight instructor, he and the student pilot were flying for about 30 minutes 
when he initiated a simulated engine out procedure. The student pilot maneuvered the airplane 
for the grass parallel to the runway, and commenced a go-around when the airplane was about 
25 feet above the ground. The airplane was approximately 200 feet above the ground when the 
engine quit, momentarily sputtered, and then went silent. He recalled checking the magnetos, 
carburetor heat and fuel lever, which all appeared to be in proper position.
The flight instructor considered landing options, and noted that a forward trajectory had more 
dangers and obstacles, such as construction traffic, vehicles, a shallow ravine, electric wires 
and a busy road. He took the controls from the student pilot and turned left 90 degrees, 
positioning the airplane in a trajectory over a hangar for a touchdown and rollout on the grass 
in an uphill direction to dissipate speed and energy. As the turn progressed, the flight 
instructor realized that they would most likely not clear the top of the hangar and that would be 
a worse situation. At that point the airplane was losing altitude rapidly and heading toward the 
Page 2 of 3ERA16LA200
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
hangar door. He used the last movement of the stick control to place the airplane into a 45-
degree nose up position to have the engine penetrate the metal door of the hangar before the 
fuselage.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the airplane came to rest 
upright inside the hangar after penetrating the hangar wall. The fabric covering of the airplane 
displayed multiple tears and punctures, the left main landing gear was displaced aft and was 
collapsed against the bottom of the fuselage, and the right main landing gear was displaced 
forward and collapsed next to the right side of the fuselage. Both the left and right wing spars 
were broken and the wings had folded aft just outboard of their mounting locations at the 
breaks in the spars. The horizontal stabilizers, elevators, vertical stabilizer, and rudder, 
displayed crush and compression damage. Control continuity was established from the flight 
control surfaces to the rudder pedals, and control sticks in the cockpit. The front of the 
propeller spinner was crushed. One propeller blade was bent back under the engine, and the 
other propeller blade was straight. Neither propeller blade showed any evidence of S-bending, 
leading edge gouging, or chordwise scratching. The wreckage was retained for further 
examination.
According to FAA and pilot records, the flight instructor held an airline transport pilot 
certificate with ratings for airplane multiengine land, and rotorcraft-helicopter, with 
commercial privileges for airplane single-engine land, and instrument helicopter, and a type 
rating for the BH-206. He also held a flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane single 
and multiengine, instrument airplane, and rotorcraft-helicopter. His most recent FAA third-
class medical certificate was issued on August 12, 2014. He reported that he had accrued 
approximately 10,000 total hours of flight experience, 200 hours of which were in the accident 
airplane make and model.
According to FAA and pilot records, the student pilot held a student pilot certificate which was 
issued on December 15, 2015. He reported that he had accrued 279 total hours of flight 
experience, 180 of which were in the accident airplane make and model.
According to FAA and airplane maintenance records, the airplane was manufactured in 1946. 
The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on March 28, 2015. At the time of 
the inspection, the airplane had accrued approximately 6,410 total hours of operation.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AERONCA
Registration:
N83547
Model/Series:
7AC NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 3 of 3ERA16LA200
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MQS, 660 ft msl
Observation Time:
0855 EDT
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 17°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
Calm / , 
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30.11 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Toughkenamon, PA (N57)
Destination: 
Toughkenamon, PA (N57)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
39.830556, -75.780556 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd G Gunther
Additional Participating Persons:
Mike Bauer; FAA / FSDO; Philadelphia, PA
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
