National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Myrtle Grove, LA
Accident Number: DFW05LA252
Date & Time: 09/01/2005, 1100 CDT
Registration: N59539
Aircraft: Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The private pilot was flying three passengers for hire along the Mississippi River, to inspect and look for missing barges following Hurricane Katrina, when he experienced a loss of tail rotor control.
At an altitude about 200 feet above ground level (agl), the helicopter took a sudden right turn and climbed approximately 100 feet before it started spinning in a clockwise direction and descended.
The helicopter continued to spin until it impacted a barge and fell into the river about 300 feet from the riverbank.
The pilot and passengers were able to egress the sinking helicopter and swam to shore unassisted.
A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman records revealed the pilot held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land and helicopter.
Multiple attempts to obtain a completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) from the pilot were unsuccessful.
As of January 23, 2006, the helicopter had not been located or recovered.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's loss of control in flight for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER Factual Information On September 1, 2005, about 1100 central daylight time, a single-engine Bell 206B helicopter, N59539, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while maneuvering near Myrtle Grove, Louisiana.
The private pilot and his three passengers sustained minor injuries.
The helicopter was registered to Altar Helicopters LLC and was operated by the pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 business flight.
The local flight originated from MYU Heliport (LS97), near Luling, Louisiana, about 1000.
A passenger, who was on board the helicopter when the mishap occurred, reported the accident to a representative of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) on September 29, 2005.
An inquiry to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), by the NTSB investigator- in-charge (IIC), revealed that the pilot had not reported the accident.
The passenger reported that a verbal agreement was made between an employee of Memco Barge Line of St. Louis, Missouri, and MYU Helicopters of Luling, Louisiana.
The agreement was that a helicopter and pilot would be provided, at an hourly rate of $2,400, to fly three Memco Barge Line employees along the Mississippi River to inspect and search for missing barges following Hurricane Katrina.
The passenger further reported that while maneuvering at an altitude about 200 feet above ground level (agl) the helicopter took a sudden right turn and climbed approximately 100 feet before it started spinning in a clockwise direction and descending.
The helicopter continued to spin until it impacted a barge and fell into the river about 300 feet from the riverbank.
The pilot and passengers were able to egress the sinking helicopter and swim to shore unassisted.
In a telephone conversation with the IIC, the pilot reported that he was unable to control the helicopter after he lost tail rotor control.
He added that he held a commercial pilot certificate, but that it was at the bottom of the river in his flight bag.
Multiple attempts to obtain a completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) from the pilot were unsuccessful.
A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman records revealed the pilot held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land and helicopter.
The pilot held a second-class medical certificate that was issued on May 13, 2004 with the limitation, "MUST WEAR CORRECTIVE LENSES."
As of January 23, 2006, the helicopter had not been located or recovered.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
