The airplane veered off the runway and collided with a taxiway light during a single engine 
landing, and the landing gear collapsed.  The left engine could not be restarted following a 
practice shutdown and feather.  Because the hydraulic pump is located on the left engine, the 
certified flight instructor was aware that the landing gear would have to be manually extended.  
They elected to return to the departure airport while the private pilot undergoing instruction 
flew an instrument landing system approach.  The private pilot positioned the landing gear 
lever in the down position and pulled out the gear pump.  The instructor did not verify the 
landing gear lever's position and pumped the handle about 10 to 20 times but was not 
successful in getting a down-and-locked indication in the landing gear lights, nor did the 
landing gear selector handle return to the neutral position.  The instructor continued 
troubleshooting the airplane; however, the gear down-and-locked lights did not illuminate on 
any of the gear.  The air traffic control tower (ATCT) gave the airplane an instruction to 
conduct a 360-degree right turn at 500 feet above ground level (agl).  Prior to the entry into the 
turn, the instructor was considering the use of the Emergency Gear Extender; however, upon 
entry into the turn, control of the airplane demanded his full attention.  As they rolled out from 
the turn, the instructor asked the controller to confirm that the landing gear appeared to be 
down.  They replied affirmatively and the instructor took complete control of the airplane.  Just 
prior to the airplane's entry into the flare, someone blind transmitted over the radio that the 
nose gear did not appear down.  The instructor then applied power and the airplane rolled to 
the left and then impacted the ground.  According to the Piper Apache owner's handbook, the 
hydraulic pump is located on the left engine.  In the event of a power loss on the left engine, the 
hydraulic pump is rendered unusable.  In order to obtain hydraulic pressure in the event of a 
hydraulic pump failure or left engine failure, the emergency pump handle should be extended 
and 30 to 40 pumps are required to raise or lower the landing gear.  Upon full extension or 
retraction, the pump handle will position itself back into the neutral position.  In the event of a 
hydraulic system failure caused by a line breakage or a selector valve malfunctioning, the gear 
can be extended using the Emergency Gear Extender.  When this control is pulled, carbon 
dioxide flows from a cylinder under the floorboards and assists in extending the gear.  The 
Emergency Gear Extender control is located beneath a small cover plate underneath the left 
pilot's seat.  Post accident examination of the airplane and landing gear system showed that the 
Page 2 of 7LAX05LA221
landing gear lever was positioned close to the neutral position, rather than in the down 
position.  The emergency landing gear system was actuated through the hand pump and 
extended into the down-and-locked position with no operational anomalies noted.
the flight crew's failure to ensure that the landing gear lever was in the full down position prior 
to utilizing the hand pump, and the certified flight instructor's failure to utilize the blow down 
emergency landing gear system.  The instructor's inadequate supervision of the flight and 
failure to maintain Vmc during an attempted go-around was also causal.
On July 1, 2005, at 1059 Hawaiian standard time, a PA-23-160, N3369P, veered off the runway 
during a single engine landing, and the landing gear collapsed at the Honolulu International 
Airport, Honolulu, Hawaii.  During the veer from the runway, the left wing impacted a taxiway 
light.  The certified flight instructor (CFI) and private pilot undergoing instruction (PUI) were 
not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.  The CFI was operating the privately 
registered airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.  The airplane departed from the Honolulu airport 
about 1015 for the local area instructional flight.
According to the CFI, the left engine could not be restarted following a practice shutdown and 
feather.  Because the hydraulic pump is located on the left engine, the CFI was aware that the 
landing gear would have to be manually extended.  They elected to return to the departure 
airport and performed the emergency landing gear extension procedures by pumping the 
handle about 10 to 20 times.  They did not receive a down-and-locked landing gear indication 
of any of the three green lights, nor did the landing gear lever return to the neutral position.  
While on final approach, the tower controller stated that the gear appeared down-and-locked.  
The CFI proceeded inbound for landing.  On short final, an unidentified aircraft reported on 
the tower frequency that the nose gear was not down-and-locked.  Due to the single engine 
operation, the CFI did not think that it was feasible to perform a go-around so he landed the 
airplane on runway 4R.  Upon touchdown, the airplane veered to the left and approximately 4 
feet of the outboard left wing sheared off when it impacted a taxiway light.  During the 
approach to landing, the pilot elected not to use the Emergency Gear Extender because he did 
not feel comfortable having the PUI fly the airplane single engine while he applied the 
Emergency Gear Extender control.
The CFI had performed the emergency gear extension procedure on one other occasion.  
During that incident, the landing gear lever did not return to the neutral position; however, the 
three green lights indicating that the gear was down-and-locked illuminated.
In a later written statement, the CFI reported that after securing the left engine, they decided 
to return to Honolulu.  He advised the air traffic approach controller that he had a feathered 
engine and could not restart it.  His PUI flew the airplane while performing an instrument 
landing system (ILS) 4R approach.  At 1,500 feet above ground level (agl) and 6 miles from the 
airport , the PUI lowered the gear lever and pulled out the hand pump.  As the PUI flew the 
approach, the CFI began pumping the hand pump and completed 10 to 20 strokes before he 
could no longer move the pump.  The CFI saw the nose gear in the mirror (mounted on the 
engine cowlings); however, none of the green lights  illuminated, and the gear lever did not pop 
back into the neutral position.
The accident flight was the forth occasion in this airplane that the CFI was required to activate 
the hand pump due to a faulty landing gear system.  On the previous occasions, he pumped the 
handle 30 to 40 strokes until no further pumping was possible.  On each of the three incidents, 
the three gear lights illuminated but the gear lever did not return to the neutral position.  On all 
occasions including the accident flight, the same sensation of stiffness on the hand pump was 
experienced.
The CFI continued troubleshooting the airplane and they rapidly "pitched and yawed" the 
airplane, attempting to position the gear down-and-locked.  As the CFI was going to ask the 
tower if the gear appeared down and considering using the Emergency Gear Extender, the air 
traffic control tower (ATCT) gave the airplane a 360-degree right turn at 500 feet agl.  The CFI 
said that about halfway through the turn "we began flirting with Vmc."  The PUI continued to 
fly the airplane but the CFI also was on the yoke because he recognized this as a critical phase 
of flight.  He did not decline the 360-degree turn given by the ATCT because he was focused on 
the gear, and as a CFI in the area for over 3 years, he has been under constant pressure to 
accommodate ATCT instructions.
As they rolled out from the turn, the CFI asked the ATCT to confirm that the landing gear 
appeared to be down.  They replied affirmatively and the CFI took complete control of the 
airplane.  Just prior to the airplane's entry into the flare, someone blind transmitted over the 
radio that the nose gear did not appear down.  The CFI then reactively applied power and the 
airplane rolled to the left and then impacted the ground.
In the PUI's written statement, she noted that her checkride had been scheduled for the end of 
March but had been canceled due to a series of mechanical problems involving the landing gear 
on the airplane.  During their return to the airport, the PUI flew the airplane and the CFI 
provided instruction on conducting a single engine instrument landing system (ILS) approach 
in visual meteorological conditions.  While on the final approach leg following the 360-degree 
turn, the CFI assumed control of the airplane and the PUI relinquished her control.
According to the Piper Apache owner's handbook, the hydraulic pump is located on the left 
engine.  In the event of a power loss on the left engine, the hydraulic pump is rendered 
unusable.  In order to obtain hydraulic pressure in the event of a hydraulic pump failure or left 
engine failure, the emergency pump handle should be extended and 30 to 40 pumps are 
required to raise or lower the landing gear.  Upon full extension or retraction, the pump handle 
will position itself into the neutral position.  In the event of a hydraulic system failure caused 
by a line breakage or a selector valve malfunctioning, the gear can be extended using the 
Emergency Gear Extender.  When this control is pulled, carbon dioxide flows from a cylinder 
under the floorboards and assists in extending the gear.  The Emergency Gear Extender control 
is located beneath a small cover plate underneath the left pilot's seat.
On July 14, the FAA coordinator and an FAA airworthiness inspector examined the landing 
gear with an aviation maintenance technician and performed a functional check.  The 
inspectors noted that the landing gear lever was positioned close to the neutral position.  
Interviews with the CFI and PUI indicated that the PUI placed the lever in the down position 
but that the CFI did not verify its position.  With the airplane on jacks, the emergency landing 
gear system was actuated through the hand pump and extended into the down-and-locked 
position with no operational anomalies noted.
