The airline transport certificated pilot and the two pilot-rated passengers traveled to Alaska for 
a Title 14, CFR Part 91 personal flying vacation.  The pilot received a VFR check-out in a rented 
airplane, and was the only person authorized by its owner to fly it.  The pilot obtained a 
weather briefing for the day of the accident flight, and queried an FAA automated flight service 
station (AFSS) specialist about VFR conditions for a sight-seeing flight.  The FSS specialist 
stated, in part, "Well, it doesn't really look good probably anywhere today..."  The area forecast 
included areas of marginal VFR and IFR conditions, and an AIRMET for mountain 
obscuration.  The cloud and sky conditions included scattered clouds at 1,500 feet in light rain 
showers, with areas of isolated ceilings below 1,000 feet, and visibility below 3 statute miles in 
rain showers and mist.  The weather briefing included a report from a pilot who was about 23 
miles north of the accident scene about 2 hours before the accident airplane departed.  The 
pilot reported fog and mist to the water, and said he was unable to maintain VFR.  Five 
minutes after receiving the weather briefing, the accident pilot again called the AFSS and 
requested the telephone number to an automated weather observing system, located south of 
the point of departure, where VFR conditions were forecast.  Local fishing charter captains 
reported fog in the area of the islands where the accident occurred.  One vessel captain 
reported hearing an airplane in the vicinity of the islands, but could not see it because of the 
fog.  The pilot did not file a flight plan, nor did he indicate any planned itinerary.  The airplane 
was reported overdue two days after departure.  The accident wreckage was located an 
additional two days later on the north cliff face of a remote island.  The airplane had collided 
with the island at high speed, about 800 feet mean sea level, and  a postcrash fire had 
incinerated the cockpit and cabin area.
The pilot's continued VFR flight into instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in 
an in-flight collision with an island cliff during cruise flight.  A factor contributing to the 
accident was fog in the area of the accident.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 1, 2005, at an estimated time of 1200 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Cessna 
T207 airplane, N1621U, was destroyed by impact and postimpact fire when it collided with the 
north side of West Amatuli Island, a part of the Barren Islands, located about 25 miles south-
southeast of Nanwalek, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) 
local area personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The airplane 
was registered to Aero Tech Flight Service Inc., Anchorage, Alaska, and operated by the pilot.  
The airline transport certificated pilot, and the two pilot-rated passengers, received fatal 
injuries.  Instrument meteorological conditions are presumed to have prevailed in the area of 
the accident.  The flight originated at the Homer Airport, Homer, Alaska, on July 1, about 1105.  
No flight plan was filed, nor was one required.
On July 3, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), was 
notified by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) personnel that the accident airplane had 
been reported overdue.  The wreckage of the airplane was located by a U.S. Coast Guard 
airplane on July 5, about 200 feet below the top of a ridge on the north face of West Amatuli 
Island.  A U.S. Coast Guard helicopter was dispatched to the scene, but due to the steep terrain, 
did not land.  An Air National Guard helicopter with pararescue personnel aboard was 
dispatched to the scene.  They verified the airplane as the missing airplane and recovered the 
occupants.
According to information provided by Alaska State Troopers personnel, the pilot and the 
passengers traveled to Anchorage, Alaska, on June 25, 2005.  Examination of a hand-written 
travel itinerary that was found by State Trooper personnel indicated the pilot and passengers 
planned to visit Juneau, Ketchikan, Sitka, and Homer, Alaska.  Alaska State Troopers, and FAA 
personnel reported that the airplane arrived in Homer on the evening of June 29.  On June 30, 
the airplane traveled to Kodiak, Alaska, and returned to Homer, and then conducted a flight 
during the evening hours of the 30th.
On July 1, at 0933, the pilot telephoned the Kenai Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS), 
Kenai, Alaska, and according to FAA transcrips of the recorded conversation, stated, in part:  
"...we're in Homer and we're wanting to do some flying sightseeing for the day, and just hope, 
wondering if you can point us toward the direction where we would have the best luck for VFR 
conditions."
The fight service station specialist replied, in part:  "Well, it doesn't really look good probably 
anywhere today.  Unfortunately, up in the Kenai area right now we've been IFR this morning.  
They do expect it to improve, but then we've got the fire up in the Sterling [Alaska] area, up in 
the Skilak [Alaska] area, and the one up in Hope [Alaska], so those gonna affect that.  Then in 
the going the other direction, out further to the west, Big River Lakes is good in that area, but 
they've also been back and forth this morning, so right now they're marginal with visibility 4 
[miles].  The Bristol Bay area is expected to stay that way pretty much, but they've got 
AIRMETS for IFR, and mountain obscurations over in that area, so you don't really wanna go 
to the Bristol Bay area.  Kodiak, actually right now, looks probably about the best, heading 
south to Kodiak, cuz going up to Seward [Alaska] doesn't, which is unusual.  Usually it's just 
the opposite, but if you go on up to the Seward area, they've got lower conditions and they're 
forecasting those for the central gulf coast to be a little bit lower today, which 
would...(unintelligible)...ceilings they're forecasting marginal VFR, some isolated IFR 
conditions over in that area...so like I said, anywhere pretty much to the north it looks like it's 
gonna be worse for you today...it looks better going, like I said, which is usually just the 
opposite, Kodiak actually looks better today."
The pilot replied, "Well, we flew down to Kodiak yesterday, and things were pretty good until 
we got there, and they had fog lying in, so the, you know the main field there was socked in 
with ah Special VFR."  The AFSS specialist stated, "I'm checking right now, let's see what 
Kodiak, what their current conditions are and what the terminal [forecast] is...but yah, it looks 
like for today, the rest of the areas look pretty bad.  Kodiak currently, visibility is 10 [miles], 
8,500 [feet] broken, and the terminal [forecast] is calling for wind, 330 [degrees] at 10 [knots], 
visibility greater than 6 [miles], few clouds at 300 hundred [feet], 1,000 [feet] scattered, 4,000 
[feet] broken, and then they expect it to improve after 2 p.m."
The pilot stated that "It sounds like they're clearly VFR right now," to which the AFSS specialist 
replied, "Right, it does look better going that direction today."  The pilot then stated, "Okay, 
what do you have in terms of just, Oh I don't know the right term, I think it, an area 
prognostication, or whatever, we, we're trying to make a decision to get the plane up tomorrow 
or the next day, are things clearing at all or."
The specialist replied, in part:  "Right now, looking at the surface charts, which gives us the 
best...indicator, there is some low pressure down in the Gulf of Alaska, but the charts show that 
moving off the east, so that actually looks pretty good for tomorrow for the Cook Inlet, Susitna 
Valley, as that moves out of the area.  Then that next low pressure hopefully, is not gonna move 
in til Sunday, so looking at the charts for tomorrow morning, we have a low pressure ridge 
that's gonna lay from like the Y-K Delta, and then head up north and go across the area, but it 
looks better for tomorrow.  Looking at the area forecast, in the outlook portion for tomorrow, 
the forecast for the Cook Inlet, Susitna Valley, they're forecasting the outlook for VFR with 
some rain showers, so it actually looks better tomorrow."  The pilot concluded the briefing at 
0937 by stating, "Okay, well that is certainly what we need to know, and you have been very 
helpful."
At 0942, the pilot telephoned the Kenai AFSS and requested the Kodiak Automated Surface 
Observing System (ASOS) telephone number.
At 1100, the pilot made radio contact the Homer Fight Service Station (FSS) specialist and 
stated, "Homer traffic, skywagon 1621U is taxiing to [runway] 21."  At 1105, the pilot reported 
that he was on the takeoff roll.
The Barren Islands are located about mid-way between the south end of the Kenai Peninsula, 
and the north end of Kodiak Island, along the Kennedy Entrance to Cook Inlet.  It is comprised 
of West and East Amatuli, Ushigat, Sugarloaf, Sud, and Nord Islands that are within the Alaska 
Maritime National Wildlife Refuge.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate with airplane single-engine and multiengine 
land ratings.  He also held a flight instructor certificate with airplane single-engine, and 
instrument airplane ratings.  The most recent second-class medical certificate was issued to the 
pilot on June 7, 2005, and contained the limitation that the pilot must wear corrective lenses.
No personal flight records were located for the pilot and the aeronautical experience listed on 
page 3 of this report was obtained from a review of the airmen Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) records on file in the Airman and Medical Records Center located in Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma.  On the pilot's application for medical certificate, dated June 7, 2005, the pilot 
indicated that his total aeronautical experience consisted of about 8,432 hours, of which 254 
were accrued in the previous 6 months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The pilot rented the airplane from Aero Tech Flight Services Inc., Anchorage, Alaska.  He 
received a VFR airplane check-out by an Aero Tech instructor on June 26.  Aero Tech 
personnel reported that all of the airplane's maintenance logbooks were on board the airplane 
at the time of the accident.
Maintenance on the airplane was performed by Hanger 5, Anchorage.  The facility had a copy 
of the most recent annual inspection check list, which was performed on July 1, 2004.  At that 
time, the airplane had accrued 7,416 hours.  The engine had accrued 5,944 hours, and 852.2 
hours since an overhaul.  Examination of previous discrepancies noted on the airplane revealed 
no unresolved maintenance issues.
According to company personnel from Homer Air, Homer, the airplane was fueled with 40 
gallons of aviation fuel on June 30, 2005, about 0900.  At that time, the pilot requested that a 
fuel account be opened.  The airplane was again fueled on June 30, about 1830, with 36 gallons 
of aviation fuel after landing in Homer about 1748.  The airplane was fueled on the morning of 
July 1, with 16 gallons of aviation fuel.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest official aviation weather observation station is Seldovia, Alaska, which is located 31 
nautical miles north of the accident site.  At 1153, an Aviation Routine Weather Report 
(METAR) was reporting, in part:  Wind, calm; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky 
condition, 1,000 feet overcast; temperature, 54 degrees F; dew point, 52 degrees F; altimeter, 
29.78 inHg; remarks, rain began at 1103, rain ended at 1148.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration maintains an automated weather data 
buoy system, and has a land-based sensor on East Amatuli Island, about 3 miles east of the 
accident site.  At 1159, the weather sensor recorded, in part:  Wind, 300 degrees (true) at 4 
knots, gusts to 7 knots; visibility (not recorded); clouds and sky condition (not recorded); 
temperature, 51 degrees F; dew point, 49 degrees F; altimeter, 29.77 inHg.
The area forecast for the central gulf coast of Alaska, issued on July 1, at 0545, and valid until 
1800 stated, in part:  AIRMET for mountain obscuration, mountains obscured in clouds and in 
precipitation, no change.  Clouds and sky condition, 1,500 feet scattered, broken to overcast 
3,500 feet in light rain showers.  Occasionally, 1,500 feet broken, 3,500 feet overcast; visibility, 
3 to 5 statute miles in light rain showers and mist.  Isolated ceilings below 1,000 feet; visibility 
below 3 statute miles in rain showers and mist.  Outlook, valid until 1800, clouds and sky 
condition, 4,500 feet broken to overcast.  Outlook, valid from 1800 to 1200 on July 2, VFR.  
Turbulence, nil significant.  Icing and freezing level, nil significant.  Freezing level, 9,000 feet.
An amended terminal forecast for Homer, issued on July 1, 2005, at 0856, and from 0900 to 
0400 on July 2, stated, in part:  Wind, calm; visibility, greater than 6 statute miles; clouds and 
sky condition, few clouds at 800 feet, 2,500 feet scattered, 6,000 feet overcast. Temporary 
conditions from 0900 to 1300, 800 feet scattered, 2,500 feet broken.  From 1600, wind, 260 
degrees at 12 knots; visibility, greater than 6 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, 4,000 feet 
scattered, 8,000 feet broken.
At 0911, the FAA received a pilot weather report (PIREP) from a Cessna 185 on a flight from 
Homer to Kodiak.  The pilot reported that south of Flat Island (located about 3 miles south of 
Nanwalek), there was fog and mist to the water.  The pilot indicated that he was unable to 
maintain VFR, and was returning to Homer due to weather.
A PIREP was received by the FAA at 0906 from a Cessna 172 on a flight from Homer to Kenai.  
The pilot indicated that 5 miles north of Homer, he was unable to maintain VFR due to clouds 
to the ground.
At 0915, the pilot of a Cessna 180 on a flight from Homer to Kasilof, Alaska, filed a PIREP that 
indicated the sky condition was 800 feet overcast, with 10 miles of visibility via the coast.
The captains of two fishing charter vessels operating from Homer, reported that on the day of 
the accident, the weather conditions around the Barren Islands included fog that obscured the 
islands.  One vessel captain reported hearing an airplane in the vicinity of the islands, but could 
not see it because of the fog.
COMMUNICATIONS
After the pilot announced that he was departing runway 21 at Homer, no further 
communications were received from the airplane.  The Homer FSS specialist reported that the 
pilot did not request a local airport advisory (LAA), or any other services.
A transcript of the communications between the airplane and all involved FAA ATC facilities is 
included in the public docket of this accident.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The NTSB IIC, accompanied by another NTSB air safety investigator, and an FAA inspector, 
examined the airplane wreckage at the accident site on July 6, 2005.  The accident site was the 
north face of the island that extended from a small saddle at the top of the face, to the ocean 
shore.  The face of the island was sloping terrain of about 40 degrees that consisted of tundra 
grasses, boulders, and rock scree.  A path of wreckage debris from the initial impact site, about 
200 feet below the top of the saddle, to the main fuselage wreckage point of rest, about another 
200 feet downslope, was on a magnetic heading of 180 degrees. (All heading/bearings noted in 
this report are oriented toward magnetic north.)
All of the airplane's major components were found at the main wreckage area.  The initial 
impact site was about 800 feet mean sea level, and had disruption of the ground and gouging 
of an area of rock, extensive presence of oil, and burned grass.  Interior and exterior fragments 
of the forward portion of the airplane, including engine parts, windshield, rudder pedal 
fragments, radio components, and fragments of the trim wheel were located at the initial 
impact site.  Additional fragmented parts of the airplane, and areas of burned grasses were 
evident from the initial impact site, directly downslope, to the fuselage point of rest.  There was 
no lateral distribution of wreckage debris at the crash site from the main debris path.
The right main landing gear strut, with its wheel attached, portions of the cockpit area 
including instrument panel parts, and the separated propeller assembly, were located 
downslope, about half-way between the initial impact site and the fuselage point of rest.  The 
left main landing gear strut remained attached to the fuselage.
Examination of the three-bladed propeller assembly revealed that it had fractured where the 
crankshaft exited the engine case.  The propeller blades were loose in the hub.  All of the blades 
had extensive leading edge gouging, chordwise scratching, "S" bending, torsional twisting, and 
fracturing of two of the three propeller tips.  A portion of a separated propeller blade tip was 
located forward, and upslope from the initial impact site.
Below the propeller point of rest, portions of seat frames, and seat belts were found.  These had 
evidence of fire damage to each, and the seat belts were latched, with one belt portion still 
attached to a fragment of floor structure.
The wings remained attached to the fuselage.  Both were extensively crushed aft and folded 
parallel to the longitudinal axis of the fuselage.  Each retained their respective aileron and flap 
assemblies.
The postcrash fire incinerated most of the cabin and cockpit area from the empennage forward.  
The fuselage had extensive aft crushing and fragmentation.  The crown of the fuselage was 
destroyed by fire.  Due to impact and postimpact fire damage, the flight controls could not be 
moved by their respective control mechanisms, but flight control cables were attached from the 
empennage to the cockpit.
The empennage, at the point of rest, was upright and had not sustained extensive destruction.  
The leading edge of the left horizontal stabilizer had aft crushing, and the outboard end of the 
right stabilizer was bent downward.  The elevators and rudder remained attached to their 
respective attach points.
The engine sustained extensive impact and fire damage to the underside and front portion of 
the engine.  The engine case and cylinders were fractured.  One exhaust extension tube was 
crushed and folded nearly flat, producing sharp creases that were not cracked or broken along 
the creases.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A postmortem examination of the pilot was not conducted.  According to the Alaska State 
Medical Examiner, 4500 South Boniface Parkway, Anchorage, Alaska, the pilot's remains were 
not recovered from the accident scene by search and rescue personnel.
A postmortem examination of the pilot-rated passengers, conducted by the Alaska State 
Medical Examiner on July 7, 2005, revealed that the cause of death for both passengers was 
attributed to massive blunt force injuries.
A toxicological examination of the pilot-rated passengers was conducted by the FAA's Civil 
Aeromedical Institute (CAMI) on August 25, and 26, 2005, and revealed putrefaction of 
specimens, and the presence of ethanol which the FAA attributed to sources other than 
ingestion.
FIRE
An extensive postaccident fire consumed the airplane fuselage forward of the empennage.
SEARCH AND RESCUE
Military search and rescue personnel reported that after identifying the airplane, they observed 
some incinerated remains of an occupant in the wreckage of the airplane.  One burned 
occupant was located about 25 feet below the airplane's initial impact point.  A third, unburned 
occupant was located below the airplane point of rest.  The two occupants located outside the 
wreckage were recovered.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Among the pilot's personal affects, Alaska State Trooper personnel found a receipt for the 
purchase of Alaska IFR en route low altitude charts, sectional charts for Anchorage, Kodiak, 
McGrath, an Anchorage/Fairbanks terminal chart, and an FAA Airport Facilities Directory, 
Alaska Supplement.
A representative of the operator's insurance company, traveled to the accident scene to assess 
the logistics of removing the wreckage from the island.  He reported to the NTSB IIC that he 
observed a damaged Garmin 295 GPS receiver among the wreckage debris.  He did not recover 
the GPS unit, but he did take a picture of it, and forwarded the picture to the NTSB IIC.  It 
received damage to the screen area, and the supplemental map memory card slot was empty.  
The insurance representative also reported that in conversations with the pilot's spouse, he 
learned that the Garmin 295 receiver was owned by one of the pilot-passengers.  Further 
investigation about the mapping capabilities of a Garmin 295 revealed that the unit's base map 
does not display West Amatuli Island.  Garmin does have supplemental terrain maps available 
that may be downloaded to a memory card that could contain terrain data for the island.  It is 
unknown if the Garmin 295 was utilized during the accident flight.  The pilot was reported to 
have owned a Garmin 296 GPS receiver, which was not observed in the wreckage debris.
At the time of this report, the airplane wreckage has not been recovered.  The Safety Board did 
not take custody of the wreckage.  No parts or components were retained by the Safety Board.
