The private certificated pilot was conducting a personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, and 
was performing a glassy water takeoff toward the west from a lake in a float-equipped airplane.  
He reported variable winds from the north.  The pilot said that during the takeoff, he lifted the 
left float out of the water, then the right float at 45 mph, and began a climb at 55 mph.  He said 
that when the airplane reached about 50 feet, it began a "very fast uncommanded roll to the 
right, and control forces went to zero."  The pilot also indicated there was no mechanical 
malfunction/failure, and the engine was producing power during the accident sequence.  The 
airplane descended toward the water, and the right wing and right float assembly struck the 
water and the airplane overturned.  The pilot and passenger were both wearing inflatable 
jackets, and exited the airplane.    An FAA airworthiness inspector examined the airplane as it 
sat on a trailer, after the pilot recovered and partially disassembled the airplane.  The inspector 
reported that the airplane's flap handle was set at 10 degrees.  The inspector did not indicate 
that he observed any mechanical malfunction.  A METAR from the accident site included calm 
winds, and a temperature of 72 degrees F.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed during takeoff initial climb, which resulted in 
a loss of control and subsequent uncontrolled descent into a lake.  A factor contributing to the 
accident was an inadvertent stall.
On July 1, 2005, about 1935 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Bellanca 7GCBC airplane, 
N88110, sustained substantial damage when it collided with the waters of Lake Hood during 
initial climb after takeoff from the Lake Hood Seaplane Base, Anchorage, Alaska.  The airplane 
was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight under Title 14, 
CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was operated by the pilot.  The private 
certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  The flight was en route to Sterling, Alaska, and no flight plan was filed, nor was one 
required.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on July 2, the pilot reported that he was performing a glassy water 
takeoff from the west waterlane of Lake Hood.  He indicated that he lifted off the water at 45 
mph, and began a climb at 55 mph.  The airplane then rolled to the right and descended toward 
the water.  The right wing and right float assembly struck the water and the airplane 
overturned.  The pilot and passenger were both wearing inflatable jackets, and exited the 
airplane.  A family pet did not escape from the airplane.  The pilot said the engine was 
producing power during the accident sequence.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations inspector, Anchorage Flight Standards 
District Office (FSDO), responded to the accident scene, and reported that the airplane 
contained about 30 gallons of fuel. The float compartments contained additional fuel 
containers, an anchor, and rope.  An FAA airworthiness inspector examined the airplane as it 
sat on a trailer on July 5, after the pilot recovered and partially disassembled the airplane.  The 
inspector reported that the airplane's flap handle was set at 10 degrees.  He did not indicate 
that he observed any mechanical malfunction.
In the Pilot/Operator Aviation Accident Report (NTSB FORM 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, 
the pilot indicated that the water surface was glassy, with a variable wind from the north.  
During the takeoff run, the pilot stated that he lifted the left float out of the water, then the 
right float, and accelerated for a climb.  He said that when the airplane reached about 50 feet, it 
began a "very fast uncommanded roll to the right, and control forces went to zero."  The pilot 
also indicated there was no mechanical malfunction/failure.
At 1957, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Lake Hood Seaplane Base was 
reporting, in part: Wind, calm; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, few at 
3,800 feet, 10,000 feet broken; temperature, 72 degrees F; dew point, 53 degrees F; altimeter, 
29.71 inHg.
