The pilot and a passenger were conducting an aerial hunt at low altitude. The pilot said he was 
about 20 feet above 30-foot-tall trees and flying into the wind slowly when the tail rotor 
"malfunctioned" and he lost control. The helicopter started spinning to the right, and the pilot 
initiated an autorotation. The helicopter landed hard and rolled over on its left side. The pilot 
stated that he thought the helicopter had lost tail rotor authority. Examination of the tail rotor 
found no evidence of a tail rotor malfunction or defects that would preclude normal operation. 
The pilot was operating the helicopter in a low airspeed, out of ground effect, high-power-
demand flight condition, which was conducive to the development of loss of tail rotor 
effectiveness.
A loss of tail rotor effectiveness while manuevering at low altitude.
On February 1, 2013, about 1500 central standard time, a Robinson R22 BETA II, N3059Q, 
struck trees and impacted terrain on a private ranch near Gillett, Texas. The pilot and 
passenger were seriously injured. The helicopter was substantially damaged. The helicopter 
was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time 
of the accident, and no flight plan had been filed. The local flight originated from Karnes City, 
Texas, approximately 1430.
According to the pilot™s accident report, he and his cousin were on a ﬁwild hog helicopter huntﬂ 
on the family ranch. They sighted some hogs along a creek and he descended to herd them out 
of the creek and into an open pasture. He said he was about 20 feet above 30-foot-tall trees and 
flying into the wind ﬁvery slowlyﬂ when the tail rotor ﬁmalfunctionedﬂ and he lost control of the 
helicopter. The helicopter started spinning to the right, and the pilot initiated an autorotation. 
The pilot said he was able to steer the helicopter towards a livestock tank, hitting the ground 
ﬁhard,ﬂ and cracking the landing skid. The helicopter rolled over on its left side. 
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot said that he thought 
he lost tail rotor authority.  The inspector said he found the tail rotor at the base of some trees 
near the stock tank, and his examination found no preimpact defects.
