Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Joplin, MO
Accident Number:
CEN14LA333
Date & Time:
07/01/2014, 1726 CDT 
Registration:
N468CM
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172R
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The pilot stated that the accident occurred as he was completing a touch-and-go landing 
following a cross-country flight. He reported that, after an uneventful landing and during the 
subsequent initial climb, the engine ﬁgrumbledﬂ and began to ﬁcut in and out.ﬂ The pilot 
immediately told the airport tower controller that the airplane had an engine issue, reduced 
engine power, and fully extended the wing flaps for landing on the remaining runway. During 
the landing roll, the airplane overran the end of the runway before it collided with a light pole 
associated with the runway approach lighting system. Following the accident, the pilot was able 
to taxi the airplane back onto the runway, under normal engine power, before he shut down the 
engine on a nearby taxiway.
A postaccident examination established that the fuel system contained about 42 gallons of 
aviation fuel that was evenly distributed between the two wing fuel tanks. The engine was 
started by following the normal checklist procedure, and it developed takeoff power during an 
operational test run. No hesitation or engine roughness was experienced during the 
operational test run, and the engine responded to corresponding throttle movements 
throughout the test run. Thus, the postaccident operational test run did not reveal any 
anomalies with the fuel-injected engine that would have prevented normal operation. The 
reason for the partial loss of engine power could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because an 
operational test run of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded 
normal operation.
Page 2 of 6CEN14LA333
Findings
Environmental issues
Runway/taxi/approach light - Contributed to outcome
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN14LA333
Factual Information
On July 1, 2014, about 1726 central daylight time, a Cessna model 172R airplane, N468CM, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing at the Joplin Regional Airport (JLN), Joplin, 
Missouri. The private pilot was not injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by 
University of Central Missouri under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
without a flight plan. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the instructional cross-
country flight that departed from Downtown Airport (3DW), Springfield, Missouri, about 1700.
The pilot reported that he was cleared for the option landing on runway 31 (6,501 feet by 150 
feet, asphalt) and that the prevailing wind was aligned with the runway heading at 11 knots. 
The pilot stated that he performed a touch-and-go landing. He reported that he made an 
uneventful landing and that shortly after the following takeoff, during initial climb, the engine 
"grumbled" and began to "cut in and out." The pilot immediately told the tower controller that 
the airplane had an engine issue, reduced engine power, and fully extended the wing flaps for a 
landing on the remaining runway. During the landing roll, the airplane overran the end of the 
runway before it collided with a light pole associated with the runway approach lighting 
system. Following the accident, the pilot was able to taxi back onto runway, under normal 
engine power, before he shut down the engine on a nearby taxiway. The right wing was 
substantially damaged during the on-ground collision with the light pole.
A postaccident examination was completed by the airplane operator's chief pilot and the 
director of maintenance. Their examination established that the airplane fuel system contained 
about 42 gallons of 100 low-lead aviation fuel that was evenly distributed between the two wing 
fuel tanks. An external examination of the engine did not reveal any anomalies or fluid leaks. 
The oil quantity dip-stick established that the engine contained about 8 quarts of oil. The 
engine was started by following the normal checklist procedure, and then demonstrated the 
ability to develop takeoff power during an operational test run. No hesitation or engine 
roughness was experienced during the operational test run. The engine responded to 
corresponding throttle movements throughout the test run. A functional magneto check did 
not reveal any anomalies with engine operation. Following the operational test run, there were 
no fluid leaks observed on the engine exterior. The postaccident operational test run did not 
reveal any anomalies with the engine, a fuel-injected Lycoming model IO-360, that would have 
prevented normal operation.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Runway excursion
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 4 of 6CEN14LA333
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
20, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/10/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/23/2014
Flight Time:
135.3 hours (Total, all aircraft), 124.1 hours (Total, this make and model), 82 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 28.7 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 18.8 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3.7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N468CM
Model/Series:
172R 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
17280860
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/27/2014, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
6 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6842.2 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360
Registered Owner:
University of Central Missouri
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
University of Central Missouri
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Pilot School (141)
Page 5 of 6CEN14LA333
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
JLN, 981 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1733 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Springfield, MO (3DW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Joplin, MO (JLN)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1700 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Joplin Regional Airport (JLN)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
981 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
31
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6501 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Touch and 
Go; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.151944, -94.498333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
01/21/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Jim Wesley; Federal Aviation Administration - Kansas City FSDO; Kansas City, MO
Publish Date:
01/21/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89586
Page 6 of 6CEN14LA333
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
