Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Belliigham, WA
Accident Number:
SEA04LA064
Date & Time:
04/02/2004, 1230 PST 
Registration:
N65914
Aircraft:
Grumman G-44
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Not long into the flight the left engine began running rough.  After adjusting the engine 
controls the engine smoothed out, but then began running rough again, prompting the pilot to 
proceed to his home base.  Approaching his destination and observing that he could only get 
1900 rpm out of the right propeller after advancing the throttle to 28.5 inches of manifold 
pressure, the pilot elected to proceed to a nearby airport.  However, due to a radio 
communication failure and inability to maintain sufficient altitude to clear terrain bordering 
the airport, the pilot decided to make a water landing on the 20 square-mile bay adjoining the 
airport.  Not realizing the tide was out and that the water was only about 6 inches deep, the 
pilot landed approximately 600 to 650 feet paralled to the shoreline.  Subsequently, the right 
wing float impacted subsurface terrain, collapsing the float aft in compression and pivoting the 
float aft and up, substantially damaging the right aileron and four wing ribs.  A post accident 
examination of the right engine and propeller revealed the propeller's oil control valve had 
developed a leak, which resulted in a lack of engine oil to the propeller.  No definitive reason 
for the leak had been determined.   Examination of the rough running left engine failed to 
reveal any anomalies which would preclude normal operation. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the pilot to select the proper touchdown point while conducting a forced landing.  
Factors included the #1 engine malfunction, the right propeller oil control valve leak, and the 
shallow subsurface terrain condition.
Page 2 of 6SEA04LA064
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) PROPELLER CONTROL - LEAK
2. (F) 1 ENGINE
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
3. (C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - OTHER
Page 3 of 6SEA04LA064
Factual Information
On April 2, 2004, approximately 1230 Pacific standard time, an amphibian Grumman G-44 
multiengine airplane, N65914, sustained substantial damage after impacting terrain while 
making a water landing near Bellingham, Washington.  The aircraft was registered to and 
operated by a private individual.  The commercial pilot and his two passengers were not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 
CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The flight originated from Lake Whatcom, Washington, at 
approximately 1210.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB form 6120.1/2), and in a 
telephone interview with the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot reported that not 
long into the flight the left engine developed intermittent roughness, which smoothed out after 
the pilot reduced his power setting.  The pilot reported that he then decided to proceed to his 
home base.  The pilot stated that while approaching his home base he advanced the right 
propeller control to full increase and opened the right throttle to 28.5 inches of manifold 
pressure, but could only get 1900 rpm out of the right propeller.  The pilot reported that at 
1,200 feet above ground level and in a slow descent his intention was to land at Bellingham 
International Airport (BLI).  The pilot related that due to a communications failure and unable 
to clear terrain bordering the airport, he opted to make a water landing in Bellingham Bay, a 
bay which encompasses an area of more then 20 square miles.  The pilot reported, "The only 
thing I didn't realize before landing was that the tide was out."  The pilot stated it was only after 
he landed in the bay, 600 to 650 feet parallel to the shoreline, that he realized the water was 
only about 6 inches deep.  The pilot stated that the right wing float impacted subsurface 
terrain, collapsing the float aft in compression and pivoting the float aft and up, substantially 
damaging the right aileron and four wing ribs. 
On May 13, 2004, the IIC spoke with the pilot, who is also the registered owner and an FAA 
certificated airframe and power plant mechanic.  The pilot reported that during the 
examination of the right engine, the engine's propeller control valve had developed a leak 
which resulted in a lack of engine oil to the propeller.  The pilot stated that no definitive reason 
for the leak had been determined.  The pilot also reported that as a result of his examination of 
the left engine, which he had reported as "running rough" during the flight, he found no 
anomalies with the engine which would preclude normal operation.
Page 4 of 6SEA04LA064
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
77, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine 
Sea; Single-engine Land; Single-
engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/01/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/04/2004
Flight Time:
13739 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3143 hours (Total, this make and model), 13660 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Grumman
Registration:
N65914
Model/Series:
G-44 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1385
Landing Gear Type: 
Amphibian; Tricycle
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/18/2003, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4525 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
2.7 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2232.7 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Fairchild
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
L-440C5
Registered Owner:
Lane E. Older
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
Lane E. Older
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6SEA04LA064
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.4 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Lake Whatcom, WA (0W7)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Lake Whatcom, WA (OW7)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1158 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
48.777500, -122.528056
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas M Little
Adopted Date:
09/01/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
William J Reichardt; Federal Aviation Administration; Renton, WA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA04LA064
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
