Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Harrietstown, NY
Accident Number:
NYC04FA100
Date & Time:
04/02/2004, 1925 EST 
Registration:
N4686J
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28R-180
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Arriving in the area of the destination airport, the weather was reported as, 1-3/4 statute miles 
of visibility; light snow, mist; overcast cloud layer at 200 feet; temperature of 34 degrees 
Fahrenheit; dew point of 32 degrees Fahrenheit.  The pilot performed an ILS procedure 
towards the runway.  An employee at the airport received a radio transmission from the 
accident airplane, requesting a current altimeter setting.  The employee replied back with the 
current altimeter setting.  Moments later, the employee heard a transmission from the airplane 
that it was on a 4 mile final for the ILS approach.  No further transmissions were received from 
the airplane.  The airplane came to rest in a wooded area, about 3/4-mile from the runway 
threshold, about 300 feet right of the extended centerline.  Review of the approach plate for the 
ILS approach revealed that the minimum glide slope intercept altitude at the beginning of the 
final approach segment on the precision approach was 4,300 feet msl.  The glide slope altitude 
at the final approach fix for the non-precision approach, which was located about 4 miles from 
the approach end of the runway, was 3,619 feet msl.  The glide slope altitude at the middle 
marker, which was located about 0.4 miles from the approach end of the runway, was 1,853 
feet msl.  Review of recovered GPS data revealed that about 1.75 miles from the runway, the 
airplane turned to the left of the final approach course.  When the airplane was about 1/2 mile 
left of the final approach course, it began a turn to the right towards the final approach course.  
The last GPS data point was recorded about 5,073 feet from the runway threshold, along the 
final approach course, at an altitude of 1,765 feet msl.  The elevation at the airport was 1,663 
feet msl.  Review of the pilot's logbook revealed times spans in excess of 6 months, where the 
pilot did not record 6 instrument approaches or IFR holding procedures.  The pilot's last 
recorded instrument flight proficiency flight was dated October 26, 1996.  According to Federal 
Aviation Regulations, Part 61.57 Recent flight experience, pilot-in-command, "...no person may 
act as pilot in command under IFR or in weather conditions less than the minimums 
prescribed for VFR, unless within the preceding 6 calendar months, that person 
has...performed and logged under actual or simulated instrument conditions, at least six 
instrument approaches, holding procedures, and intercepting and tracking courses through the 
use of navigation systems...a person who does not meet the instrument experience 
requirements within the prescribed time, or within 6 calendar months after the prescribed 
time, may not serve as pilot in command under IFR or in weather conditions less than the 
Page 2 of 9NYC04FA100
minimums prescribed for VFR until that person passes an instrument proficiency check..."
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to follow instrument flight rules procedures resulting in a collision with a 
tree.  Factors related to the accident were the dark night conditions, low visibility, and low 
cloud ceiling.
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - FAF/OUTER MARKER TO THRESHOLD (IFR)
Findings
1. OBJECT - TREE(S)
2. (C) IFR PROCEDURE - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
4. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
5. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - SNOW
Page 3 of 9NYC04FA100
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 2, 2004, about 1925 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28R-180, N4686J, was 
substantially damaged after impacting terrain during an approach to the Adirondack Regional 
Airport (SLK), Harrietstown, New York.  The certificated private pilot and passenger were 
fatally injured.  Night instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight 
rules (IFR) flight plan was filed for the flight that originated from the Leesburg Executive 
Airport (JYO), Leesburg, Virginia.  The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the airplane arrived at JYO 
the day before the accident, and was fueled with 25.9 gallons of aviation fuel.
On the day of the accident, the pilot received a weather briefing from the Leesburg Flight 
Service Station (FSS), and subsequently filed an IFR flight plan.  He then departed JYO about 
1530.  The flight proceeded uneventfully towards SLK, and was cleared for the ILS runway 23 
approach at SLK at 1858.  At 1909, the radar services were terminated.
An employee at the SLK airport received a radio transmission from the accident airplane, 
requesting a current altimeter setting.  The employee replied back with the current altimeter 
setting.  Moments later, the employee heard a transmission from the airplane that it was on a 4 
mile final for the ILS runway 23 approach.  No further transmissions were received from the 
airplane.
The airplane was located the following day by rescue personnel.  It came to rest inverted, in a 
wooded area, about 3/4-mile from the runway 23 threshold, and about 300 feet right of the 
extended centerline.
Review of radar data revealed that the airplane crossed the SLK VOR, which was co-located on 
the airport, at 6,000 feet msl, and proceeded outbound on a course of approximately 050 
degrees.   The airplane also began a descent to 5,000 feet msl after crossing the VOR.  About 9 
miles from the SLK VOR, the airplane made a left hand turn.  Approximately 10 seconds later, 
the airplane turned to the right.  The turn continued until intercepting the final approach 
course for the runway 23 localizer, where a gradual descent began.  The last target observed 
was about 2.25 miles prior to the SLK VOR, at an altitude of 2,500 feet msl. 
A hand-held global positioning system (GPS) was found in the wreckage, and was forwarded to 
the manufacturer for data extraction.  The data revealed that the airplane departed from JYO, 
and proceeded in a northerly direction towards SLK at an average airspeed of 153 mph.  About 
5 minutes after passing the SLK VOR at 5,555 feet msl, the airplane reversed course, and began 
to track the final approach course inbound towards the runway.  About 1.75 miles from the 
runway, the airplane turned to the left of the final approach course.  When the airplane was 
about 1/2 mile left of the final approach course, it began a turn to the right towards the final 
approach course.  The last data point was recorded about 5,073 feet from the runway 
threshold, along the final approach course, at an altitude of 1,765 feet msl.
The accident occurred during the hours of darkness, at 44 degrees, 24.336 minutes north 
longitude, 74 degrees, 11.42 minutes west latitude, at an elevation of 1,640 feet. 
PILOT INFORMATION
Page 4 of 9NYC04FA100
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land, and 
instrument airplane.
The pilot's most recent application for a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class 
medical certificate was dated on May 14, 1996.
Review of the pilot's logbook revealed that he had accumulated about 1,215 hours of total flight 
experience, of which 285 hours were recorded as "actual instrument."  During the previous 6-
month period, the pilot recoded 5 instrument approaches, and 14.9 hours of "actual 
instrument."  The pilot did not record any IFR holding procedures during the 6-month period.  
Further review of the pilot's logbook revealed times spans in excess of 6 months, where the 
pilot did not record 6 instrument approaches or IFR holding procedures.  The pilot's last 
recorded instrument flight proficiency flight was dated October 26, 1996.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
A review of the airframe and engine records did not reveal any abnormalities with the engines 
or the airframe. 
The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on March 31, 2004, at a total 
aircraft time of 3,108 hours.  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather reported at SLK, at 1924, included winds from 090 at 5 knots; 1-3/4 statute miles 
of visibility; light snow, mist; overcast cloud layer at 200 feet; temperature of 34 degrees 
Fahrenheit; dew point of 32 degrees Fahrenheit; and an altimeter setting of 29.75 inches of 
mercury.
An AIRMET, issued at 1545, and valid until 2200, called for moderate rime and mixed icing in 
clouds and in precipitation, between the freezing level and 15,00 feet.  The freezing level was 
expected to be between 4,000 and 6,000 feet.
AIDS TO NAVIGATION
Review of the approach plate for the ILS Runway 23 approach at SLK revealed that the 
outbound minimum altitude from the SLK VOR, for the full approach, was 5,000 feet msl.  The 
outbound course was 047 degrees, and continued to the initial approach fix (IAF).  Upon 
crossing the IAF, the outbound course was 049 degrees, and the minimum descent altitude was 
4,800 feet msl.  Upon completion of the course reversal, the inbound course was 229 degrees.  
The glide slope crossing altitude at the beginning of the final approach segment on the 
precision approach was 4,300 feet.  The glide slope altitude at BRIEL intersection, which was 
located about 5.8 miles from the approach end of the runway, was 3,619 feet.  The glide slope 
altitude at the middle marker, which was located about 0.4 miles from the approach end of the 
runway, was 1,853 feet.  The minimums for the full approach were 1/2 statute mile visibility, 
and a decision height of 200 feet agl.
The airport elevation at SLK was 1,663 feet msl.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site on April 3-4, revealed terrain which consisted of evergreen 
and hardwood trees reaching a height of about 40 feet.  The ground surrounding the accident 
site was covered with about 4 feet of snow.  The wreckage path was oriented on a 230-degree 
Page 5 of 9NYC04FA100
heading, with the main fuselage coming to rest on a 235-degree heading.
The first tree strike area was located about 150 feet prior to the main fuselage.  A 48-inch 
section of the outer left wing was located about 60 feet beyond the first tree strike.  About 10 
feet from the outer left wing, the remaining section of the inboard left wing was located.  A 
large section of a 9-inch diameter hardwood tree was found lying on the ground about 4 feet 
past the wing section.  About 35 feet beyond the fallen tree was a 6-foot wide, 15-foot long, and 
1-foot deep, crater.  About 40 feet beyond the crater was the main wreckage.  The right wing, 
and empennage section remained attached to the fuselage.  All flight control surfaces were 
accounted for at the accident site.  The left wing main landing gear assembly was located under 
the fuselage.
When the outer left wing was examined, a 12-inch deep "u"-shaped dent on the leading edge 
were noted.  Tree bark was observed in the dent compression mark.
 
When the inboard left wing was examined, two large, deep, dents on the leading edge was 
noted.  Tree bark was observed in the dent compression marks.
The engine was removed from the airframe and examined.  The crankshaft was rotated freely 
through the accessory drive section.  Thumb compression and valve train continuity was 
attained on all cylinders.
The top and bottom spark plugs were removed; their electrodes were intact and light gray in 
color.  The left and right magnetos were removed from the engine, and when rotated by hand, 
produced spark on all four towers.
The fuel line connected to the fuel divider manifold and the fuel servo was removed and 
contained fuel.  The fuel flow divider cap was removed, and liquid similar in color and odor to 
aviation 100 low lead fuel was observed.  The fuel servo filter screen was absent of debris.  All 
four injector nozzles were removed, and were absent of debris.
Oil was present throughout the engine, and no metal contamination was observed in the oil or 
oil filter.  The oil sump screen was removed from the engine.  Carbon deposits and a Teflon 
tape remnant were observed in the screen and its cap.  
Internal examination of each cylinder was conducted using a lighted borescope.  Each cylinder 
displayed no abnormalities to the valves, top surfaces of each piston, or the cylinder walls.
The vacuum pump was removed from the engine.  When rotated, suction from the inlet and 
outlet lines was observed.
The 2-bladed propeller remained attached to the engine.  Both blades were broken loose inside 
the hub assembly, and displayed s-bending and chord-wise scratching.
The cockpit area was severely damaged.
Examination of the cockpit area revealed that the fuel selector was observed in the "left" tank 
position.  The fuel boost pump switch was in the "off" position.  The pitot heat switch was in 
the "off" position.  The autopilot switch was in the "off" position.
The pilot's airspeed indicator was recovered, but had sustained impact damage.  The airspeed 
indicator displayed a reading of 71 knots.  The altimeter indicator displayed a reading of 3,220 
feet.  The Kollsman window displayed an altimeter setting of 29.73.  The remaining primary 
Page 6 of 9NYC04FA100
instruments were either destroyed or impact damaged. 
The throttle lever was destroyed.  The mixture and propeller controls were in the full forward 
position; however, they had sustained impact damage. 
Control cable continuity for the right wing, rudder, stabilator, and trim surfaces located on the 
tail section of the airplane, were confirmed to the cockpit area; however, recovery personnel 
cut the cables that extended to the flight controls in the cockpit.  All cable ends to the left wing 
were separated.  No corrosion was observed at the separation points.
 
The landing gear was determined to be extended, by noting the fracture locations on the strut 
assemblies.  The flap position was determined to be in the 10-degree position.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Franklin County Coroners Office, Franklin County, New York, performed an autopsy of the 
pilot, on April 4, 2004.
The FAA Toxicology and Accident Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma conducted 
toxicological testing on the pilot.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
- Instrument Experience - 
According to Federal Aviation Regulations, Part 61.57 Recent flight experience, pilot-in-
command:
"(c) Instrument experience. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, no person may 
act as pilot in command under IFR or in weather conditions less than the minimums 
prescribed for VFR, unless within the preceding 6 calendar months, that person has:
(1) For the purpose of obtaining instrument experience in an aircraft (other than a glider), 
performed and logged under actual or simulated instrument conditions, either in flight in the 
appropriate category of aircraft for the instrument privileges sought or in a flight simulator or 
flight training device that is representative of the aircraft category for the instrument privileges 
sought,
(i) At least six instrument approaches;
(ii) Holding procedures; and
(iii) Intercepting and tracking courses through the use of navigation systems.
(d) Instrument proficiency check. Except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section, a person 
who does not meet the instrument experience requirements of paragraph (c) of this section 
within the prescribed time, or within 6 calendar months after the prescribed time, may not 
serve as pilot in command under IFR or in weather conditions less than the minimums 
prescribed for VFR until that person passes an instrument proficiency check consisting of a 
representative number of tasks required by the instrument rating practical test."
- Instrument Landing System (ILS) -
According to the Aeronautical Information Manual chapter on Navigation Aids, Instrument 
Landing System (ILS), it stated that "Make every effort to remain on the indicated glide path."  
Page 7 of 9NYC04FA100
It also cautioned the pilot to, "Avoid flying below the glide path to assure obstacle/terrain 
clearance is maintained."
- Wreckage Release - 
The airplane wreckage was released on April 4, 2004.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
57, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Expired
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/14/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/26/1996
Flight Time:
1218 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N4686J
Model/Series:
PA-28R-180 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28R-30587
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2004, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
6 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3108 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360
Registered Owner:
Paul N. Gurlich
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Paul N. Gurlich
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 8 of 9NYC04FA100
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SLK, 1663 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1924 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
230°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
1.75 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 200 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
90°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.75 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
1°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Snow
Departure Point: 
Leesburg, VA (JYO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Harriettstown, NY (SLK)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1530 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
Adirondack Regional Airport (SLK)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
1663 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
23
IFR Approach:
ILS
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
44.409167, -74.195000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Stephen M Demko
Adopted Date:
10/27/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
James W Leavitt; FAA; Latham, NY
George Hollingsworth; Piper Aircraft; Vero Beach, FL
Aaron Spotts; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 9 of 9NYC04FA100
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
