Before departing on the instrument flight rules cross-country flight, the private pilot obtained a 
weather briefing that forecast moderate icing conditions along the intended route. The pilot, a 
commercial pilot-rated passenger, and a second passenger then departed on the flight in the 
high-performance, single engine airplane, which was not certified for flight into known icing 
conditions. Both the pilot and pilot-rated passenger were heard communicating with air traffic 
controllers during the flight and it could not be determined who was flying the airplane at the 
time of the accident. About 1 hour, 45 minutes into the flight, the pilot requested a higher 
altitude and stated to a controller that the airplane was "picking up a little ice." The pilot was 
granted a higher altitude, which was above the clouds, thus, reducing the potential for icing. 
About 20 minutes later, the flight began its descent toward the destination airport. Radar 
contact was lost about 8 minutes later when the airplane was at an altitude of 3,600 ft mean 
sea level.
Based on an analysis of the weather conditions near the accident site at the time of the 
accident, the atmosphere was conducive to the formation of supercooled large droplet (SLD) 
icing. It is likely that, during the descent, the airplane encountered SLD icing, which rapidly 
accumulated on the airframe to the extent that the airplane could no longer sustain flight. The 
airplane then entered a steep, uncontrolled descent to ground contact. Due to the night 
conditions, it is possible that the pilots were not able to visually observe the amount of ice on 
the airframe or did not realize how quickly the ice was accreting. The airplane was equipped 
with a parachute system (CAPS) that could be deployed by the pilot in flight. The CAPS rocket 
motor was found expended; however, the parachute remained in its pack. The investigation 
could not determine whether the rocket was deployed before impact or as a result of impact 
forces. There were no observed airplane preimpact anomalies. 
The airplane's encounter with supercooled large droplet (SLD) icing, which resulted in a loss of 
lift and a subsequent uncontrolled descent into terrain. Also causal was the pilot's preflight and 
in-flight decision to fly in known icing conditions in an airplane that was not certified to do so.
