National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PARKER, PA
Accident Number: NYC00LA115
Date & Time: 04/01/2000, 1700 EST
Registration: N737HB
Aircraft: Mooney M-20F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot decided to conduct a simulated engine failure over an agricultural field, with an intended recovery at '60-70 feet above the ground.'
When he was satisfied that he 'made the field,' a flock of geese distracted him, and the airplane struck a wire.
The pilot then returned to the originating airport to assess the damage to the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain an adequate visual lookout, due to his distraction with a flock of birds.
A factor was the pilot's improper in flight decision to continue the simulated engine failure to too low of an altitude.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: DESCENT Findings 1.
OBJECT - BIRD(S) 2.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
ALTITUDE - LOW - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On April 1, 2000, about 1700 Eastern Standard Time, a Mooney M-20F, N737HB, was substantially damaged while practicing a simulated engine failure, near Parker, Pennsylvania.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the flight between the Clarion County Airport (AXQ), Clarion, Pennsylvania, and the Venango Regional Airport (FKL), Franklin, Pennsylvania.
The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot stated that he departed about 1600.
While en route, he decided to conduct a simulated engine failure over an agricultural field, with an intended recovery at "60-70 feet above the ground."
When the pilot was satisfied that he "made the field," a flock of geese distracted him and he struck a wire.
The pilot then returned to AXQ to assess the damage to the airplane.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector reported that the right wing, right aileron and the horizontal stabilizer were substantially damaged.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 61, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
