National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MONROE CITY, MO
Accident Number: CHI00LA104
Date & Time: 04/02/2000, 1800 CDT
Registration: N1964
Aircraft: Wilson RAF 2000 GTX SE
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The gyrocopter sustained substantial damage on impact with a tree and terrain following a takeoff from runway 15 for a local flight.
The pilot and passenger sustained minor injuries.
The pilot stated, 'I misread direction of wind from hanger area.
I taxied to north end of runway and took off south with a 90 [degree] crosswind.
When I passed over hanger area at the south end of runway I hit some turbulence.
I should have did a emergency landing in the field south of runway, but chose to continue.
At the south end of field that has trees on three sides I didn't have enough altitude to cross a ravine with trees.
I hit the top of a large oak tree and fell 50 - 60 ft into the ravine.'
The pilot listed his certificate and rating as private and single engine land.
An on scene examination revealed no anomalies.
Wind at Quincy, Illinois was 210 degrees at 7 knots.
The pilot's safety recommendation stated, 'Take off the other direction.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot not obtaining clearance from the trees.
Factors were the trees and the ravine terrain condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
WIND INFORMATION - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 4.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT OBTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 5.
The local flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot and passenger sustained minor injuries.
No flight plan was on file.
The personal flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated, "I misread direction of wind from hanger area.
I taxied to north end of runway and took off south with a 90 [degree] crosswind.
When I passed over hanger area at the south end of runway I hit some turbulence.
I should have did a emergency landing in the field south of runway, but chose to continue.
At the south end of field that has trees on three sides I didn't have enough altitude to cross a ravine with trees.
I hit the top of a large oak tree and fell 50 - 60 ft into the ravine."
The pilot listed his certificate and rating as private and single engine land.
At 1552, the Quincy Municipal, Baldwin Field Airport, Quincy, Illinois weather was: Wind 210 degrees at 7 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition scattered 3,900 feet scattered 20,000 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew point 7 degrees C; altimeter 29.82 inches of mercury.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector performed an on scene examination of the wreckage.
The examination revealed no anomalies.
The pilot's safety recommendation stated, "Take off the other direction."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
