Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Boulder City, NV
Accident Number:
WPR14LA084
Date & Time:
01/01/2014, 1507 PST 
Registration:
N133GC
Aircraft:
EUROCOPTER EC 130 B4
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Hard landing
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
Analysis 
The pilot stated that, during a postmaintenance operational check flight and while on final 
approach for landing, the fuel pressure indicator light illuminated, and the engine ﬁflamed 
out.ﬂ The pilot lowered the collective to initiate an autorotation; however, due to the low 
altitude and airspeed, the helicopter subsequently landed hard and rolled over. 
During a postaccident examination of the wreckage, a main fuel supply line B-nut fitting was 
found without the safety wire, and the nut was loose when turned by hand. Before the accident 
flight, the line had been disconnected during a task to replace the bidirectional suspension 
cross-bar assembly, and the accident flight was the first flight since the task was performed. 
According to the noncertificated maintenance technician who performed the task, the line was 
removed to defuel the fuel tank, which was contrary to manufacturer™s maintenance manual 
instructions. Based on the evidence, it is likely that the B-nut fitting was not properly tightened 
and safety-wired during reassembly, which allowed it to back off due to normal engine 
vibration and resulted in the interruption of the fuel flow during flight.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of the noncertificated maintenance 
technician™s failure to properly tighten and safety wire a B-nut fitting. Contributing to the 
accident was the maintenance technician™s failure to follow the manufacturer™s maintenance 
manual instructions. 
Page 2 of 6WPR14LA084
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Not specified (Cause)
Misc hardware - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Installation - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Use of manual - Maintenance personnel (Factor)
Maintenance - Maintenance personnel (Factor)
Qualification/certification - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Page 3 of 6WPR14LA084
Factual Information
On January 1, 2014, about 1507 Pacific standard time, a Eurocopter EC-130 B4, N133GC, 
landed hard during an autorotation, while on short final at the Boulder City Municipal Airport 
(BVU), Boulder City, Nevada. The commercial pilot was the sole person on board and was not 
injured. The helicopter came to rest on its right side and sustained substantial damage to the 
fuselage and tail boom. The helicopter was registered to Zuni LLC, and operated by Papillon 
Airways, Inc. (PAI), under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the post-maintenance operational check flight. A 
company flight plan was filed for the local flight that departed about 1457.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that she completed the post-maintenance operational 
check portion of the flight and was on short final to BVU, about 200 feet above the ground, 
with an airspeed of 40 to 50 knots. Shortly thereafter, the fuel pressure indicator light 
illuminated and the engine "flamed out". The pilot stated that she lowered the collective to 
initiate an autorotation, but did not have sufficient airspeed to successfully complete it. The 
helicopter's tailboom impacted the ground first during the accident sequence, followed by a 
hard landing. During the landing, the helicopter's skids separated and the fuselage sustained 
substantial damage.
A postaccident examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector, revealed that safety wire was removed from a B-nut fitting that connects the main 
fuel supply to the aft side of the engine firewall, which delivers fuel to the engine Hydro 
Mechanical Unit. The B-nut fitting was loose when rotated by hand. The safety wire that was 
removed from the B-nut fitting remained attached to hardware [intermediate fitting] near the 
engine firewall.
Maintenance records revealed that the replacement of the bi-directional suspension cross-bar 
assembly was due and that the accident flight was the first flight since the task was performed.
According to the FAA, several maintenance technicians at PAI, stated that the selected method 
to gain access for the replacement of the bi-directional suspension cross-bar assembly, is 
contrary to the manufacturer's maintenance manual, by choosing to defuel and remove the fuel 
tank. They further stated that they defuel the tank by disconnecting the main fuel supply line 
that delivers fuel to the engine Hydro Mechanical Unit. This line is then attached to a tank on 
the ground, and the fuel is then pumped out from the tank with the use of the helicopter's fuel 
boost pump. This task was performed by a non-certificated technician. Several maintenance 
technicians were aware of the tasks performed to gain access to the bi-directional suspension 
cross-bar assembly, yet none of them made a statement reflecting they had followed the 
helicopter manufacturer's maintenance manual. The maintenance records showed no entry 
regarding the removal or disconnection of the main fuel supply line.
The manufacturer's maintenance manual [Section 63-31-00, 4-1] recommends that the bi-
directional suspension cross bar assembly will be accessed by removing the main gear box and 
not by removing the fuel tank.
Following the accident, PAI implemented a 16-step independent control check to their Safety 
Control System which will be conducted by only experienced maintenance inspectors. This 
system is complemented by the addition of the inclusion of exclusively assigned Maintenance 
Ops Check Pilots who provide an additional level of oversight. An internal maintenance 
Page 4 of 6WPR14LA084
training system was created with heavy focus on FAA CFR 39, 43, 91, to include onsite 
manufacturer's training programs that encompass airframe and engine systems.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Loss of engine power (total)
Autorotation
Hard landing (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
28
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/15/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2157 hours (Total, all aircraft), 537 hours (Total, this make and model), 2126 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 63 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
EUROCOPTER
Registration:
N133GC
Model/Series:
EC 130 B4 B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3883
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
8
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/01/2014, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
0 Hours
Engines:
 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
10321 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Turbomeca
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
Aerial 2B1
Registered Owner:
ZUNI LLC
Rated Power:
832 hp
Operator:
Papillon Airways Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Rotorcraft External Load 
(133); On-demand Air Taxi 
(135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
PG9A
Page 5 of 6WPR14LA084
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KBVU, 2203 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2315 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
320°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.18 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Boulder City, NV (KBVU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Boulder City, NV (KBVU)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1457 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
BOULDER CITY MUNI (BVU)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2203 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27R
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2166 ft / 60 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
35.946944, -114.860000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew L Swick
Adopted Date:
07/13/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Paul Alukonis; FAA-FSDO; Las Vegas, NV
Allen McKinney; FAA-FSDO; Las Vegas, NV
Luis Garcia; Papillon Airways; Boulder City, NV
John E Becker; Papillon Airways; Boulder City, NV
Publish Date:
07/13/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88613
Page 6 of 6WPR14LA084
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
