Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
DAYTONA BEACH, FL
Accident Number:
MIA97LA054
Date & Time:
01/01/1997, 1341 EST 
Registration:
N5813G
Aircraft:
Cessna 150K
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Before the first of several legs of flight, the pilot used a wooden stick to confirm the fuel 
quantity, since one of the fuel gauges was inoperative. He then departed, performed airwork, 
and continued to a landmark, where a flyby was performed. The pilot landed at an airport, 
remained a short time, then during the preflight, he noted that the fuel quantity indicated 
about 1/2. The flight departed, and the pilot flew to another airport, and performed a full stop 
landing with taxiback. He then departed on a return flight to the original departure airport, 
where he performed two touch-and-go landings. During the takeoff roll of the third touch-and-
go, the pilot noted that the engine was not producing full power; however, with insufficient 
runway remaining to stop, he elected to continue. About 200 feet above ground level, the 
engine coughed, then the propeller stopped. Subsequently, the airplane collided with concrete 
blocks during a forced landing. The pilot stated to a police officer that he believed the engine 
quit because he ran out of fuel. Postcrash examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector 
revealed 3.0 gallons of fuel remaining in the fuel tanks. According to the airplane type 
certificate data sheet, the unusable fuel quantity was 3.5 gallons. Following recovery of the 
airplane, the engine was started, and it operated to 750 rpm. Impact damage precluded 
operating the engine to a higher rpm. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's improper planning/decision, by failing to ensure there was sufficient fuel for 
continued flight, which resulted in fuel exhaustion and subsequent collision with objects 
(concrete blocks) during a forced landing.  Factors relating to the accident were: a partially 
inoperative fuel gauge, which provided a false fuel indication, and the pilot's operation of the 
airplane with the known deficiency. 
Page 2 of 5MIA97LA054
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) ENGINE INSTRUMENTS,FUEL QUANTITY GAGE - FALSE INDICATION
3. (F) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
5. (C) FUEL SUPPLY - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Page 3 of 5MIA97LA054
Factual Information
 On January 1, 1997, about 1341 eastern standard time, a Cessna 150K, N5813G, registered to a 
private individual, was substantially damaged during a forced landing near the Daytona Beach 
Regional Airport, Daytona Beach, Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The private-rated pilot 
and one passenger sustained serious injuries.  The flight originated about 1 minute earlier from 
the Daytona Beach Airport.
     The pilot stated that before departure he was aware that one of the fuel gauges was 
inoperative and during the preflight of the airplane he used a wooden stick that was labeled 
half and full.  Before departure on the first leg the fuel tanks were slightly less than full.  The 
flight departed, performed airwork, then flew south to the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) where 
a fly-by was performed.  The flight continued south of the KSC and performed a full stop 
landing at an airport.  Before departure the pilot checked the fuel tanks using the stick and it 
indicated 1/2.  The flight departed and he performed a full stop landing with taxi back at 
another airport then continued to the Daytona Beach Airport.  He performed two touch-and-go 
landings then during the landing roll of the third, after applying power to go around, he 
recognized that the engine was not developing full power.  With insufficient runway remaining, 
he elected to continue and about 200 feet above ground level, the engine began coughing and 
the propeller stopped.  With obstructions ahead the pilot intentionally stalled the airplane 
which collided with concrete blocks.  He further stated to a police officer that the engine may 
have quit because he ran out of fuel.
     The airplane was examined the following day by an FAA airworthiness inspector who stated 
that when he arrived, the airplane was in the process of being dismantled.  The non-ruptured 
fuel tanks were drained and found to contain 3.0 gallons of fuel.  According to the airplane type 
certificate data sheet, the total unusable fuel quantity is 3.5 gallons.
     Following recovery of the airplane the engine was started and operated to about 750 rpm.  
Impact damage prevented engine operation to full rated rpm.  No discrepancies were noted 
during the engine run.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
23, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/12/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
138 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3 hours (Total, this make and model), 87 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5MIA97LA054
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N5813G
Model/Series:
150K 150K
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
15071313
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/07/1996, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
70 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4609 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
WILLIAM BECK
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
WILLIAM BECK
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DAB, 35 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
270°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 3400 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
100°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (DAB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (DAB)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1340 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
DAYTONA BEACH INT'L (DAB)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
35 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
7R
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
3197 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 5 of 5MIA97LA054
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TIMOTHY    W MONVILLE
Adopted Date:
09/30/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
STANLEY F OKON; ORLANDO, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
