Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CHESAPEAKE, VA
Accident Number:
IAD97FA039
Date & Time:
01/02/1997, 1937 EST 
Registration:
N3CD
Aircraft:
Aerostar 601P
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
4 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane departed the airport and crashed shortly thereafter. Before departure, the 
airplane was fueled with 120 gallons of 100LL aviation fuel. According to the refueler, the 
airplane had full fuel tanks. The refueler also indicated the pilot had stated he wanted to be 
airborne prior to the arrival of bad weather. After the accident, the engines and propellers were 
disassembled and examined. No engine or propeller discrepancies were noted, except 
(postimpact) heat damage. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
failure of the pilot to maintain proper altitude/clearance above the ground after takeoff.  A 
related factor was the pilot's self-induced pressure to depart before the arrival of bad weather. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) SELF-INDUCED PRESSURE - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 5IAD97FA039
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 1997, at about 1937 eastern standard time, a Aerostar 601P, N3CD, crashed in a 
heavily wooded swampy area approximately 1/2 mile north of runway 5, shortly after takeoff 
from the Chesapeake Municipal Airport in Chesapeake, Virginia.  The pilot/owner and 3 
passengers sustained fatal injuries, and impact and subsequent post-crash fire destroyed the 
airplane.  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) 
flight plan was filed.  The pleasure flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91, and was 
originating at the time of the accident.
According to the airport manager, the pilot had dropped off his granddaughter and had taken 
on fuel.  He stated that the pilot appeared to be in a hurry and had stated that he wanted to be 
airborne prior to the arrival of some bad weather.  The airport manager fueled the airplane 
topping off the tanks and returned to his office. He said he did not watch the takeoff and was 
not aware of the accident until notified by local authorities later in the evening.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a private certificate.  He had private pilot privileges for airplane single engine 
land, multi-engine land and instrument airplane.  The pilot's logbook was not recovered. The 
pilot's last proficiency check was undetermined due to the lack of a current logbook.  The pilot 
reported 2100 civilian flight hours in all aircraft on the application for his most recent Third 
Class Medical Certificate, which was dated May 3, 1996.  The medical certificate contained the 
limitation that the pilot must wear corrective lenses in order to exercise the privileges of the 
airman's certificate.
 AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The engine and aircraft records were examined, with no discrepancies found.  Both engines 
were inspected on April 16, 1996.  The airframe received an annual inspection on April 16, 
1996.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather when the airplane departed was 300 feet overcast ceilings with 3 miles visibility, 
but according to witnesses, it was deteriorating rapidly. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted into heavy brush and moderate sized trees.  The surrounding area was 
swampy.  The airplane was located approximately 1/2 mile from the departure end of runway 
5.  The wreckage was distributed on a 30 degree azimuth. The descent angle through the trees 
was estimated to be 10 degrees down.  Except for the empennage, the airplane was consumed 
by fire.
Prior to departure, the airplane was fueled with 120 gallons of 100LL aviation fuel.  According 
to the refueler, the airplane then had full fuel tanks. 
The weight and balance was calculated and found to be 270.2 pounds over the maximum gross 
weight of 6, 315 pounds.
Subsequent to the accident, the engines were disassembled and examined.  The left engine 
Page 3 of 5IAD97FA039
showed heat damage to the fuel injector, flow divider, fuel pump,  and ignition harness.  All 
cylinders produced thumb compression.  There was continuity through the engine, including 
the accessory drive train.  The right engine also showed extreme heat damage to the spark 
plugs and valves, and many components were consumed by the fire.  Continuity to all 
connecting rods was confirmed. No discrepancies, other than the heat damage, were noted on 
either engine.
Both propellers were also examined. The left propeller showed the pitch change mechanism 
cylinder was stripped from the hub and retained by a jammed piston.  The pitch change rod 
was fractured, with shear lips evident.  No heat distress was noted on any of the blades.  One 
blade was bent rearward about 45 degrees at the mid blade location and twisted.  The next 
blade was bent rearward 60 degrees and twisted.  The last blade was bent smoothly rearward 
90 degrees and twisted.  The right propeller was heat distressed throughout. The pitch change 
rod was fractured.  The right propeller blades showed heat distress.  The first blade had a large 
mass of molten material fused to the face of the blade, and was bent rearward.  The next blade 
was bent rearward 80 degrees and twisted slightly.  The last blade was bent rearward 40 
degrees and twisted.
The left propeller piston, right propeller piston, left and right pitch change rods, right propeller 
cylinder, and right propeller spring were sent to the National Transportation Safety Board's 
Metallurgical Laboratory for further testing.  According to the report, the left propeller pitch 
change rod was forced through the left piston under loads not encountered in normal 
operation.  The fractures to both rods and the right piston were caused by shear overstress.  
The right propeller spring damage suggests that the spring was being compressed at some 
time.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A post mortem examination of the pilot was performed January 3, 1997 by Dr. James Batten, 
Medical Examiner, in Chesapeake, Virginia.  A toxicological examination was completed by the 
Federal Aviation Administration on May 1, 1997.  The results were negative for 
carboxyhemoglobin, cyanide, ethanol, and drugs.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
66, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/03/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2100 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5IAD97FA039
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Aerostar
Registration:
N3CD
Model/Series:
601P 601P
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
61P-0353-108
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/16/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5700 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
26 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1949 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540
Registered Owner:
C G AVIATION
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
CHRISTOPHER PAVLIDES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
C G AVIATION
Operator Designator Code:
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CPK, 20 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1941 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
3 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
210°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
10°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (CPK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
ATLANTA, GA (PDK)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1937 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
CHESAPEAKE MUNICIPAL (CPK)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
20 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
23
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4200 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 5 of 5IAD97FA039
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
BUTCH        WILSON
Adopted Date:
05/21/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
MARGARET   MORRISON; SANDSTON, VA
ROGER W STALLKAMP; PIQUA, OH
JAMES F BROWN; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
DARYL   MIDDLEBROOK; DANBURY, CT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
