Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
BITTINGER, MD
Accident Number:
IAD97FA038
Date & Time:
01/01/1997, 1308 EST 
Registration:
N8925S
Aircraft:
Cessna 150F
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The noninstrument-rated pilot departed on a cross-country flight after receiving a briefing that 
VFR flight was not recommended. No flight plan was filed, and a family member stated that the 
pilot had made this flight numerous times. Witnesses reported, 'a very low overcast (100 feet), 
fog, and drizzle, which changed to freezing drizzle and rain within one hour of the accident.'  
Witnesses stated that they 'heard the airplane circling, but did not see the airplane impact' due 
to obscuring low clouds. Impact occurred in a pasture in a nose down attitude. Examination of 
the wreckage revealed no preimpact malfunction. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
VFR flight by the noninstrumented-rated pilot into instrument meteorological conditions 
(IMC), which lead to spatial disorientation of the pilot, his loss of aircraft control, and an 
uncontrolled collision with the terrain.  Factors relating to the accident were: the adverse 
weather conditions, and the pilot's lack of instrument experience. 
Page 2 of 7IAD97FA038
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
2. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - FOG
3. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - DRIZZLE/MIST
4. (C) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
5. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (C) SPATIAL DISORIENTATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. (F) LACK OF TOTAL INSTRUMENT TIME - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7IAD97FA038
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT On January 1, 1997, approximately 1308 eastern standard time, a 
Cessna 150F, N8925S, was destroyed when it descended from cruise flight and collided with 
terrain near Bittinger, Maryland.  The certificated private pilot/owner received fatal injuries.  
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal 
cross country flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot departed Connellsville Airport, Connellsville, Pennsylvania, approximately 1230, 
destined for the Warrenton Airport, Warrenton, Virginia, to pickup his two children.  The non 
instrument rated pilot received a weather briefing from the Altoona Flight Service Station.  The 
pilot was instructed that VFR flight was not recommended due to instrument conditions in the 
higher terrain area between his departure airport and destination.  The pilot did not file a flight 
plan, and according to a family member, had made this trip numerous times.
Witnesses reported "very low overcast (100 feet), fog, and drizzle, which changed to freezing 
drizzle and freezing rain within one hour of the accident."  The witnesses stated that they 
"heard the airplane circling, but did not see the airplane impact" in the pasture due to the 
obscuring low clouds.
The accident occurred during daylight hours, about 39 degrees, 38 minutes North latitude, 79 
degrees, 13 minutes West longitude.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION The pilot was issued an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
Private Pilot Certificate on October 10, 1993, for airplane single engine land.  The pilot did not 
possess an instrument rating.
He was issued an FAA Airman's Third Class Medical Certificate on August 10, 1995, with no 
limitations.
The pilot's logbook was not found.  On his application for his last Third Class Medical 
Certificate, dated August 10, 1995, the pilot indicated a total pilot time of 350 hours, of which 
50 hours had been flown during the past 6 months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION No airframe or engine logbooks were found and turned over for 
further examination.  The airplane appeared to have been recently re-skinned on the lower left 
wing.  No material identification was observed on the bare aluminum skin.  Door panels were 
filled with styro foam sheets, which had been duct taped to the inside of the door panels.  The 
rotating beacon was installed with house hold Romex cable and common wire nuts.  A hand 
held GPS unit was mounted on the pilot's yoke.  It was connected to an antenna installed with 
the coax cable routed through one of the four screw holes attaching the original 
communications antenna.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS A copy of a "WeatherMation Flight Plan" from 
Connellsville, Pennsylvania to Warrenton, Virginia, computed on January 01, 1997, at 1228, 
was found in the airplane.  The weather report showed visual meteorological conditions at the 
departure airport and the destination.  Weather at Martinsburg, West Virginia (MRB), at 1145, 
reported winds from 130 degrees at 10 knots; Visibility, 8 miles; Ceiling, 2,500 feet overcast; 
altimeter, 30.26 inches.
The weather reported by witnesses in the area was very low overcast (100 feet), fog, and drizzle, 
which changed to freezing drizzle and freezing rain within one hour of the mishap.  The pilot 
Page 4 of 7IAD97FA038
received a telephone weather briefing from the Altoona Flight Service Station and was advised 
that VFR flight was not recommended.  Mountain obscuration was reported by the Altoona 
Flight Service Station along his intended route of flight and in the vicinity of the mishap.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION The ground impact scarring depicted the front 
cross section of the airplane.  A narrow 20 foot long gash represented the left wing, followed by 
the 18 inch deep crater for the engine, and a narrow shorter gash for the right wing.  Only the 
left main wheel had made a ground depression, located 2.5 feet offset and back from the engine 
crater.  Small pieces of Plexiglas and other debris were thrown in a 210 degree magnetic 
heading, but remained close to the initial impact crater.  The airplane came to rest 
approximately 40 feet away from the initial impact crater, facing 080 heading, in an upright 
position.
The empennage was crushed aft of the baggage compartment and scorpioned to the left.  The 
propeller displayed chord wise scratches and leading edge gouges.  The spinner displayed 
rotational crushing.  The engine exhibited continuity to the accessory section, and all cylinders 
produced thumb compression with the exception of the number 3 cylinder, which had a bent 
push rod.  Both magnetos produced sparks, and fuel was observed in the fuel bowl.  The oil 
filter was free of contaminates.  The carburetor fuel bowl was free of contaminates and no 
evidence of water was observed.  The throttle arm and mixture control were found loose.
All flight controls were accounted for at the mishap site and remained attached to their 
respective hinges.  Flight control continuity was confirmed to the cockpit area, but binding 
occurred in the cockpit due to extensive airframe deformations.  Flaps were in the "up" 
position, confirmed through the flap actuator.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION An autopsy was conducted on the pilot, on 
January 2, 1997, by Dennis J. Chute, M.D., the Assistant Medical Examiner for the State of 
Maryland.
Toxicological testing was also conducted by the FAA Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, on January 4, 1997.  The results were negative for alcohol, drugs, 
and carbon monoxide.
The wreckage was released on January 3, 1997, to Robert Pawlikowski, brother of the airplane's 
owner.
Page 5 of 7IAD97FA038
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/10/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
450 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N8925S
Model/Series:
150F 150F
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
15062225
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
WILLIAM PAWLIKOWSKI
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
WILLIAM PAWLIKOWSKI
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7IAD97FA038
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
0 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 100 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
CONNELLSVILLE, PA (2W3)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
WARRENTON, VA (W66)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1230 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JIM          CAIN
Adopted Date:
10/30/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
DOUG   LUNDGREN; GLEN BURNIE, MD
DAVID   GILLEN; GLEN BURNIE, MD
EMILE J LOHMAN; WICHITA, KS
GEORGE M HOLLINGSWORTH; RESTON, VA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7IAD97FA038
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
