Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Garden Valley, ID
Accident Number:
WPR13LA304
Date & Time:
07/02/2013, 0800 MDT 
Registration:
N39796
Aircraft:
DORMAN BAKENG
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
In the days just preceding the accident, the owner-pilot made several uneventful flights in the 
experimental amateur-built airplane, which was equipped with an aircraft engine and an 
automotive performance/racing oil cooler. On the morning of the accident, the owner™s brother 
joined him at a remote turf airstrip in mountainous terrain to conduct a flight. The brother, 
who was also a pilot, took the aft cockpit seat, which was the primary pilot position in the 
airplane. The owner took the forward cockpit seat. The brother conducted the engine start, 
taxi-out, run-up, and takeoff, which were all normal. During the climbout, the owner realized 
that the airplane was not performing as it should, and, when he asked his brother about it, his 
brother reported that the engine was losing power. The owner took control of the airplane and 
began a turnback to the airport, and the engine lost total power shortly thereafter. An attempt 
to restart the engine was unsuccessful, and the airplane landed short of the runway. 
Examination of the airport revealed an oil spray trail on the turf that began at the parking 
location and extended along the taxi route and through the takeoff path. Postaccident 
examination of the airplane revealed a significant oil streak on the exterior side of the airplane 
that emanated from the oil cooler. The engine was also devoid of oil. Detailed examination of 
the oil cooler revealed deformation of its containment frame and damage to some of the unit™s 
oil tubes, which included separation of the cooling fins from the tubes and several holes in the 
tubes that permitted oil to escape the cooler. The damage signatures were not consistent with 
preaccident or postaccident impact or other structural deformation damage. The damage 
signatures were somewhat, but not completely, consistent with an internal overpressure of the 
oil cooler; however, the reasons for the internal overpressure could not be determined during 
postaccident examination. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A mechanical failure of the oil cooler, which resulted in a complete loss of oil and engine 
Page 2 of 8WPR13LA304
power.
Findings
Aircraft
Cooler - Failure (Cause)
Oil - Fluid level (Cause)
Recip eng oil sys - Damaged/degraded (Cause)
Page 3 of 8WPR13LA304
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 2, 2013, about 0800 mountain daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Bakeng 
Deuce airplane, N39796, was substantially damaged when it impacted vegetation and terrain 
near Garden Valley airport (U88), Garden Valley, Idaho, following a complete loss of engine 
power shortly after takeoff. The owner/pilot and his passenger were not injured. The personal 
flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the flight.
According to the owner-pilot, he based the airplane at Salt Lake City International airport 
(SLC), and had flown to U88 several times previously. On the accident trip, he originally left 
SLC for U88 on Saturday, June 29, stopped once for fuel, and landed at U88 later that same 
day. On Sunday June 30 he flew to another airport in Idaho, where he and the airplane 
remained overnight, before returning to U88 on Monday morning. Later that day, he made an 
out and back flight from U88 to obtain fuel. All flights were uneventful, and during preflight 
inspections, the engine oil quantity remained at its normal value.
On the morning of the accident, the owner's brother, who was also a pilot, joined him for a 
planned flight. The preflight inspection was normal. The airplane was equipped with dual flight 
and engine controls. The brother took the rear cockpit, which was the primary pilot position for 
the airplane. The brother conducted the engine start, taxi out, and runup; all were normal. The 
brother performed the takeoff from runway 28. When the airplane was on the crosswind leg, 
the owner queried his brother why they weren't climbing as well as he expected, and the 
brother responded that he was "losing rpms." The owner took control of the airplane, and 
turned back towards the airport. When the airplane was about 750 feet above the ground, the 
engine ceased operating. Since the engine could not be started from the front seat, the owner 
asked the brother to attempt a restart, but attempts were unsuccessful. The owner then 
attempted to land the airplane on runway 10 (opposite direction of the takeoff), but the 
airplane struck vegetation and the ground short of the runway. It came to rest upright, about 
30 feet short of the runway threshold.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Front Cockpit Owner-Pilot
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records indicated that the owner-pilot held a private 
pilot certificate, with a single-engine airplane rating. The certificate was issued in February 
2010. The owner's most recent flight review was completed, and his most recent FAA third-
class medical certificate was issued, in May 2012.  The owner reported that he had a total flight 
experience of about 486 hours, including about 69 hours in the accident airplane make and 
model.
Aft Cockpit Pilot
According to information provided by the owner, his brother (the takeoff pilot) held a private 
pilot certificate, with a single-engine airplane rating. His most recent flight review was 
Page 4 of 8WPR13LA304
completed, and his most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued, in May 2012. 
The owner reported that the takeoff pilot had a total flight experience of about 133 hours, 
including about 44 hours in the accident airplane make and model.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 1997. Neither the current owner 
nor his brother was the builder of the airplane; the current owner had purchased the airplane 
about 1 year prior to the accident. The airplane was of the high parasol-wing taildragger 
configuration, with tandem open cockpits.
The airplane was equipped with a Lycoming O-320-B2D engine, serial number L-21662-27A, 
and a fixed-pitch two blade propeller. The engine utilized a pressure-type wet sump lubrication 
system. Oil sump capacity was 8 quarts, and minimum engine operating oil quantity was 2 
quarts. The owner reported that the sump contained about 5.5 quarts at the time of his pre-
flight inspection.
Normal operating oil pressure range was 60 to 90 psi. The engine was equipped with an oil 
pressure relief valve to maintain oil pressure within the manufacturer-specified limits. The aft 
cockpit was equipped with an oil temperature and pressure gauge. The investigation did not 
determine whether oil and temperature information was presented in the forward cockpit.
According to information provided by the owner, the most recent annual condition inspection 
was completed on June 28, 2013. The maintenance entry for that inspection reported the 
following times: "Hobbs 395.4," TTE 1598.1," TSMOH 407.9," and "TTP 006.7." The engine 
had accumulated about 4 hours since its most recent inspection.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The owner reported that the conditions at U88 included clear skies, a temperature of 75 
degrees F (24 degrees C) and no wind.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
According to FAA information, the runway at U88 was turf, with a length of 3,850 feet, and an 
elevation of 3,177 feet.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Post accident examination by the owner and an inspector from the FAA revealed an oil streak 
on the left side of the airplane that extended aft from the cowling. Examination of the airport 
revealed an oil spray trail on the turf ground surfaces along the taxi-out, run-up, and takeoff 
path. Examination of the de-cowled engine revealed that no oil remained in the engine, and 
that the oil streak had emanated from an undetermined location near or on the aft face of the 
oil cooler, which was mounted just forward of the firewall.
Detailed examination of the oil cooler fluid lines,airbox,and mounting did not reveal any 
abnormalities, indications of distress or distortion, or failures. Removal of the cover of the 
Page 5 of 8WPR13LA304
airbox revealed that some of the oil cooler tubes and fins were deformed. The cooler was 
removed and shipped to the NTSB Material Laboratory for detailed examination.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Oil Cooler
The oil cooler was installed in an aluminum airbox that was mounted just forward of the lower 
left portion of the firewall. A scat tube routed ram air into the airbox to effect cooling of the oil.
The oil cooler was an Earls Performance brand Model 21608 automotive performance/racing 
unit, constructed of aluminum. According to information provided by the manufacturer, each 
unit was pressure-tested to 175 psi. The time in service of the oil cooler was not determined.
The cooler configuration was similar to typical aircraft engine oil coolers. The cooler had an 
input and output plenum, each with a threaded fitting for its respective oil line. The two 
plenums were on opposite ends of the unit, and connected by 16 flat tubes that were 
perpendicular to the plenums, and parallel to one another. The tubes transported oil from the 
input plenum to the output plenum on the other side of the unit. The 16 tubes were 
interconnected via 15 rows of fins, which transferred the heat from the oil to the ram air 
passing through the cooler.
As installed in the airplane, the cooler was oriented so that the two plenums were at the top 
and bottom, and extended laterally. The tubes were oriented near-vertically, and for the 
investigation, were numbered from 1 to 16, inboard to outboard. The inlet and outlet fittings 
were located on the inboard side of the unit. A riveted set of four aluminum caps formed a 
structural frame for the cooler. The inboard and outboard caps were captive between the top 
and bottom caps; each corner joint was attached by two rivets. One fitting was wrapped with 
red tape as a marker for the investigation. The fitting with the red marker tape was the lower 
(or bottom) fitting. It was not determined whether this was the input or output line fitting.
Laboratory examination of the oil cooler did not reveal any residue or staining from oil leakage 
on any of its surfaces, with the exception of some dirt deposits around the fittings. Overall the 
oil cooler had a clean appearance. No evidence of impact or other contact damage was 
observed on any part of the oil cooler.
The oil cooler exhibited some plastic deformation, particularly between tubes 5 to 8, and tubes 
12 to 13. The area of deformation bounded by tubes 5 to 8 was visible on the forward and aft 
faces of the cooler, while the deformation between tubes 12 and 13 was only visible on the aft 
face. The deformation was consistent with loading in the inboard-outboard direction, 
perpendicular to the tubes. The deformation of the tubes caused portions of the cooling fins to 
separate from the tubes, breaking the brazed connections between the fins and tubes. Between 
tubes 6 and 7, some areas where the fins were separated from the tubes resulted in small holes 
in those tubes.
The eight rivets in the four cap corner joints exhibited varying degrees of pull-through, 
consistent with tensile overload. One rivet was completely pulled through, six were partially 
pulled through, and one was only slightly deformed. The direction of the loading was inboard-
outboard, perpendicular to the tubes.
The tube and frame damage was not consistent with any pre- or post-impact damage or 
Page 6 of 8WPR13LA304
structural deformation, and the surrounding airbox was intact. The tube and frame damage 
was somewhat consistent with a cooler internal overpressure condition. The investigation did 
determine the timing or failure mechanism for the cooler damage. The investigation did not 
examine test the oil pressure relief valve.
History of Flight
Enroute-climb to cruise
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
57
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/04/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/23/2012
Flight Time:
486 hours (Total, all aircraft), 69 hours (Total, this make and model), 486 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
0
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/30/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
133 hours (Total, all aircraft), 44 hours (Total, this make and model), 80 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Page 7 of 8WPR13LA304
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
DORMAN
Registration:
N39796
Model/Series:
BAKENG Deuce
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
235
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/28/2013, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
4 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-B2D
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Garden Valley, ID (U88)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Garden Valley, ID (U88)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0800 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Garden Valley (U88)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
3177 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Rough; Vegetation
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 8 of 8WPR13LA304
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
44.066944, -115.931111 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael C Huhn
Adopted Date:
08/25/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael Misnick; FAA FSDO; Boise, ID
Publish Date:
08/25/2015
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=87365
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
