Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lufkin, TX
Accident Number:
CEN13LA406
Date & Time:
07/03/2013, 1140 CDT 
Registration:
N255SF
Aircraft:
AMERICAN CHAMPION AIRCRAFT 
7GCBC
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
The pilot was flying a pipeline patrol flight about 500 feet above ground level. About 6 miles 
south of the destination, the engine abruptly lost power. The pilot observed that both fuel tanks 
contained a usable level of fuel. Additionally, he saw no obvious issues with the mixture setting, 
carburetor heat, magnetos, throttle position, and fuel shutoff valve. The pilot landed the 
airplane in a field with high vegetation, which resulted in strut damage. 
The pilot did not report any fuel or oil leaks. During a postaccident examination, the engine 
was intermittently operational. The engine would produce power when the carburetor was 
ﬁtappedﬂ after the engine stopped. A carburetor examination revealed that the accelerator 
pump was operational and that the fuel screens were clear of debris. However, the forked 
needle valve™s movement within its seat was restricted. The valve clip forks were observed 
resting on the valve seat when the carburetor™s throttle body was inverted. The carburetor 
maintenance manual specified that a minimum clearance must exist between the forked valve 
clip and the valve seat. It is likely that the restricted movement of the carburetor™s forked 
needle valve resulted from the mechanic™s misadjustment of the valve clip forks, which 
subsequently caused the engine to lose power due to fuel starvation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The restricted movement of the carburetor™s forked needle valve within its seat due to the 
mechanic™s misadjustment of the valve clip forks, which resulted in fuel starvation.
Page 2 of 6CEN13LA406
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel control/carburetor - Malfunction (Cause)
Fuel control/carburetor - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Installation - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN13LA406
Factual Information
On July 3, 2013, about 1140 central daylight time, an American Champion Aircraft model 
7GCBC airplane, N255SF, impacted high vegetation and terrain during a forced landing 
following a loss of engine power near Lufkin, Texas. The airline transport rated pilot and his 
passenger were uninjured. The airplane sustained substantial damage to its wing struts. The 
aircraft was registered to and operated by KCSI Aerial Patrol Inc. under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an aerial observation flight. Day visual flight rules 
(VFR) conditions prevailed for the flight, which did not operate on a VFR flight plan. The flight 
originated from the Texas Gulf Coast Regional Airport (LBX), near Angleton, Texas, about 
0945 and was destined for the Angelina County Airport (LFK), near Lufkin, Texas.
According to the pilot's accident report, the airplane was serviced with a full load of fuel at 
LBX. The purpose of the flight was a working pipeline patrol flight, which was flown at 500 feet 
above ground level. Weather was VFR with light to variable wind. After a radio call to area 
traffic at LFK to state position and intention, the pilot continued the pipeline patrol flight. 
About six miles south of LFK, there was an abrupt loss of engine power. The pilot checked fuel 
tank levels, which were 1/2 tank on the left side and "a little more" than 1/4 tank on the right 
side. Additionally he checked the mixture setting, carburetor heat, magnetos, throttle position, 
and the fuel shutoff valve. The pilot observed no obvious issues.
The pilot contacted the LFK common traffic advisory frequency, announced the airplane's 
engine trouble, and indicated that he would be conducting a forced landing about five miles to 
the south of the LFK. The pilot landed the airplane in a field with high vegetation. He did not 
report any fuel or oil leaks as he checked and secured the airplane.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector examined the airplane and confirmed the 
substantial damage. The airplane was recovered and the operator started the engine after the 
accident. The operator indicated that when the carburetor was "tapped" after an engine 
stoppage, the engine would start producing power again.
The carburetor was shipped to the investigator in charge for a tear down examination. It was a 
Marvel-Schebler MA-4SPA model carburetor marked with part no. 10-3678-32. The 
carburetor's accelerator pump link was manufactured with three holes. The selection of a link 
hole is model specific. The accelerator pump plunger stem was secured in a link hole that was 
not specified for the accident carburetor part number. The accelerator pump was operational 
and it ejected a test fluid when the throttle linkage was rotated by hand. Disassembly revealed 
that the carburetor's fuel screens were clear of debris. The carburetor was equipped with a solid 
blue epoxy float. The needle valve's movement within its seat was restricted. The forked valve 
clip's forks were observed to rest on the valve seat when the carburetor's throttle body was 
inverted. 
The Marvel-Schebler aircraft carburetor maintenance manual describes procedures for 
overhauling the manufacturer's carburetors. It describes how to determine and adjust the 
specified minimum clearance that must exist between the forked valve clip and the valve seat 
on solid blue epoxy float equipped carburetors.
Page 4 of 6CEN13LA406
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
51
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/20/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/18/2011
Flight Time:
4046 hours (Total, all aircraft), 995 hours (Total, this make and model), 3473 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 281 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 118 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AMERICAN CHAMPION 
AIRCRAFT
Registration:
N255SF
Model/Series:
7GCBC 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1287-2000
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/19/2013, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2842.4 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C126 installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-B2B
Registered Owner:
KCSI AERIAL PATROL INC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
KCSI AERIAL PATROL INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN13LA406
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KLFK, 316 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1053 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
9°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.04 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
ANGLETON/LAKE JACKSON, 
TX (LBX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Lufkin, TX (LFK)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0945 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
ANGELINA COUNTY (LFK)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
295 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
31.147778, -94.770833 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Edward F Malinowski
Adopted Date:
07/30/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Matthew D Wetzel; Federal Aviation Administration; Houston, TX
Publish Date:
07/31/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=87455
Page 6 of 6CEN13LA406
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
