According to an FAA inspector, he interviewed several witnesses who said that the pilot was 
giving airplane rides from his private grass airstrip. On the fifth and final airplane ride, during 
initial climb after takeoff, the engine stopped. The inspector said that witnesses told him that 
they saw the airplane turn about 180 degrees toward the departure runway, but it descended 
quickly and impacted the ground in a level attitude. The on scene examination revealed the 
presence of fuel, and no obvious anomalies. An examination was performed by the NTSB, and a 
representative from the engine manufacturer. During the examination, crash related damaged 
parts were replaced, and a club propeller was fitted. The engine was then test run. Initially, 
when fuel was added, the fuel poured from the carburetor, consistent with the needle valve 
having been stuck in the open position due to an obstruction. After tapping on the wall of the 
carburetor, the obstruction was cleared, and fuel stopped flowing out of the carburetor. The 
test run was then completed without further anomalies.  A teardown examination of the 
carburetor revealed debris within the carburetor float bowl large enough to block the needle 
valve, or fuel metering orifice.
The pilot's improper decision to make a 180-degree turn at low altitude to return to the 
departure runway following a loss of engine power during takeoff-initial climb. A factor in the 
accident was contamination in the carburetor.
On August 1, 2007, about 1130 eastern daylight time, a Piper J3C-65, N5721N, registered to 
and operated by a private individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed shortly 
after taking off from a private field in Andersonville, Georgia. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The private-rated pilot and one passenger received 
serious injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage. The flight was originating at the 
time of the accident.
An FAA inspector responded to the scene of the accident, and stated that he examined the 
wreckage and found fuel to be present in the airplane, but noted no obvious anomalies. He 
further stated that he interviewed several witnesses who said that the pilot was giving airplane 
rides to construction workers, who had been working on his house. According to the inspector, 
the witnesses said that the pilot was taking off and landing on his private landing strip, while 
giving the airplane rides, and he had given rides to four workers. In the process of giving the 
fifth and final airplane ride, during initial climb after takeoff, the airplane's engine ceased 
operating. He said that the witnesses said that they observed the airplane as it turned about 
180 degrees in the direction of the runway from where it had just departed, but it descended 
quickly and impacted the ground in a level attitude.
A postcrash examination was performed by the NTSB, along with a representative of Teledyne 
Continental Motors. The examination revealed that several engine mounts had fractured 
during the impact, and that the carburetor had separated from it's attach point to the engine 
manifold. In addition the oil sump had been crushed, and the propeller flange and propeller 
had been bent beyond the permissible limits of a test run.
During the course of the examination the engine was removed from the airframe, and parts 
which exhibited damage consistent with the damage having occurred during the accident, were 
replaced. The parts that were replaced include, the intake manifold, oil sump, and the propeller 
flange. In addition, a club propeller was fitted. 
The engine was then given a test run, and initially during the test, when fuel was added, the 
fuel "poured from" the carburetor, consistent with the needle valve having been stuck in the 
open position due to an obstruction. After tapping on the side of the carburetor with a 
screwdriver handle, the obstruction was cleared, and fuel stopped flowing out of the 
carburetor. The test run was then completed with no other anomalies being noted.
A follow-on teardown examination of the carburetor revealed the presence of debris within the 
carburetor float bowl, of a size that was capable of blocking the needle valve, or fuel metering 
orifice.
