The airplane was 15 miles east of the destination airport, at 1,500 feet msl, when the engine 
gauges started to indicate low oil pressure and high oil temperatures.  About 8 miles east of the 
airport, the engine experienced a loss of power, and produced a puff of white-gray smoke 
combined with loud clanking sounds.  The airplane was at 1,200 feet, and the pilot directed the 
airplane towards an open field above a stretch of beach.  During the landing roll, the airplane 
came to the end of the field, nosed over the edge of a 50-foot cliff, and came to rest on the 
beach below.  The engine had been factory rebuilt in 2002, and had accumulated 1441.5 hours 
since the last major overhaul.  An examination of the engine revealed a 2.7-inch hole in the top 
of the engine case, shiny copper fragments from the number 2 main bearing in the oil sump, 
and one bearing fragment in the oil pickup screen.  Additionally, the bearing material of the 
number 2 main bearing had partially displaced itself and extruded between the crankshaft 
journal and the crankcase.  The bearing fragments were somewhat shiny or polished, indicating 
they received lubrication and were not exposed to extreme temperature. Numerous fragments 
from the number 2 main bearing were located in the oil sump.  The sizes of the fragments were 
generally too large to enter the oil sump pickup tube but could obstruct the pickup tube orifice, 
restricting the oil flow.  Engine oil analysis records indicate a sudden increased level of copper 
from 5.3 parts per million (ppm) to 61.2 ppm occurred sometime within the previous 63.1 
hours of operation.  Engine journal bearing material is the only material within the engine that 
has a significant copper component.  This increase in copper levels is directly related to the 
gradual deformation and fragmentation of the number 2 main bearing.  The number 1 
connecting rod had failed under overload that resulted from extreme temperatures at the 
connecting rod bearing that were consistent with oil starvation.  The number 1 connecting rod 
bearing receives oil pressure from the oil pump through the number 1 main bearing, and would 
be one of the first bearings to be effected by reduced oil flow.
The oil starvation and failure of the number one piston connecting rod and bearing that was 
due to the fragmentation of the number 2 main bearing, which then obstructed the engine oil 
pickup tube and restricted the flow of oil through the engine.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 2007, about 1942 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna R172K, N758BJ, executed a 
forced landing along a beach in Goleta, California.  The forced landing was precipitated by a 
loss of engine power.  The Santa Barbara Flying Club, Inc., operated the airplane under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The commercial pilot sustained a minor 
injury and the passenger was not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.  The flight originated at 
Lompac Airport, Lompoc, California, around 1930.
The pilot reported to a National Transportation Safety Board investigator that 15 miles east of 
the Santa Barbara Airport, at 1,500 feet msl, the engine gauges started to indicate low oil 
pressure and high oil temperatures.  About 8 miles east of the Santa Barbara Airport, the pilot 
informed approach control that he was having engine problems.  Immediately after making 
that radio call, the engine experienced a loss of engine power and produced a puff of white-gray 
smoke combined with loud clanking sounds.  The airplane was at 1,200 feet msl, and the pilot 
directed the airplane towards an open field above the beach visible off the left wing.  During the 
landing roll the airplane came to the end of the field, nosed over the edge of a 50-foot cliff, and 
came to rest on the beach below.  
The airplane impacted on its right side collapsing the right wing, and imbedding the nose into 
the sand.  In the hours following the accident the tide proceeded to rise, and submerged much 
of the airplane's engine and a portion of the cockpit under water.
The pilot stated that the engine oil dipstick indicated 8 quarts of oil in the engine when he 
performed his preflight.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The high wing, four place, airplane was powered by a Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) IO-
360-KB8, 6-cylinder, 210-horsepower engine.  The engine was last rebuilt at the factory on 
April 28, 2002.  The engine logbook records show that the last annual inspection was 
performed on August 24, 2006, at 1,135.8 hours since major overhaul (TSMOH), and 38.3 
hours tachometer time.  The last oil change was performed on July 17, 2007, at 1,440.2 
TSMOH (192.0 hours tach time).  The engine was washed and a post maintenance run was 
performed on August 1, 2007, 1440.30 TSMOH (192.1 hours tach time).
The airframe maintenance logbook record showed that the last annual inspection was 
completed on August 24, 2006, at total airframe time of 6,490.00 hours (38.30 hours tach 
time).
The tach reading obtained during the wreckage examination was 193.2 hours.
The engine was subject to an oil analysis surveillance program.  The mechanic who had 
performed most of the recent maintenance on the airplane told the Safety Board investigator 
that his shop sends oil samples to the analysis company once a week, usually on Fridays.  The 
oil analysis company sends the analysis results to him via e-mail once the tests are completed.  
Unless he had a concern about a particular engine, he would review the oil analysis results as 
he had time to do so.  The engine oil analysis results for the July 17, 2007, oil sample displayed 
abnormal values for iron (93.0 parts per million (ppm)) and copper (61.2 ppm).  The next 
previous oil analysis had been performed on a sample taken on March 26 (1378.27 TSMOH), 
which resulted in values marked as normal for iron (42.5 ppm) and copper (5.3 ppm).  The 
mechanic received the e-mail with the abnormal results in his e-mail inbox on Saturday, July 
28th, but did not view the e-mail until after the accident.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The airplane was recovered and transported to the Aircraft Recovery Services (ARS) facility in 
Littlerock, California.  ARS was instructed by the Safety Board investigator-in-charge (IIC) to 
make efforts to preserve the engine and prevent further corrosion from its exposure to salt 
water. On August 10, 2007, the airplane and engine were examined by representatives from the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), TCM, and the Cessna Aircraft Company, under the 
supervision of the Safety Board IIC.
The engine compartment cowling and engine baffling was removed.  Investigators identified a 
2.7-inch hole in the upper left crankcase half, below the fuel manifold valve, and in line with 
the number two cylinder. The oil cap was secured and the oil dipstick was in place.  The engine 
was disassembled.  All gaskets and seals were present on engine components.   Bluish fluid 
with a petroleum odor was identified in the throttle body.  The oil filter was present, screwed 
on tight, and safety wired.  The oil pan was removed; seventeen 0.25- to 2.0-inch-long shiny 
copper colored fragments were located in the oil pan sump just beyond the sump oil pickup 
tube inlet, along with black twisted 0.5-inch sized fragments, four 2-inch sized black metal 
chunks that were once a part of the number 1 piston connecting rod cap. The sump oil pickup 
tube is 6.43 inches long and has a internal diameter of 11/16-inch. The cylinder jugs were 
removed and the engine case split.  The number 1 connecting rod had separated at the lower 
neck from the crankshaft throw.  The number one crankshaft throw was dark black, including 
the connecting rod journal, and smeared at the base.  The number one connecting rod cap was 
not attached to the connecting rod.  
The crankcase number 1, 3, and 4 main bearings were in place, oil galleries were clear, and 
exhibited streaks of copper color, except the number 4 main bearing, which was all gray. The 
number 2 main bearing halves were deformed and appeared to have portions extruded 
between the crankshaft journal and the crankcase.  The number 2 bearing surface was copper 
in color.  Connecting rods 2 though 6 were present on the crankshaft.   The oil sump pickup 
screen, located down stream from the oil sump pickup tube inlet, in the engine accessory case, 
contained one copper colored metal fragment lodged across the screen element.  The oil filter 
was cut open and the paper element contained shiny silver colored sand like particles between 
all filter folds.
The engine was shipped to TCM for further examination.  On December 11, 2007, 
representatives from TCM and Cessna examined the engine under the supervision of the Safety 
Board IIC.  The engine manufacturer technicians determined that the number 1 crankshaft 
connecting rod failed in a manor consistent with oil starvation.  The number two main bearing 
had fragmented, deformed, and shifted out of place, but appeared to receive lubrication 
throughout the process.  The copper colored fragments that were located in the oil pan were 
identified as part of the number 2 main bearing, with serial number fragments that were 
consistent with the other bearings in the engine.  According to TCM, the engine journal 
bearings are the only engine components that contain a significant amount of copper.  
Per the Continental Aircraft Engine Series IO-360 Operators Manual, the engine is lubricated 
by a forced-feed system.  The oil pressure pump picks up oil from the sump and discharges it 
through a passage to the pressure oil screen, the engine oil galleries, oil cooler, and bearings.  A 
pressure relief valve, in the crankcase cover, regulates the pressure in the main oil galleries.  
The oil pump outlet flows to the oil cooler, and from the oil cooler oil flows to the number 1 
main bearing, the tappets for numbers 1 and 2 cylinders, the number 1 camshaft bearing, and 
moves on utilizing engine oil galleries to locations throughout the engine.  The number 1 main 
bearing feeds oil to the number one connecting rod bearing.
