The airplane made a forced landing following a loss of power from both engines.  The pilot 
reported that he had called the fixed base operator at the airport to have them pull his airplane 
out and to have 30 gallons of fuel added to each side.  He stated that when he arrived at the 
airport, the fuel had already been added to the airplane.  He stated that he performed a pre-
flight examination of the airplane which included visual checks of the fuel which was blue in 
color, consistent with 100LL aviation gasoline.  The pilot reported that the subsequent start-
up, taxi and pre-takeoff checks were normal and he proceeded to takeoff.  He stated that at 
about 32 inches of manifold pressure the left engine stumbled and he aborted the takeoff.  
After taxi back to the runway, the pilot performed another run-up and attempted another 
takeoff which again resulted in an aborted takeoff.  The pilot stated that he then returned to the 
maintenance area where a mechanic boarded the airplane and a full power run-up was 
performed.  No anomalies were noted during the full power run-up.  After the mechanic 
deplaned, the pilot returned to the runway and was again cleared for takeoff.  He stated that he 
entered the runway, held his brakes, and increased the power to 35 inches of manifold 
pressure.  He stated that he checked the engine gauges and all were normal and he applied full 
power and proceeded to takeoff.  After liftoff, the pilot noticed a fluctuation in the right 
engine's manifold pressure and he began a gradual left turn.  He stated that the manifold 
pressure and fuel flow indications for both engines then began to fluctuate.  The pilot's 
attempts to rectify the power fluctuations were unsuccessful and an eventual off-airport forced 
landing was made.  The pilot reported that he had to maneuver the airplane to avoid trees, 
cars, houses and people during the forced landing.  A fuel receipt from the fixed base operator 
revealed that the airplane had been fueled with aviation jet fuel.
The improper fuel grade due to the improper fueling of the airplane by the fixed base operator, 
which led to the loss of engine power of both engines.  A factor was the unsuitable terrain 
encountered during the forced landing.
