While on a short cross-country flight, the pilot contacted an air traffic control tower, at an 
airport that was not his intended destination.  The pilot reported that he was approximately 5 
miles north of the airport, low on fuel, and requested to land quickly.  The air traffic controller 
instructed the pilot to enter a left base leg for runway 9.  The pilot subsequently stated that he 
was out of fuel, and declared an emergency.  The air traffic controller advised the pilot that the 
airplane was 2 miles north of the airport, and asked if the pilot was in the vicinity of a highway.  
The pilot replied that he was "stalling," and the airplane impacted a wooded area in a nose-
down attitude.  Examination of the wreckage revealed that there was no fuel in the fuel tanks, 
and no evidence of fuel throughout the fuel system.  In addition, there was no evidence of a fuel 
leak.
The pilot's inadequate preflight planning, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due to 
fuel exhaustion during approach.
On August 1, 2007, about 1720 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 177RG, N177RV, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing in Kennesaw, Georgia.  The certificated private 
pilot was seriously injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that 
originated from Athens Airport (AHN), Athens, Georgia, about 1630; destined for Cartersville 
Airport (VPC), Cartersville, Georgia.  No flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted 
under 14 Code of Federal Regulation Part 91.
A National Transportation Safety Board investigator was flying near the accident site, and 
monitoring the air traffic control tower (ATCT) frequency at Cobb County Airport (RYY), 
Atlanta, Georgia.  The Safety Board investigator report that at approximately 1710, the accident 
pilot contacted the RYY ATCT, and stated that he was approximately 5 miles north of RYY, low 
on fuel, and requested to land quickly.  The air traffic controller instructed the pilot to enter a 
left base leg for runway 9.  The pilot subsequently stated that he was out of fuel, and declared 
an emergency.  The air traffic controller advised the pilot that the airplane was 2 miles north of 
RYY, and asked if the pilot was in the vicinity of Cobb Parkway.  The pilot replied that he was 
"stalling," and no further transmissions were received from the accident airplane.
The pilot suffered critical injuries, and could not recall the accident.  The pilot reported a total 
flight experience of 237.5 hours; of which, 13.4 hours were in the same make and model as the 
accident airplane.
The airplane impacted a wooded area in a nose-down attitude.  Examination of the wreckage 
by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed that there was no fuel in the 
fuel tanks, and no evidence of fuel throughout the fuel system.  In addition, the FAA inspector 
did not observe any evidence of a fuel leak.   
The reported weather at RYY, at 1724, was:  wind from 150 degrees at 3 knots; visibility 10 
miles; scattered clouds at 6,000 feet; broken ceiling at 7,500 feet; temperature 32 degrees 
Celsius (C); dew point 18 degrees C; altimeter 29.95 inches of mercury.
