The airplane had been fully serviced with fuel and oil prior to takeoff.  During the initial climb 
to 10,500 feet, the electronic manifold pressure gauge malfunctioned so the pilot managed 
power "by throttle position."  He reduced power when the number 2 cylinder head temperature 
increased more than the other cylinder head temperatures.  Almost immediately upon leveling 
off, the engine lost power.  When the fuel boost pump was switched to HIGH, the engine "fired 
and achieved lower power for 30 seconds."  Mixture control manipulation restarted the engine, 
but after a few seconds there was "an explosion and a lot of smoke."  The engine stopped but 
[the propeller] "appeared to be turning freely" all the way down.  The pilot made a rapid 
descent and landed in an open field.  The airplane rolled about 400 feet, crested a small rise, 
then struck a ground depression that collapsed the landing gear.  The airplane then slid 
sideways for another 300 feet.  The pilot used his cellular telephone to alert authorities of the 
accident.  FAA inspectors examined the engine, a Continental TSIO-550-B-1-B (s.n. 802008), 
and found evidence of catastrophic engine failure.  An oil line to the turbocharger wastegate 
actuator had come loose, causing oil starvation and high heat distress.  A hole in the engine 
case exposed the number 5 journal and imprints from rod bolt strikes.  The airplane was built 
in 1992.  The engine had a total time of 88 hours.
A catastrophic engine failure due to oil starvation when an oil line to the turbocharger 
wastegate actuator came loose.  Contributing factors in this accident were the unsuitable 
terrain on which to make a forced landing.
On August 1, 2007, approximately 1615 central daylight time, a Walker Lancair IV, N7441W, 
piloted by an airline transport-certificated pilot, was substantially damaged when it collided 
with terrain during a forced landing following a loss of engine power three miles southeast of 
Sylvan Grove, Kansas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  
The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91 without a flight plan.  The pilot was seriously injured.  The cross-
country flight originated at Junction City, Kansas (3JC), and was en route to Farmington, New 
Mexico (FMN).  Its final destination was Santa Barbara, California (SBA).
The pilot had just purchased the airplane and was ferrying it home.  According to the pilot's 
accident report dictated to an FAA inspector from his hospital bed, the airplane had been "fully 
serviced with fuel and oil" prior to his departure.  During the initial climb to 10,500 feet, the 
electronic manifold pressure gauge malfunctioned so he managed power "by throttle position."  
He reduced power when the number 2 cylinder head temperature increased more than the 
other cylinder head temperatures.  Almost immediately upon leveling off, the engine lost 
power.  When the fuel boost pump was switched to HIGH, the engine "fired and achieved lower 
power for 30 seconds."  Mixture control manipulation restarted the engine, but after a few 
seconds there was "an explosion and a lot of smoke."  The engine stopped but [the propeller] 
"appeared to be turning freely" all the way down.  The pilot made a rapid descent and landed in 
an open field.  The airplane rolled about 400 feet, crested a small rise, then struck a ground 
depression that collapsed the landing gear and buckled the firewall.  The airplane then slid 
sideways for another 300 feet.  The pilot used his cellular telephone to alert authorities of the 
accident.
FAA inspectors examined the engine, a Continental TSIO-550-B-1-B (s.n. 802008), and found 
evidence of catastrophic engine failure.  An oil line to the turbocharger wastegate actuator had 
come loose, resulting in oil starvation and high heat distress.  A hole in the engine case exposed 
the number 5 journal and imprints from rod bolt strikes.  The airplane was built in 1992.  The 
engine had a total time of 88 hours.  
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Walker
Registration:
N7441W
Model/Series:
Lancair IV 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
LIV-076
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/01/2007, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
90 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-550-B
Registered Owner:
Bruce A. Stratton
Rated Power:
350 hp
Operator:
Bruce A. Stratton
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
RSL, 1862 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
29 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
240°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3900 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 18 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.91 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
32°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Junction City, KS (3JC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Farmington, NM (FMN)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1355 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
38.993889, -99.595278
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
12/20/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Gary Watson; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
