Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lake City, FL
Accident Number:
ERA10LA463
Date & Time:
09/02/2010, 1800 EDT 
Registration:
N7108Z
Aircraft:
QUICKSILVER MX-2
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot completed a preflight inspection of the airplane and a run-up check of the engine, 
noting no anomalies. During the initial climb, the pilot noted that the engine coolant 
temperature had risen above its normal range, and he responded by reducing engine power. He 
also turned the airplane left toward the overrun area for a perpendicular runway. The engine 
coolant temperature continued to rise as the pilot pitched the airplane for the best glide speed. 
As the pilot continued to maneuver the airplane, the sink rate was increasing, so he applied full 
power, with no accompanying response from the engine. During the attempted landing, the 
pilot gradually lost control of the airplane as it slowed, and subsequently struck a pool 
enclosure attached to a home. A postaccident examination of the engine found contamination 
within the carburetors; the pistons, connecting rods, and crankcase exhibited a black/brown 
glaze; and the lower piston rings exhibited extreme carbon build-up; however, no definitive 
cause for the rise in engine coolant temperature or the reported partial loss of engine power 
could be determined. The reported temperature and dew point at an airport located 34 nautical 
miles from the accident site were conducive to the formation of "serious" carburetor icing at 
glide engine power settings; however, given that the engine was operating at a very high power 
output when the reported loss of power occurred, it was unlikely that carburetor icing 
contributed to the partial loss of engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings
Aircraft
Engine (reciprocating) - Not serviced/maintained
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA10LA463
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 2, 2010, about 1800 eastern daylight time, an experimental light sport 
Quicksilver MX-2, N7108Z, was substantially damaged when it impacted a residential structure 
during a forced landing after takeoff from Cannon Creek Airpark (15FL), Lake City, Florida. 
The certificated commercial pilot incurred minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight, which was conducted under 
the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
According to a written statement submitted by the pilot, he completed a preflight inspection of 
the airplane, and after taxiing to the end of runway 27, completed an engine-run up check 
noting no anomalies. The pilot subsequently applied full takeoff power (6,400 rpm) and began 
the takeoff. Upon reaching about 200 feet msl, the pilot noticed that the engine coolant 
temperature had risen above 210 degrees Fahrenheit, with the normal range being between 
160 degrees and 180 degrees. He responded by reducing the engine power to 4,500 rpm, and 
made a left turn to a heading of 180 degrees magnetic in an attempt to land in an overrun area 
for the perpendicular runway at the airport.
The engine coolant temperature continued to rise above 220 degrees as the pilot pitched the 
airplane for the best glide speed of 45 mph. During the turn, the pilot noted that the airplane's 
sink rate was increasing, so he applied full power, with no accompanying response from the 
engine. After reaching the desired alignment with the overrun area, the pilot applied full right 
rudder an aileron to stop the turn, but the controls' effectiveness were decreased due to the 
airplane's slow speed. The airplane continued to turn and struck a pool enclosure attached to a 
home, resulting in substantial damage.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman records revealed that the pilot held 
a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single and multiengine land and sea. 
The pilot's most recent second-class medical certificate was issued in March 2010. The pilot 
reported 3,600 total hours of flight experience, 25 hours of which were in the accident airplane 
make and model.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1053 recorded weather at Gainesville Regional Airport (GNV), Gainesville, Florida, located 
about 34 nautical miles southeast of the accident site, included calm winds, clear skies, 10 
statute miles visibility, temperature 32 degrees C, dewpoint 18 degrees C, and an altimeter 
setting of 29.90 inches of mercury. According to a carburetor ice probability chart published by 
the FAA  "serious icing at glide power" was possible based on the reported temperature and 
dewpoint.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The amphibious airplane was equipped with a Rotax 582, two-stroke, two-cylinder, liquid-
cooled, 65 horse power reciprocating engine. According to the pilot, the airplane's most recent 
condition inspection was completed on August 5, 2010, and at that time the airframe and 
engine had accumulated 204 total flight hours. Since that inspection, the airplane had 
accumulated 16 additional flight hours. According to FAA aircraft registration records, the pilot 
Page 3 of 5ERA10LA463
purchased the airplane on August 11, 2010. Additionally, according to FAA airworthiness 
records, the airplane was manufactured in 1999, and had been previously operated as an 
ultralight vehicle until it was registered as an experimental light sport aircraft on September 
21, 2007.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The engine was separated from the airframe, and a representative of the engine manufacturer 
examined the engine under the supervision of an FAA inspector. According to the 
representative's Investigation Report, the carburetor float bowls were removed to expose the 
main jets and examine the condition of the carburetors. Contamination in the form of varnish 
was found in both carburetor float bowls and the sieve screens were crushed, preventing them 
from free floating. The cylinder head was removed to expose both pistons and cylinders, and no 
evidence damage or seizure was observed on the pistons or cylinder walls. The cylinders also 
exhibited evidence of a previous disassembly and repair. The lower piston rings on both 
cylinders were stuck in their respective lands and exhibited extreme carbon build-up. The sides 
of the pistons, connecting rods, and crank case were coated in a black/brown glaze. No other 
evidence of any mechanical malfunction or defects of the engine were discovered.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
44, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine 
Sea; Single-engine Land; Single-
engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/09/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/16/2010
Flight Time:
3600 hours (Total, all aircraft), 25 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 4 of 5ERA10LA463
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
QUICKSILVER
Registration:
N7108Z
Model/Series:
MX-2 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental Light Sport
Serial Number:
PS1950
Landing Gear Type: 
Amphibian
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/05/2010, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
720 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
16 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
220 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
ROTAX
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
582DCDI
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GNV, 152 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
34 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1753 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
120째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.9 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
32째C / 18째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Lake City, FL (15FL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Lake City, FL (15FL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1800 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Cannon Creek Airpark (15FL)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
125 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2292 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 5 of 5ERA10LA463
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
30.153611, -82.666389 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis Diaz
Adopted Date:
04/20/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Joseph W Gramzinski; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL
Publish Date:
04/20/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77186
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
