Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sonoma, CA
Accident Number:
SEA08LA057B
Date & Time:
01/01/2008, 1430 PST 
Registration:
N15EX
Aircraft:
Barnard/Stancil Glastar
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilots were attending a fly-in at the airport.  One pilot in a low-wing airplane was landing, 
and the other pilot in a high-wing airplane was departing.  The runup area for the landing 
runway is situated at the beginning of the runway so following a runup, a pilot can depart 
straight from the runup area onto the runway.  A witness said that the landing pilot had made 
radio transmissions around the traffic pattern and then indicated that he was on final approach 
for landing.  When the landing pilot was on short final, the departing pilot indicated that he 
was departing.  The witness was flying above the airport and advised the departing pilot that an 
airplane was landing.  The airplanes collided shortly thereafter.  According to 14 CFR 91.113, 
Right-of-way rules: Except water operations, "Aircraft, while on final approach to land or while 
landing, have the right-of-way over other aircraft in flight or operating on the surface, except 
that they shall not take advantage of this rule to force an aircraft off the runway surface which 
has already landed and is attempting to make way for an aircraft on final approach."
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The departing pilot's inadequate visual lookout.
Findings
Occurrence #1: MIDAIR COLLISION
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 5SEA08LA057B
Factual Information
On January 1, 2008, about 1430 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA 28-180 low-wing airplane, 
N8037W, and a Barnard/Stancil Glastar high-wing airplane, N15EX, collided in flight at the 
Sonoma County Airport (OQ3), Schellville/Sonoma, California.  Both pilots were operating the 
airplanes under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The private pilot of the Piper, the sole 
occupant, and the commercial pilot and one passenger of the Glastar, were not injured.  The 
Piper sustained minor damage, and the Glastar sustained substantial damage.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for either flight.  The pilots of 
both airplanes were attending a fly-in at the airport.
The Piper pilot reported that he entered the right downwind leg of the traffic pattern for 
runway 07 and announced his position.  Then, he announced that he was turning right base for 
runway 07.  As he turned onto the final approach leg, he announced his position and that he 
was landing on runway 07.  He noticed an airplane about 100 feet from the runway, facing east 
(away from the pilot).  As the pilot continued his descent, he heard the sound of an airplane 
engine.  Within 1 to 2 seconds, he felt contact between his airplane and another airplane.  He 
looked out of the right window and saw an airplane next to his, turning away and climbing.  He 
noticed that the top portion of the other airplane's rudder sustained impact damage.
According to the Glastar pilot, he was waiting for an airplane to land on runway 25 so he was 
holding at the end of runway 07.  When the airplane cleared the runway, the pilot announced 
his intentions to depart and began his takeoff roll.  As the airplane became airborne, he heard 
someone transmit over the frequency that he had someone above him.  The pilot looked up and 
saw the right main gear of an airplane about six feet above him.  The pilot attempted to side 
slip to the right; however, the airplanes collided.  The Glastar pilot continued to fly the airplane 
and did not have any rudder authority.  He diverted to Napa County Airport because they had a 
larger runway available.  The landing was made without further incident.
The Safety Board investigator interviewed a witness who was attending the fly in.  The witness 
was the pilot of an airplane that was the second airplane in a flight of two.  The lead airplane 
was just entering the right downwind for runway 07 and the witness was directly over the 
airport at midfield.  He saw the Piper on downwind, base, and then on the final approach leg.  
As the Piper was on final, the Piper pilot made a broadcast that he was landing on runway 07.  
When the Piper was on short final, the witness heard another pilot say, "...rolling 07."  The 
witness looked down and saw a Glastar rolling down the runway and the Piper nearly over the 
top of him.  The witness transmitted to the Glastar pilot that there was an airplane landing on 
the runway.  The airplanes then collided and the Glastar went to the right while climbing and 
the Piper landed uneventfully.  After attempting to land at Schellville but not being able to due 
to a lack of rudder authority, the Glastar landed uneventfully at a nearby airport.
The witness stated that the runup area for runway 07 is situated at the beginning of runway 07.  
Following a runup, a pilot can depart straight from the run up area onto the runway.  The 
witness further indicated that it is widely known that airplanes operating at the Antique Fly-In 
may not have radios and/or electrical systems so pilots must remain vigilant of other traffic in 
the area, especially during fly-in activities.
According to 14 CFR 91.113, Right-of-way rules: Except water operations, "Aircraft, while on 
final approach to land or while landing, have the right-of-way over other aircraft in flight or 
operating on the surface, except that they shall not take advantage of this rule to force an 
Page 3 of 5SEA08LA057B
aircraft off the runway surface which has already landed and is attempting to make way for an 
aircraft on final approach."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
70, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/01/2007
Flight Time:
8300 hours (Total, all aircraft), 250 hours (Total, this make and model), 8100 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 120 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Barnard/Stancil
Registration:
N15EX
Model/Series:
Glastar 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
5496
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/01/2007, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1960 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
340 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Textron Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360
Registered Owner:
Kenneth Couey
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Kenneth Couey
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5SEA08LA057B
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DVO, 2 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1454 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
220°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.19 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Sonoma, CA (OQ3)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Jackson, CA (O70)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1430 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
Schellville/Sonoma (OQ3)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
10 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
7
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2700 ft / 45 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
38.223889, -122.449722
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Kristi Dunks
Adopted Date:
04/30/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Glenn Gathreight; Federal Aviation Administration; Oakland, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5SEA08LA057B
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
