National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PACIFIC OCEAN, PO
Accident Number: LAX94LA187
Date & Time: 03/01/1994, 0830 PST
Registration: N4712R
Aircraft: BELL 206A
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
 Analysis According to a report from the operator, the helicopter had completed the assigned fish spotting mission and was returning to the ship when it disappeared from the ship's radar, about 3 miles short of the vessel.
There were no known distress calls prior to the disappearance.
A search of the area around the last known position of the helicopter revealed parts of an emergency float system known to have been installed on the helicopter, and the bodies of the pilot and spotter.
No trace of additional aircraft components were found.
The pilot was a Panamanian citizen who reportedly held a pilot certificate issued by the Republic of Panama.
The fish spotter was a Mexican national who has not been identified.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: undetermined.
Findings Occurrence #1: UNDETERMINED Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED Factual Information On March 1, 1994, about 0830 hours Pacific standard time, a Bell 206A helicopter, N4712R, disappeared at sea under unknown circumstances in international waters at north latitude 17 degrees 56 minutes by west longitude 109 degrees 46 minutes.
The helicopter, operated by L & M Offshore Corporation of Paitilla, Republic of Panama, was engaged in fish spotting operations from the Mexico registered tuna vessel, "El Quijote."
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and a flight plan was filed with the ship.
The helicopter is presumed to have been destroyed in the accident sequence.
Both the pilot and the spotter on board the helicopter sustained fatal injuries.
The flight originated from the ship on the day of the mishap at about 0730 hours as a local fish spotting mission.
According to a report from the operator, the helicopter had completed the assigned spotting mission and was returning to the ship when it disappeared from the ship's radar about 3 miles short of the vessel.
There were no known distress calls prior to the disappearance.
A search of the area around the last known position of the helicopter revealed parts of an emergency float system known to have been installed on the helicopter, and the bodies of the pilot and spotter.
No trace of additional aircraft components were found.
The pilot was a Panamanian citizen who reportedly held a pilot certificate issued by the Republic of Panama.
The fish spotter was a Mexican national who has not been identified.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial; Foreign; Private Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
