Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Chickaloon, AK
Accident Number:
ANC05LA021
Date & Time:
01/01/2005, 1400 AST 
Registration:
N4262D
Aircraft:
Maule M-7
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Serious, 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in VFR conditions.  A witness reported seeing 
the airplane flying low over a highway when it struck power lines that crossed the highway.  
The accident site is located in a gently rolling, wide mountain valley, and the power lines were 
about 30 feet above the highway.  The cables did not break immediately, and the airplane 
pulled the cables free from the poles on both sides of the highway, and snapped the top six feet 
and cross arm off one pole, carrying the cables and debris about 100 yards to the airplane's 
final resting place.  An examination revealed all the major airframe components and flight 
controls were present, and flight-control continuity was established.  One propeller blade had 
extensive leading edge gouging, chord-wise scratches, and torsional twisting and bending.  An 
examination of the engine revealed no preimpact mechanical anomalies.  The pilot and front 
seat passenger, who were both seriously injured, said they had no recollection of the accident.  
The pilot did not indicate in his written report to the NTSB that there was any preimpact 
mechanical problems with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain altitude/clearance during cruise flight, which resulted in an in-
flight collision with power lines, and an uncontrolled descent and collision with terrain.  A 
factor associated with the accident was the power lines.
Page 2 of 6ANC05LA021
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION
2. (C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6ANC05LA021
Factual Information
On January 1, 2005, about 1400 Alaska standard time, a wheel-equipped Maule M-7 airplane, 
N4262D, sustained substantial damage during an in-flight collision with power lines, and 
subsequent collision with terrain, about 65 miles east-northeast of Chickaloon, Alaska.  The 
airplane was being operated by the pilot as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal local flight 
under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The commercial pilot and one 
passenger received serious injuries, and the two remaining passengers received minor injuries.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight departed 
Anderson Lake Airport, Wasilla, Alaska, about 1245.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on January 1, the Alaska State Trooper at the accident site said a 
witness reported the airplane was flying at a low altitude over the highway when it struck 
power lines that crossed the highway.  He said it was unknown if the pilot was attempting to 
land on the highway.
The NTSB IIC did not travel to the accident site, however, information and photographs were 
provided by personnel from the FAA, utility company, and airplane recovery company, who did 
travel to the site.  The accident site is located in a gently rolling, wide mountain valley with a 
state highway running through it.  The highway has numerous clear stretches in excess of a 
mile long.  The terrain is typically tundra covered, with sparse, low growing spruce trees.  At 
the time of the accident, the terrain was covered with one to three feet of snow.
While flying over the highway the airplane collided with two power cables.  According to the 
utility company, the power poles where the cables cross the highway are 44 feet tall, and placed 
100 feet from the centerline of the highway.  The power cables sag from pole to pole, crossing 
the highway about 25-30 feet above the highway, and were not marked.  At the accident site, 
the highway is gently sloping, and relatively straight for several miles.   When struck by the 
airplane, the cables did not break immediately.  The airplane pulled the cables free from the 
poles on both sides of the highway, and snapped the top six feet and cross arm off one of the 
poles.  The airplane carried the cables and debris to its final resting place, about 100 yards 
from the cable crossing. The airplane came to rest in a level, upright attitude in the snow, about 
50 feet off of the edge of the highway.  The wings were folded back, and the forward portion of 
the passenger cabin was extensively damaged.  Rescue crews cut the forward portion of the 
cabin apart to extricate the pilot and front seat passenger.  Rescue and recovery crews reported 
copious amounts of fuel present.
During interviews with the IIC on March 30, the pilot and front seat passenger, who were both 
seriously injured in the accident, said they had no independent recollection of the accident.  
The pilot said he was told by the rear seat passenger that she heard one of them (pilot or front 
seat passenger) say "what was that" but had no idea what was happening prior to the accident.  
The fourth passenger was a two-year old child.  The pilot said typically he would have been 
flying eight to nine hundred feet above ground level, unless he were making an emergency 
landing.  He said there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the 
accident, and he did not indicate in his written report to the NTSB that the airplane had a 
mechanical problem which precipitated the accident.
On January 5, the airplane was examined by the IIC accompanied by a aviation safety inspector 
from the FAA at a storage facility.  All the major airframe components and flight controls were 
Page 4 of 6ANC05LA021
present.  Control continuity was established for all the flight controls.  The flap handle was 
mechanically captured in the flaps retracted position, and the flaps had damage consistent with 
them being retracted during impact.  The throttle was friction locked about one-inch from the 
full throttle position.  The propeller control was broken off, and the mixture control was about 
one-quarter inch from the full rich position.  One of the propeller blades had extensive leading 
edge gouging, chord-wise scratches, and torsional twisting and bending.
On March 29, the airplane was again examined by the IIC accompanied by the engine 
manufacturer's representative. The engine and associated components were removed from the 
airframe, and taken to an engine shop.  The engine was disassembled and inspected.  Clean fuel 
was found in the carburetor, and no evidence of any mechanical anomaly was discovered with 
the carburetor.  The magnetos were bench tested, and no anomalies were found.  The vacuum 
pump was intact, and appeared to function normally.  The engine was disassembled, examined, 
and no preimpact mechanical deficiencies were found.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/01/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2003
Flight Time:
1313 hours (Total, all aircraft), 93 hours (Total, this make and model), 1213 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ANC05LA021
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Maule
Registration:
N4262D
Model/Series:
M-7 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
23061C
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/2004, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
142 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
583 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-540
Registered Owner:
David Barnes
Rated Power:
235 hp
Operator:
David Barnes
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Anderson Lake, AK (0AK1)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1245 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious, 2 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious, 2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
62.000000, -146.750000
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lawrence R Lewis
Adopted Date:
12/20/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Charlotte Luckett; Anchorage FSDO-03; Anchorage, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
