National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: DAYTONA BEACH, FL
Accident Number: MIA97LA054
Date & Time: 01/01/1997, 1341 EST
Registration: N5813G
Aircraft: Cessna 150K
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Before the first of several legs of flight, the pilot used a wooden stick to confirm the fuel quantity, since one of the fuel gauges was inoperative.
He then departed, performed airwork, and continued to a landmark, where a flyby was performed.
The pilot landed at an airport, remained a short time, then during the preflight, he noted that the fuel quantity indicated about 1/2.
The flight departed, and the pilot flew to another airport, and performed a full stop landing with taxiback.
He then departed on a return flight to the original departure airport, where he performed two touch-and-go landings.
During the takeoff roll of the third touch-and- go, the pilot noted that the engine was not producing full power; however, with insufficient runway remaining to stop, he elected to continue.
About 200 feet above ground level, the engine coughed, then the propeller stopped.
Subsequently, the airplane collided with concrete blocks during a forced landing.
The pilot stated to a police officer that he believed the engine quit because he ran out of fuel.
Postcrash examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed 3.0 gallons of fuel remaining in the fuel tanks.
According to the airplane type certificate data sheet, the unusable fuel quantity was 3.5 gallons.
Following recovery of the airplane, the engine was started, and it operated to 750 rpm.
Impact damage precluded operating the engine to a higher rpm.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's improper planning/decision, by failing to ensure there was sufficient fuel for continued flight, which resulted in fuel exhaustion and subsequent collision with objects (concrete blocks) during a forced landing.
Factors relating to the accident were: a partially inoperative fuel gauge, which provided a false fuel indication, and the pilot's operation of the airplane with the known deficiency.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) ENGINE INSTRUMENTS,FUEL QUANTITY GAGE - FALSE INDICATION 3.
(F) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 5.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.
The private-rated pilot and one passenger sustained serious injuries.
The flight originated about 1 minute earlier from the Daytona Beach Airport.
The pilot stated that before departure he was aware that one of the fuel gauges was inoperative and during the preflight of the airplane he used a wooden stick that was labeled half and full.
Before departure on the first leg the fuel tanks were slightly less than full.
The flight departed, performed airwork, then flew south to the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) where a fly-by was performed.
The flight continued south of the KSC and performed a full stop landing at an airport.
Before departure the pilot checked the fuel tanks using the stick and it indicated 1/2.
The flight departed and he performed a full stop landing with taxi back at another airport then continued to the Daytona Beach Airport.
He performed two touch-and-go landings then during the landing roll of the third, after applying power to go around, he recognized that the engine was not developing full power.
With insufficient runway remaining, he elected to continue and about 200 feet above ground level, the engine began coughing and the propeller stopped.
With obstructions ahead the pilot intentionally stalled the airplane which collided with concrete blocks.
He further stated to a police officer that the engine may have quit because he ran out of fuel.
The airplane was examined the following day by an FAA airworthiness inspector who stated that when he arrived, the airplane was in the process of being dismantled.
The non-ruptured fuel tanks were drained and found to contain 3.0 gallons of fuel.
According to the airplane type certificate data sheet, the total unusable fuel quantity is 3.5 gallons.
Following recovery of the airplane the engine was started and operated to about 750 rpm.
Impact damage prevented engine operation to full rated rpm.
No discrepancies were noted during the engine run.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 23, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
