National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NOME, AK
Accident Number: ANC97LA017
Date & Time: 01/02/1997, 1202 AST
Registration: N23CB
Aircraft: Cessna 185F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot and passenger prepared to depart on a volunteer search and rescue flight.
A front seat belt became lodged under the fuel selector handle located on the cockpit floor between the two front seats.
When the seat belt was pulled loose, the long, pointer end of the fuel selector handle snapped off.
The pilot positioned the remaining portion of the fuel selector to what appeared to be the 'BOTH' position.
Just after takeoff, the engine suddenly quit, and the pilot performed an emergency landing on snow covered terrain.
Following the accident, the pilot discovered he had positioned the fuel selector to the 'OFF' position.
The loss of the pointer end of the selector handle allowed the selector to rotate 360 degrees.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to properly verify the position of a fractured fuel selector handle, which resulted in fuel starvation and subsequent loss of engine power.
A factor related to the accident was: the fractured handle that allowed the fuel selector to be rotated to an OFF position.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) FUEL SYSTEM,SELECTOR/VALVE - FRACTURED 2.
(C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - NOT VERIFIED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED Factual Information On January 2, 1997, at 1202 Alaska standard time, a tundra tire equipped Cessna 185F, N23CB, crashed after takeoff about 4 miles northwest of Nome, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight when the accident occurred.
The airplane, operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
The sole passenger received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The pilot reported that he and the passenger were preparing to depart on a volunteer search and rescue flight.
A front seat belt became lodged under the fuel selector handle located on the cockpit floor between the two front seats.
When the seat belt was pulled loose, the long pointer end of the fuel selector handle broke off.
The pilot positioned the remaining rotating portion of the selector to what appeared to the "Both" fuel tank position.
After departure, the engine suddenly quit about 200 feet above the ground and the pilot performed an emergency landing on snow covered terrain.
The airplane received damage to the fuselage, landing gear and wings.
Following the accident, the pilot reported that he found the fuel selector positioned to the "Off" position.
The pilot indicated that without the long end of the pointer attached, the selector could be rotated 360 degrees to the "Off" position.
: 3350 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 156 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3059 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-520-D Registered Owner: N.B.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
