National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ANDERSON, SC
Accident Number: ATL97LA032
Date & Time: 01/02/1997, 1700 EST
Registration: N1445E
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, he touched down hard and bounced.
He released back pressure on the control yoke and the nose of the airplane subsequently dropped.
The airplane porpoised three times and came to a stop.
The propeller had struck the runway, the nose gear was bent, the firewall was bent, and the fuselage underside was wrinkled.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper recovery from a bounced landing.
A factor was the pilot's improper level off.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) LEVEL OFF - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On January 2, 1997, about 1700 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172N, N1445E, landed hard at the Anderson County Airport, Anderson, South Carolina.
The airplane was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
A flight plan was not filed for the personal flight.
The private pilot and his passenger were not injured, and the airplane was substantially damaged.
Origination of the flight was Augusta, Georgia, about 1615, on the same day.
The pilot reported that his approach to landing was acceptable, crossing the threshold at 60 knots.
At touch down the airplane ballooned, then porpoised three times onto the nose landing gear.
The pilot examined the airplane after it had stopped on the runway.
The nose gear was bent rearward and the fuselage underside was wrinkled.
The pilot also indicated that it was his first flight in a 172, with his prior experience all in a 150.
He stated that he received a checkout from the same FBO in a 152 in August 1996.
When he rented the airplane for this flight, he was assigned N1445E.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 40, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
