National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RIO GRANDE CITY, TX
Accident Number: FTW97LA074
Date & Time: 01/02/1997, 0845 CST
Registration: N1552D
Aircraft: Beech C90A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot planned to navigate south along the road for approximately 25 nautical miles to the Starr County Airport, near Rio Grande City.
The pilot stated that while en route to the airport, at an estimated altitude of 1,000 feet MSL, the left engine propeller impacted guide wires and the outer portion of the right wing impacted a tower.
According to the Brownsville sectional chart, the tower, which is located on the west side of the road, is 1,002 feet MSL high (519 feet AGL).
The pilot reported that he 'checked [the] map to track his position along highway 755, and when he looked up, the tower was right in front, too late to take evasive action.'
The pilot also reported that after the collision with the tower, he aborted the approach and proceeded to the McCallen Miller International Airport, where after extending the landing gear manually, an uneventful landing was made.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the tower.
Factors were the low ceilings and the pilot's diverted attention to his navigation.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING 2.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
OBJECT - GUY WIRE 5.
OBJECT - TOWER Factual Information On January 2, 1997, at 0845 central standard time, a Beech C90A, N1552D, was substantially damaged upon impact with a tower during approach near Rio Grande City, Texas.
The airplane, owned by the Sheerin Charter Service L.C., of San Antonio, Texas, and operated by Raytheon Aircraft Services, also of San Antonio, was being operated under Title 14 CFR Part 91, at the time of the accident.
The airline transport rated pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the business flight for which an instrument flight plan was filed.
The flight originated from the San Antonio International Airport at 0740.
According to the pilot, the IFR portion of his flight plan was terminated after he found a clearing in the broken ceiling near the Diamond "O" Ranch airstrip, near La Gloria, Texas.
The pilot planned to navigate south along the road for approximately 25 nautical miles to the Starr County Airport, near Rio Grande City.
The pilot added that while en route to the airport, at an estimated altitude of 1,000 feet MSL, the left engine propeller impacted guide wires and the outer portion of the right wing impacted the tower.
According to the Brownsville sectional chart, the tower which is located on the west side of the road, is 1,002 feet MSL high (519 feet AGL).
In the narrative portion of the enclosed NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot stated that he "checked [the] map to track his position along highway 755, and when he looked up, the tower was right in front, too late to take evasive action."
The pilot reported that after the collision with the tower, he aborted the approach and proceeded to the McCallen Miller International Airport, near McCallen, Texas, where after extending the landing gear manually, an uneventful landing was made.
Examination of the airframe revealed that a 65-inch section of outboard portion of the right wing was damaged, two propeller blades on the left engine propeller were damaged, and a 12- inch incision was found on the left mid wing section.
: 10100 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 108 Hours Engines: 2 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time: 1803 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: PT6A-21 Registered Owner: SHEERIN CHARTER SERVICE L.C.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
