National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KANSAS CITY, MO
Accident Number: CHI97LA049
Date & Time: 01/01/1997, 0230 CST
Registration: N8040A
Aircraft: Gates Learjet LR35
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The airplane had just executed an ILS runway 3 approach and was cleared to land by the control tower operator.
The landing approach was flown with excessive airspeed.
The airplane touched down on the runway with approximately 2,000 feet of runway remaining, and tire skid marks were seen for approximately 2,000 feet on the runway.
The airplane went off the runway, past the departure end of the runway, and collided with 2 aircraft and a hangar.
The airplane was not configured correctly for landing.
The flaps were found at 20 degrees; both the AFM and company procedure recommend 40 degrees for landing.
The drag chute had not been used.
A review of the airframe and engines did not reveal any abnormalities, and the pilots did not report any malfunctions with the airframe or engines.
The weather at the time of the accident was reported as 100 feet overcast with a runway 3 visibility range of 5,000 feet, the wind was from 200 degrees at 10 knots.
The runway was wet.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the flightcrew's excessive airspeed and failure to attain a proper touchdown point on the runway.
Factors were: the fog, wet runway, tailwind and improper procedures by the flight crew.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - FOG 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 5.
(C) AIRSPEED - EXCESSIVE - FLIGHTCREW 6.
(F) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - FLIGHTCREW 7.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - FLIGHTCREW 8.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - WET ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 9.
OBJECT - AIRCRAFT PARKED/STANDING 10.
The airplane struck two aircraft, and a hanger after departing the runway.
Neither flight crew member was injured in the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 135 flight was operating on an instrument flight plan, and instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane had just executed an ILS runway 03 approach, and had been cleared to land by the control tower operator.
The control tower operator witnessed the touch down of the aircraft, and reported that the airplane landed on the runway with approximately 2,000 feet of runway remaining.
The tower operator advised the crew of the airplane that they were going to run out of runway, after the airplane had landed.
There was no response from the crew of the Gates Lear Jet on tower frequency, following the tower operator's advisory.
The airplane was inspected by a representative from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), on the day of the accident.
The representative reported that he observed skid marks on the runway which began approximately 2,000 feet from the end of runway 03.
The skid marks went from the center of the runway to the left side of the runway, and then continued through the grass.
The airplane was found with the flaps set at 20 degrees and the drag chute stowed.
The airplane flight manual, and company procedure recommend the use of forty degrees of flaps during landing.
The altitude bug on the copilots altimeter was set at 900 feet.
The decision height for the approach to runway 03 is listed at 994 feet.
A review of the airframe and engines by the FAA representative did not reveal any abnormalities.
In an interview of the pilot following the accident the pilot  reported that runway 03 was chosen, because it had the minimum visibility required for the approach.
The pilot was also aware that he was landing the airplane with almost a direct tailwind.
Both pilots had flown into the airport where the accident occurred, on prior flights.
The pilot did not report that there were any malfunctions with the airframe or engines.
The weather at the time of the accident was reported as 100 feet overcast with a runway 03 visibility range of 5,000 feet, the wind was from 200 degrees at 10 knots.
The runway was wet.
The last radar data for the accident aircraft showed that at 1,000 feet (six feet above decision height) N8040A had a ground speed of 176 knots.
The airplanes nose was crushed from hitting the other aircraft, and impacting with the hanger, the right tip tank had ruptured.
: 18000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 180 Hours Engines: 2 Turbo Fan Airframe Total Time: 8163 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Garrett ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: TFE-731-2-2B Registered Owner: AIRNET SYSTEMS INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
