The gyrocopter sustained substantial damage on impact with a tree and terrain following a 
takeoff from runway 15 for a local flight.  The pilot and passenger sustained minor injuries.  
The pilot stated, 'I misread direction of wind from hanger area.  I taxied to north end of runway 
and took off south with a 90 [degree] crosswind.  When I passed over hanger area at the south 
end of runway I hit some turbulence.  I should have did a emergency landing in the field south 
of runway, but chose to continue.  At the south end of field that has trees on three sides I didn't 
have enough altitude to cross a ravine with trees.  I hit the top of a large oak tree and fell 50 - 
60 ft into the ravine.'  The pilot listed his certificate and rating as private and single engine 
land.  An on scene examination revealed no anomalies.  Wind at Quincy, Illinois was 210 
degrees at 7 knots.  The pilot's safety recommendation stated, 'Take off the other direction.' 
the pilot not obtaining clearance from the trees.  Factors were the trees and the ravine terrain 
condition. 
 On April 2, 2000, at 1800 central daylight time, a Wilson RAF 2000 GTX SE, N1964, operated 
by a private pilot, sustained substantial damage on impact with a tree and terrain following a 
takeoff from runway 15 (1,500 feet X 50 feet, dry/grass) at a private field near Monroe City, 
Missouri.  The local flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The pilot and passenger sustained minor 
injuries.  No flight plan was on file.  The personal flight was originating at the time of the 
accident.
The pilot stated, "I misread direction of wind from hanger area.  I taxied to north end of 
runway and took off south with a 90 [degree] crosswind.  When I passed over hanger area at 
the south end of runway I hit some turbulence.  I should have did a emergency landing in the 
field south of runway, but chose to continue.  At the south end of field that has trees on three 
sides I didn't have enough altitude to cross a ravine with trees.  I hit the top of a large oak tree 
and fell 50 - 60 ft into the ravine."  The pilot listed his certificate and rating as private and 
single engine land.
At 1552, the Quincy Municipal, Baldwin Field Airport, Quincy, Illinois weather was: Wind 210 
degrees at 7 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition scattered 3,900 feet scattered 
20,000 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew point 7 degrees C; altimeter 29.82 inches of 
mercury.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector performed an on scene examination of the 
wreckage.  The examination revealed no anomalies.
The pilot's safety recommendation stated, "Take off the other direction."
