While at an altitude of 2,500 feet, the pilot opted to change the propeller pitch from climb to 
cruise.  While doing so, the pilot noticed a sudden power loss, and the engine shut off.  The 
pilot attempted to restart the engine with no success and performed a forced landing to a farm 
field.  During the landing an outrigger rod broke.  The pilot also observed the engine ignition 
switch in the off position, 'indicating the possibility that I had inadvertently touched it while 
operating the mechanical lever for the [propeller] pitch change.'  The pilot replaced the 
outrigger rod and attempted a takeoff from the field.  After liftoff, the pilot noticed that the 
motorglider began to drift to the right, and struck a small tree located on the edge of the field.  
The motorglider veered further to the right, touched down on the ground, struck two 
embankments lined with fence posts, and came to rest in an adjacent farm field.  Examination 
of the accident site revealed that the airplane departed the field on a heading of about 080 
degrees.  The winds reported by an airport 20 miles to the northwest were from 210 degrees at 
10 knots. 
The pilot's improper weather evaluation, resulting in a tailwind departure. 
 On April 1, 2000, about 1500 Eastern Standard Time, a homebuilt RF-5B, a motorglider, 
N55GS, was substantially damaged during takeoff from a grass field near Gillespie, 
Pennsylvania.  The certificated commercial glider pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight destined for the Garrett 
County Airport, Oakland, Maryland.  The flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, while at an altitude of 2,500 feet above mean sea level, he opted to 
change the propeller pitch from climb to cruise.  While doing so, the pilot noticed a sudden 
power loss, and the engine shut off.  The pilot attempted to restart the engine with no success 
and performed a forced landing to a farm field.  During the landing an outrigger rod broke.  
The pilot also found the engine ignition switch in the off position, "indicating the possibility 
that I had inadvertently touched it while operating the mechanical lever for the pitch change."
After the outrigger rod was replaced and it was confirmed that there were no problems with the 
engine, the pilot decided the motorglider was airworthy.  The pilot determined that that the 
wind was coming from his right, and positioned the motorglider for a takeoff.  After liftoff, the 
pilot noticed that the motorglider began to drift to the right, and struck a small tree located on 
the edge of the field.  The motorglider veered further to the right, touched down on the ground, 
struck two embankments lined with fence posts, and came to rest in an adjacent farm field.
Examination of the accident site by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector 
revealed that the airplane departed the field on a heading of about 080 degrees.
The winds reported at 1453, at an airport 20 miles to the northwest were from 210 degrees at 
10 knots. 
The FAA inspector did not find any abnormalities with the engine, nor did the pilot report any.
