The MD-82 aircraft was parked at gate C-9 at night with the jetway still attached, and most of 
the passengers had boarded.  The aircraft's APU was inoperative and electrical power was 
being supplied by an external ground power unit. Additionally, cabin air conditioning was 
being provided by an external ground source through the aircraft's right engine air 
conditioning system.  Electrical ground power then failed resulting in the aircraft's cabin lights 
going out and the emergency floor track lights automatically illuminating.  Smoke/fumes from 
the electrical ground power cart exhaust were pulled into the aircraft's cabin through the 
external ground source.  Passengers and crew noted the smoke and then evacuated the aircraft 
via the forward, left cabin door (L-1) through the jetway and into the terminal without injury. 
Contaminated air being ducted into the aircraft's cabin from the engine exhaust of a nearby 
ground power cart. 
 On April 1, 2000, approximately 2000 Pacific standard time, a McDonnell Douglas MD-82, 
N934AS, registered to Wilmington Trust Company, operated by Alaska Airlines, Inc., and 
crewed by two airline transport pilots (captain and first officer) and three cabin attendants, 
was undamaged during an emergency evacuation at gate C-9 at the Seattle-Tacoma 
International Airport, Seattle, Washington.  Visual meteorological night conditions existed and 
an IFR flight plan had been filed.  None of the 140 passengers or crew aboard were injured 
during their egress and there was no fire.  The flight, operating as flight 660, destined for Las 
Vegas, Nevada, was scheduled to depart at 1953, and was to have been operated under 
14CFR121 as a regularly scheduled, domestic passenger flight.  The aircraft was parked at gate 
C-9 with the jet ramp still connected to exit L-1 at the time of the event.
The Captain's irregularity report stated that "Gnd pwr failed, cabin being ventilated with gnd 
tie thru rt pack.  APU inop. Cabin filled with smoke, passengers deplaned fwd entry.  Due to no 
power, aft flt attendant deployed left aft slide."
One of the three flight attendants was stationed aft near row 24 and reported that the boarding 
of the aircraft was almost complete when the cabin lights went out and the (emergency) track 
lights illuminated.  The flight attendant remarked to the passengers that "our ground power 
must have disconnected..." and shortly thereafter one passenger stated "I smell burning, don't 
you?" and another passenger remarked "I smell it also."
The flight attendant then attempted to contact the cockpit via the interphone without success.  
She stated that "by this time smoke was coming into the cabin..." and she began to urge the 
passengers to exit the aircraft.
The flight attendant stated that passengers were beginning to panic and were not moving up 
the center aisle.  She then returned to the interphone (located near the galley area at exit L-2, 
refer to DIAGRAM I) and again attempted to contact the cockpit without success.  After 
unsuccessfully trying to communicate via the aircraft public address system, the flight 
attendant chose to open exit L-2 and activate the emergency escape slide.
Upon opening the door she realized the emergency escape slide had not been armed 
whereupon she re-closed the door, armed the slide, and re-opened the door resulting in the 
slide deploying (Note: emergency escape slides are not normally armed until after the aircraft 
leaves the gate as a ground safety procedure).
A nearby passenger then indicated that passengers were moving up the aisle.  The flight 
attendant began to urge everyone forward up the center aisle towards exit L-1, rather than 
utilizing the escape slide, so as to minimize injuries during egress.  All passengers and crew left 
the aircraft via exit L-1 and the emergency escape slide was unused.
The aircraft was subsequently checked and released for the flight to Las Vegas with the same 
cockpit crew and a new cabin crew.  A maintenance examination disclosed no evidence of any 
aircraft related cause for the smoke.  Additionally, maintenance personnel reported that the 
external air conditioning unit's intake pulled exhaust from the nearby electrical ground power 
cart and this air/exhaust mixture  was then ducted into the aircraft cabin.
