The pilot conducted a downwind takeoff on the local banner-tow flight. The airplane 
subsequently picked up the banner on a downwind low approach. A witness reported that the 
engine sounded normal. An eyewitness reported the airplane was not gaining much altitude 
and that the banner was very close to being dragged in crops on departure. A witness near the 
accident site said that the banner got caught in the corn while the airplane was maneuvering. 
Another witness saw the banner separate from the airplane before the airplane banked and 
went into a dive. The pilot was trained in and endorsed for banner towing operations and 
emergencies. However, his logbook did not contain an endorsement for a flight review. The 
local wind was 11 knots gusting to 20 knots. A wreckage examination revealed no preimpact 
anomalies. The propeller blades exhibited chordwise abrasion and leading edge nicks 
consistent with an engine producing power at the time of impact. A global positioning system 
unit showed that, after the airplane picked up the banner, it made a tight downwind turn to the 
left and headed northeast during its climbout. The data showed the airplane then turned to the 
south and subsequently descended.
The pilot™s failure to maintain airplane control while performing low-level banner towing 
operations with a gusting wind.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 2, 2010, about 0921 central daylight time, a Cessna 150L, N10128, operated by 
Drake Aerial Enterprises, LLC, and piloted by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial 
damaged when it collided with terrain near Boone, Iowa. The airplane was conducting banner 
tow operations under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The pilot 
sustained fatal injuries. The local banner tow flight departed the Boone Municipal Airport 
(BNW), near Boone, Iowa, about 0907. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was on file.
A witness at the fixed base operator (FBO), who saw the airplane depart from runway 15, stated 
that the airplane never gained much altitude and its banner looked like it was "very close" to 
dragging on the ground. The witness watched the airplane turn east and then back north with 
not much of an altitude change. The witness and two others went up in an airplane and spotted 
the wreckage. The banner was north of the aircraft and according to the witness, it appeared 
that "the aircraft went almost straight down because there was not much corn disturbed."
Another witness at the FBO stated that he observed the takeoff. He heard the initial takeoff and 
the approach to the banner. The engine "sounded normal."
A witness near the accident site reported that the banner was "dipping" in the wind and all of 
sudden, it "got caught in the corn." Within two to three seconds the "plane nose dived straight 
down into the field."
Another witness near the accident site stated that the airplane "seemed to be struggling to gain 
altitude as he headed north from the airport.ﬂ The witness saw the airplane turn to the east and 
continued to appear to "struggle.ﬂ The airplane turned back west and its altitude did not 
increase. After the airplane turned around the banner appeared to "fall off as if he cut it loose." 
Shortly after that the plane turned south. The witness said that the plane then banked hard to 
its left and its "nose went straight down."
Deputies from the Boone County Sheriff™s Office found the wreckage in a cornfield north of 
200th Street between S and R Avenues.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The 24-year-old pilot held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) commercial pilot 
certificate with airplane single-engine land, multiengine land, and instrument ratings. 
According to copies of his logbook, the most recent entry was dated August 23, 2010. Those 
copies showed that the pilot reported a total flight time of 559.6 hours. It further showed a 
banner towing endorsement, dated November 8, 2007. A current flight review was not located 
in the copies of the pilot™s logbook. The operator estimated that the pilot had over 40 hours of 
total flight experience in the same make and model as the accident airplane.
The pilot's most recent FAA second-class medical certificate was issued on June 13, 2010, with 
no limitations.
According to the operator, the operator provided the following training to the banner tower 
pilot:
1.  Familiarization of the aircraft to be used in this case it 
would be just Cessna 150s, as he did not have a tailwheel 
endorsement. 
2.  Tow hitches and their release handles
3.  Flap settings for towing
4.  Engine and fuel management
5.  Pick up and drop procedures and speeds
6.  Aborted pick up procedures
7.  Aborted drop procedures
8.  Pick ups that bring up FOD
9.  Tangled and twisted banners
10.  Landing with banner that will not come off
11.  Set up and tear [down] of banner and launch equipment
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N10128 was a 1973 Cessna 150L, which was an all-metal, high-wing, semimonocoque design 
airplane with serial number 15074800. The airplane was equipped with externally braced 
wings, wing flaps, and a fixed tricycle landing gear. The airplane was configured to seat two 
occupants.  
FAA airworthiness documents revealed that the airplane was powered by a Lycoming O-360-
A4A, serial number L17153-36A, installed under supplemental type certificate (STC) 
SA4795SW, and had a short take off and land (STOL) kit installed under STC SA909CE. Both 
of those installations were documented on a major repair and alteration form, dated December 
17, 1991. Long-range fuel tanks were installed under STC SA5733SW on November 25, 2003. A 
tow hook assembly was installed under STC SA1-349 on October 7, 2005. Vortex generators 
were installed under STC SA01065SE on January 29, 2009. The airplane had an EDM 700 
cockpit displayed engine monitoring system, manufactured by J.P. Instruments (JPI), that 
recorded engine data. The monitoring system was installed under STC SA00432SE.
The airplane was maintained under an annual inspection program and airplane logbook 
entries showed that the airplane™s most recent annual inspection was conducted on April 1, 
2010. The entry showed that the airplane accumulated 6,796.9 hours of total time at the time 
of that inspection. The operator™s accident report stated that the airplane had accumulated a 
total time of 7,107 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 0915, the recorded weather at BNW was: Wind 310 degrees at 11 knots gusting to 20 knots, 
visibility 10 statute miles, sky condition clear, temperature 22 degrees C, dew point 17 degrees 
C, altimeter 29.81 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
FAA inspectors and an air safety investigator from Cessna examined the wreckage on-scene. 
Pictures of the wreckage showed that the leading edge of the airplane™s wings came to rest on 
the ground. The engine came to rest below the ground and one propeller blade was visible 
above ground. Flight control continuity was established. The flap actuator was extended to 
about the 15 - 20 degree flap setting. The propeller blades exhibited chordwise abrasion and 
leading edge nicks.
The banner measured about 39 feet by 105 feet when it was laid out and examined. The 
banner™s bridle lines were twisted and knotted. The top bridle line was detached from the 
banner. The third bridle line up from the bottom was torn away from the banner. Fraying was 
found on the bottom of the banner. The lead pole sleeve, near the bottom of the banner, was 
torn. The green parachute cord on the bottom lead pole sleeve was torn.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Iowa Office of the State Medical Examiner on 
September 3, 2010. The autopsy reported multiple blunt force injuries as the cause of death.
The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute prepared a Final Forensic Toxicology Accident 
Report. The report was negative for the tests performed.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The JPI engine monitor and a recovered Garmin Global Positioning System (GPS) were 
shipped by a FAA inspector to the National Transportation Safety Board Vehicle Recorder 
Laboratory for downloading by NTSB National Resource Specialists. The JPI engine monitor 
sustained impact damage and no usable information about the accident flight was available 
from the monitor™s data. The GPS unit also sustained impact damage. However, there was 
accident relevant data that was able to be downloaded from the GPS unit. A National Resource 
Specialist prepared a report on the flight™s data.
From that report, the recovered GPS data showed that the airplane departed from BNW on 
runway 15 and made about a three-quarter mile left traffic pattern with its crosswind leg turn 
to downwind leg west of S Avenue. The data indicated that the airplane descended consistent 
with a low approach parallel to and east of runway 15 to pick up a banner. The data then 
showed that the airplane made about a one-quarter mile left traffic departure with its 
crosswind leg turn to the downwind leg east of R Avenue. According to the data, the airplane 
climbed and turned to the northeast and flew near the intersection of R Avenue and 200th 
Street. The plot of the data depicted a left turn towards the south near the intersection of S 
Avenue and 195th Street. The airplane, subsequent to the low approach, reached its highest 
recorded GPS altitude of 1,498 feet during the turn to the south. The airplane subsequently 
descended. The last recorded GPS altitude data point was 1,311 feet.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to preliminary information supplied to the NTSB, the same operator subsequently 
had a banner towing accident on September 12, 2011. That NTSB report, number CEN11LA182, 
in part, stated:  
A Cessna 150L, N6622G, piloted by a commercial pilot, sustained 
substantial damaged when it collided with snow and terrain 
during a forced landing following an in-flight loss of engine 
power near Trenton, Michigan. The airplane was conducting 
banner tow operations under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91. The pilot reported no injuries. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan 
was on file. The banner towing flight departed from the 
Oakland/Troy Airport, near Troy, Michigan, and was destined for 
the Grosse Ile Municipal Airport, near Detroit, Michigan.
