Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Greensburg, IN
Accident Number:
CHI08LA144
Date & Time:
06/01/2008, 1030 EDT 
Registration:
N102VE
Aircraft:
CESSNA 208B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Skydiving
Analysis 
The pilot reported that the airplane, which was used for sky diving operations, was climbing 
through 7,000 feet mean sea level (msl) when he heard an explosion followed by a metal 
grinding noise coming from the engine section of the airplane.  He felt the airplane vibrate, and 
smoke began to fill the cabin.  He reported that the engine was not producing any power so he 
shut the fuel off and performed procedures to rid the cabin of smoke.  He leveled the airplane 
at 5,000 feet msl and set the flaps to 20-degree so that the 14 skydivers could exit the airplane.  
He attempted a forced landing to runway 18 (3,433 feet by 40 feet, asphalt).The airplane was 
too high and fast during the approach so he executed a forced landing to a cornfield off the 
departure end of runway 18.  When the airplane landed in the cornfield, the propeller and left 
wing impacted the terrain, and the airplane sustained substantial damage.  Inspection of the 
engine revealed that the compressor turbine (CT) blades failed as a result of blade creep.  The 
engine manufacturer had issued Service Information Letters (SIL) concerning recommended 
borescope inspection procedures to inspect CT blades for blade creep and fatigue cracks.  The 
airplane's owner reported that he was unaware of the SIL's, and did not perform the borescope 
inspections that were recommended by the engine manufacturer's SIL.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The total loss of engine power during the en route climb due to a compressor turbine failure as 
a result of blade creep. Also causal was  the inadequate maintenance performed by the 
airplane's owner.
Findings
Aircraft
Turbine section - Failure (Cause)
Turbine section - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Turbine section - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Maintenance - Owner/builder (Cause)
Page 2 of 7CHI08LA144
Factual Information
On June 1, 2008, about 1030 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 208B, N102VE, operated by 
Skydive Greensburg, had a loss of engine power and sustained substantial damage when it 
nosed over in a cornfield after a forced landing near the Greensburg-Decatur County Airport 
(I34), Greensburg, Indiana.  The 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 skydiving flight 
with 14 skydivers on board the airplane departed I34 on a local flight at 1015.  The pilot was not 
injured and all the skydivers parachuted safely from the airplane after the complete loss of 
engine power.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no 
flight plan was filed.  
The pilot reported that it was the second flight of the day and that the airplane performed 
normally during the first flight.  The pilot reported that during the accident flight, the airplane 
was climbing through 7,000 feet mean sea level (msl) when he heard an explosion and 
immediately heard a metal grinding noise coming from the engine section of the airplane.  He 
felt the airplane vibrate and smoke began to fill the cabin.  He reported that the engine was not 
producing any power so he shut the fuel off and performed procedures to rid the cabin of 
smoke.  He leveled the airplane at 5,000 feet msl and set in flaps 20 so that the skydivers could 
exit the airplane.  After the skydivers had exited the airplane, he retracted the flaps and turned 
off the electrical system.  He decided to make a forced landing on runway 18 (3,433 feet by 40 
feet, asphalt) at I34.  He turned the electrical system back on and tried to lower the flaps but 
the flap circuit breaker had popped.  He tried to reset the circuit breaker but without success.  
Oil from the engine started to coat the windshield so he could not see out the front windshield.  
When he approached runway 18 he realized that his airspeed was too high to make a landing 
on the runway.  He executed a forced landing to a cornfield off the departure end of runway 18.  
When the airplane landed in the cornfield, the propeller and left wing impacted the terrain. 
A witness located at I34 took a series of photographs of the accident airplane as it made its 
approach to runway 18 and its forced landing in the field.  The photographs indicated that the 
flaps were in the fully extended position.       
The 25-year-old pilot held a commercial certificate with airplane single-engine and multi-
engine land ratings.  He was a certificated flight instructor with airplane single-engine, multi-
engine, and instrument instructor ratings.  He held a first-class medical certificate that was 
issued in March 25, 2008.  He had a total of about 1,089 flight hours.  Within the previous 90 
days he had flown about 85 flight hours in the C-208B, which was his total time in make and 
model.    
The single-engine Cessna 208B, serial number 208B0618, was manufactured in 1997.  It had 
two pilot's seats in the cockpit and was configured for sky diving operations.  The maximum 
gross takeoff weight of the airplane was 8,750 pounds.  The engine was a flat rated 675 shaft 
horsepower Pratt & Whitney PT6-114A engine.  The last annual maintenance inspection was 
performed on February 7, 2008, with a total time of 7,175.0 hours.  The engine had about 
3,075.3 hours since overhaul at the time of the accident.  The aircraft total time at the time of 
the accident was 7,221 hours. 
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector traveled to the accident site 
on the same day the accident occurred.  Due to heavy rains and flooding, the airplane wreckage 
was not recovered to a hangar at I34 for about two weeks.  On June 18, 2008, the FAA 
inspector and representatives from the airplane and engine manufacturers conducted an 
Page 3 of 7CHI08LA144
inspection of the airplane.
The inspection revealed control cable continuity to the ailerons, rudder, elevator, and elevator 
trim.  The flap lever was found in the FULL position, the flap indicator was found near FULL, 
and the flap actuator was found in the full flaps position.  Using the accident airplane's battery, 
when electrical power was applied, the flap lever was moved to each position from FULL to UP, 
and back, twice.  The flap actuator moved to each position and the circuit breaker did not trip.  
However, the flap surfaces were disconnected from the flap actuator since the wings had been 
removed to facilitate the recovery from the field to the hangar.    
The emergency power lever (EPL) was found secured with a shinny, clean frangible wire.  A 
dull colored, mud-splattered piece of frangible wire of the same shape was found on the 
floorboard of the cockpit.  The pilot reported that he had never operated the EPL on the 
airplane. The pilot and the airplane's mechanic reported that they had never found the 
frangible safety wire broken on or removed from the EPL. 
The altimeters and the #2 airspeed indicator were missing from the wreckage during the 
inspection on June 18.  The FAA inspector reported that he observed them in the airplane on 
the day of the accident.  The missing instruments were not recovered during the course of the 
investigation. 
The inspection of the engine revealed that the propeller and turbine section could not be 
rotated.  The propeller was feathered and each blade was slightly bent in the direction of 
rotation.  The engine was sent to the engine manufacturer for teardown.
The engine examination was performed on August 5, 2008, in Bridgeport, West Virginia, at the 
Pratt and Whitney Engine Services facility.  The inspection revealed that the compressor 
turbine (CT) guide vane ring (part number 3029051, serial number 2D008) displayed impact 
damage and erosion of material from the outer ends of the vane airfoils.  The CT shroud had a 
deep impact mark at the 2 o'clock position, and additional dents and rubs were evident around 
the circumference of the shroud.  The CT (disk part number 3013411, serial number 40B690) 
had rubbed with both the CT and power turbine (PT) vanes.  The CT blades were all fractured 
at varying heights, from just above the blade root to approximately mid-span of the airfoil.  
The CT disk with blades, the CT shroud, turbine vane, and combustor exit duct were sent to the 
National Transportation Safety Board's (NTSB) Materials Laboratory for inspection.  The 
inspection revealed that the CT disk was intact and showed circumferential rub marks. The 
trailing side of the CT disk had a blue tint at the inner side of the web, and the remainder of the 
disk was light brown in color. An orange/tan colored deposit was observed in the inner bore of 
the disk, and similarly colored deposits were observed in the vicinity of the blade platforms and 
root serrations. Except for the one missing blade (removed to identify the blade part number), 
all of the remaining blades on the CT disk were fractured in the airfoils at locations ranging 
from just above the platform to approximately 85% of the airfoil span. Multiple parallel cracks 
were observed on the convex sides of the blades. The trailing edges were mostly damaged with 
material missing from most of the span on each airfoil. Fracture surfaces on the blades were 
generally rough and uniform in color. Several of the blades with longer portions of the airfoil 
remaining showed wrinkling and bulging of the surface coating and thinning of the blade 
adjacent to the fracture near the trailing edge, features consistent with creep. Many blades with 
longer remaining airfoils showed some metal flow and balls of re-solidified metal at the 
fracture surfaces.  The inspection of individual CT blades revealed areas of wrinkling and cross-
Page 4 of 7CHI08LA144
sectional thinning adjacent to the fracture surface, which is consistent with necking at high 
temperatures.  
The engine manufacturer, Pratt & Whitney Canada (P&WC), issued Service Information 
Letters (SIL's) that pertained to the issues of PT6A CT blade fractures and recommended 
maintenance practices.  The SIL's were:
1. SIL No. PT6A-053R3: "Emergency Power Lever (EPL) Fuel Control Manual Override 
System" issued Feb 24/1998, Rev 3. Nov 10/2004
2. SIL No. PT6A-116R2: "Borescope Inspection in Conjunction with Fuel Nozzle Check" issued 
Jan 24/2003, Rev 2. Apr 1/2008.
3. SIL No. PT6A-125: "PT6A Compressor Turbine (CT) Blade Fractures" issued Jan 21/2004.
4. SIL No. PT6A-146: "PT6A-114 AND 114A Compressor Turbine Blade Maintenance" issued 
Oct 25/2006.
SIL No. PT6A-125 describes the conditions that lead to and may accelerate blade creep.  It 
states, "During engine operation, CT blades are exposed to both high temperatures from hot 
gases and stresses due to centrifugal forces from engine speed.  The cumulative time effect of 
this heat and stress cause the CT blade material to creep that is detectable by airfoil elongation 
also referred to as stretch."  It further stated, "It is essential to use the correct power setting 
procedures to assure the integrity of the engine.  Engines operated regularly beyond the 
recommended power settings in the P.O.H. [Pilot Operating Handbook], but still below the 
defined temperature redline settings and engine maintenance manual over-temperature chart 
limits, may experience accelerated CT Blade creep.  This effect is cumulative and could likely 
lead to reduced CT Blade life or CT Blade fracture and total loss of engine power occurring 
prior to the blade inspection interval stated in the maintenance manual or overhaul manual."
SIL No. PT6A-146 stated, "Adherence to recommended maintenance practices is essential in 
the early detection and control of hot section oxidation and sulphidation that may lead to blade 
distress.  The erosion of CT vane airfoil material can result in fatigue-related fractures of CT 
blades, while sulphidation can weaken blade structure and lead to overload fractures of the 
airfoil."  It further states, "The Engine Maintenance Manual (EMM) recommends periodic 
refurbishment of fuel nozzles and concurrent borescope inspections of hot section components 
including CT vane and blade airfoils.  While proper fuel nozzle maintenance serves to protect 
hot section components from thermal distress, borescope inspection is a fundamental tool in 
detecting airfoil oxidation and sulphidation.  In certain cases, borescope inspection is also 
effective in identifying CT blade trailing edge cracks (reference SIL PT6A-116).  
SIL No. PT6A-116R2 states, "Despite P&WC's efforts to emphasize the importance of 
Borescope inspections, it has become evident during the investigation of recent Compressor 
Turbine (CT) Blade fracture events (which occurred in 2007) that not all operators are 
performing the recommended borescope inspection at the same time as their scheduled fuel 
nozzle maintenance."  It states further, "P&WC wishes to remind operators that borescope 
inspection is required per the EMM in conjunction with the fuel nozzle inspections as defined 
in the periodic inspection Table 601 (Reference the EMM Section 72-00-00).
NOTE 1 of the Table 601, Periodic Inspection, of the EMM Section 72-00-00 states, "Do the 
periodic borescope inspection of the hot section components in conjunction with the following 
tests (Ref.2.B.)," i.e., fuel nozzle maintenance.  
Page 5 of 7CHI08LA144
SIL's remain advisory in nature and maintenance procedures are considered to be 
"recommended" and not mandatory requirements for aircraft owners and operators who are 
regulated under the 14 CFR Part 91 regulations.  Likewise, the manufacturer's maintenance 
manual procedures are recommended procedures under Part 91 regulations, whereas under 
Part 135 or Part 121 regulations, the maintenance procedures in the maintenance manuals are 
considered as mandatory requirements.       
Skydive Greensburg operated the accident airplane for skydiving operations under 14 CFR Part 
91.  The airplane's owner, Pacific Aero, a.k.a Kapowsin Air Sport Ltd. located in Shelton, 
Washington, maintained the airplane's maintenance records.  The mechanic who maintained 
the airplane for Skydive Greensburg, in Greensburg, Indiana, performed the maintenance as 
Kapowsin Air Sport directed him.  The mechanic reported that he had not received any 
directive to conduct a borescope inspection of the engine's hot section during fuel nozzle 
maintenance.  The owner of the airplane from Kapowsin Air Sport reported that he was not 
aware of any requirement to perform borescope inspections when fuel nozzle maintenance was 
performed.  The owner reported that he was not aware of the Pratt & Whitney SIL's that 
concerned borescope inspections.
History of Flight
Enroute-climb to cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Landing area overshoot
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
25, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2008
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2007
Flight Time:
1089 hours (Total, all aircraft), 85 hours (Total, this make and model), 918 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 130 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 59 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Page 6 of 7CHI08LA144
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N102VE
Model/Series:
208B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
208B0618
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/07/2008, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
8750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
47 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
7221 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney Canada
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-114
Registered Owner:
Pacific Aero LLC
Rated Power:
675 hp
Operator:
Skydive Greensburg
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BAK, 656 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
24 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1000 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
240°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.96 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 15°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Greensburg, IN (I34)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1015 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Greenburg Decatur County (I34)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
912 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3433 ft / 40 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 7 of 7CHI08LA144
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
39.326667, -85.522500
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
James P Silliman
Adopted Date:
05/12/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Tom Himmelman; FAA-Indianapolis FSDO; Indianapolis, IN
Michael Koonce; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
Jeff Davis; Pratt & Whitney Canada; Bridgeport, WV
Publish Date:
05/12/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
