Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Marana, AZ
Accident Number:
SEA08LA149
Date & Time:
06/01/2008, 0816 MST 
Registration:
N62JV
Aircraft:
Van Heeswyk Lightning
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Part(s) separation from AC
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
While maneuvering adjacent to a private airstrip at a low altitude, witnesses reported 
observing the propeller assembly separate from the airplane.  The pilot  maneuvered towards 
the airstrip and leveled out on runway heading about mid-length of the runway.  As the 
airplane crossed over the end of the runway, it banked to the left and descended into terrain, 
impacting an open desert field adjacent to several residential homes.  Examination of the 
airplane revealed that the airframe and both wings were structurally damaged.  The propeller 
assembly, including the propeller flange extension were found separated from the engine 
crankshaft.  No further anomalies were noted with the airframe and engine that would have 
precluded normal operation.  The attachment bolts were installed on a painted surface of the 
propeller flange extension.  The paint surrounding this area was flaking away from the surface.  
Evidence of thread locking material was observed in the threaded areas consistent with 
installation instructions.   Examination of the attachment bolts revealed that four of the six 
bolts exhibited fracture surfaces consistent with fatigue.  One of the four bolts exhibited a 
multifaceted fracture surface with multiple origins around the circumference.  Hardness of this 
bolt was checked and found to be within the specified hardness range.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The insufficient clamping force resulting in a fatigue fracture of the propeller extension 
attachment bolts and subsequent separation of the propeller assembly in flight. Contributing to 
the accident was the pilot's failure to maintain sufficient airspeed to avoid an inadvertent stall 
while maneuvering during the emergency approach to the airport.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Factor)
Propeller system - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Page 2 of 7SEA08LA149
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On June 1, 2008 about 0816 mountain standard time, an amateur built Van Heeswyk 
Lightning experimental airplane, N62JV, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain 
while maneuvering near Marana, Arizona.  The airplane was registered to and operated by the 
pilot operated under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.  The 
private pilot, who was the sole occupant of the airplane, was killed.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  The local personal flight originated from 
Ryan Field Airport, Tucson, Arizona, about 0559.
Witnesses located adjacent to the accident site reported to a Federal Aviation Administration 
Inspector (FAA) that they observed the airplane over fly a private airstrip at an altitude of 
about 100 feet above ground level (agl) to the northwest.  As the airplane passed over the end 
of the airstrip, witnesses reported observing the propeller assembly separate from the airplane 
followed by the engine "revving up".  The airplane was observed making a "tear-drop" turn 
towards the airstrip and leveled out on a southeasterly heading about mid-length of the 
airstrip.  The witnesses stated that the airplane continued flying on the runway heading.  As the 
airplane  passed over the end of the runway, it banked to the left and descended into terrain.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The pilot, age 62, held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating.  The 
pilot also possessed a repairman experimental aircraft builders certificate.  A third-class 
airman medical certificate issued June 30, 2003, with the limitation stated "must wear 
corrective lenses for near and distant vision."  Review of the pilot's logbook flight records 
revealed that as of the pilot's most recent logbook entry on May 19, 2008, he had accumulated 
640.5 hours total flight time, of which 9.8 hours were in the accident make/model airplane.  
The pilot had logged 5.3 hours within the previous 90 days and 2.2 hours within the previous 
30 days to the accident.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
The experimental amateur built two-seat, low-wing, fixed-gear airplane, serial number (S/N) 7 
was built by the owner/pilot.  It was powered by a Jabaru 3300 engine, rated at 120 horse 
power and equipped with a Sensenich EX-Pitch Composite propeller.   According to FAA 
records, the airplane was registered to the pilot on November 8, 2007. 
Review of the airframe logbooks revealed that the airplane was initially inspected and issued a 
special airworthiness certificate on December 24, 2007.  The most recent maintenance 
performed on the airplane was conducted on May 4, 2008, at a total airframe time of 6 hours.
The Jabaru J ALL Constructors Manual, dated January 30,2008, states the following 
installation instructions and requirements for the installation of the propeller flange extension: 
"Objectives of this task:
To remove the universal propeller flange that is shipped with the engine and fit the model 
specific propeller flange extension to the crankshaft. While this is a straightforward mechanical 
task it is most definitely a critical task and care must be taken. The universal propeller flange is 
lock wired in place, however the depth of the propeller flange extension makes the use of lock 
Page 3 of 7SEA08LA149
wire almost impossible and so we use a strong Loctite to keep the flange securely fitted. This 
means that the cleanliness of all threads is critical. This task will require 2 people: 1 to stop the 
crankshaft from moving and 1 to loosen and later tighten the cap screws. This task is intended 
to be performed by the kit builder with the engine mounted to the aircraft. In the factory we do 
this task while the engine is fitted to a mobile engine stand so some of the photos will be 
slightly different to what the kit builder could expect to see.
Materials and equipment required:
Loctite 620
Thread cleaner Œ Loctite or Acetone
5/16" Hex drive socket, or alternately a 5/16" Allen key cut straight and fitted to a 5/16" socket
Torque wrench, set to 30 ft/lbs or 40 Nm
Remove the universal flange
The universal flange is held in place by 6 x 3/8" UNF Allen head cap screws, all of which will be 
reused. Cut and remove the lock wire from the 6 cap screws, then heat the cap  screws with a 
heat gun in order to loosen the Loctite. Lock the engine from turning by holding a large blade 
screwdriver in the ring gear teeth between the starter motor and the adjacent alloy block 
(circled in the photo above right). Crack each cap screw in turn to break the Loctite seal and 
remove each cap screw and the related washer. Set the cap screws and washers aside for later 
use. Remove the flange and discard.
Clean and prepare the screws and hub
Clean the cap screw threads with a wire brush - make sure that there is no residual Loctite in 
the threads. Clean all threads with cleaning solvent (Loctite cleaner or Acetone) and dry. Run a 
3/8" UNF flat bottomed tap all the way into each bolt hole in the hub, apply a cleaning solvent 
(Loctite cleaner or Acetone) into each hole and then blow dry with compressed air. Check that 
each thread is absolutely clean and dry before proceeding.
Fit the propeller flange extension
Set your torque wrench to 30 ft/lbs or 40 Nm and place it on top of the engine. Apply a few 
drops of Loctite to each screw hole, place the propeller flange extension on the hub and fit the 6 
cap screws and washers. Have your helper lock the engine from turning and tighten all the cap 
screws firmly then torque each cap screw to 30 ft/lbs or 40 Nm, working in a criss-cross 
pattern as shown at right. Re-check each cap screw, applying steady pressure on the torque 
wrench until the torque value is reached. In the factory we have the workers change places at 
this point so that the torque values are set by one person and double-checked by the other as 
an additional safety measure."
According to a witness, the pilot had used his facility to build the airplane and had always 
brought his own expendable items in a small toolbox.  Family members of the pilot reported 
that Permatex Medium Strength Threadlocker Blue was found within the pilot's toolbox along 
with various other sealants.  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
Review of recorded data from the Tucson International Airport (TUS) automated weather 
observation station, located 32 miles southeast of the accident site revealed at 0753 conditions 
Page 4 of 7SEA08LA149
were: wind from 150 degrees at 6 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, clear sky, temperature 24 
degrees Celsius, dew point minus 8 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.00 inches of 
Mercury. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
that the airplane came to rest upright within an open desert field adjacent to several residential 
homes.  The fuselage was partially separated aft of the cabin area.  The wreckage debris path 
remained within about a 30-foot circumference to the main wreckage.  Two bushes, about four 
feet in height, were observed on the forward and aft sides of the right wing and appeared to be 
undamaged.  All primary flight controls were located within the accident site.  The propeller 
assembly and propeller extension were found separated from the engine and were located  
about .62 miles northwest of the accident site.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
 
The Pima County Medical Examiner's office conducted an autopsy on the pilot on June 2, 
2008.  The medical examiner determined that the cause of death was "–blunt impact."
The FAA's Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI) in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
toxicology tests on the pilot. According to CAMI's report, carbon monoxide, cyanide, volatiles, 
and drugs were tested.  Unspecified amounts of Alfuzosin and Metoprolol were found within 
the blood and liver specimens.  
TESTS AND RESEARCH
On June 5, 2008, at the facilities of Air Transport, Phoenix, Arizona, the recovered airframe 
and engine were examined by a representative from Arian Aircraft under the supervision of the 
NTSB investigator-in-charge.  
Flight control continuity was established throughout the airframe from the cockpit controls to 
all primary flight control surfaces.  No mechanical anomalies were noted with the airframe.
The engine remained attached to the airframe and exhibited no external damage.  The 
propeller assembly, including the propeller flange extension was separated from the engine 
crankshaft.  The engine was removed from the airframe and disassembled.  The engine 
crankshaft, propeller flange extension, and attachment bolts were sent to the NTSB Office of 
Research and Engineering, Materials Laboratory Division for further examination.
Examination of the bolts revealed that four of the six propeller flange extension attachment 
bolts that attach the propeller extension to the forward end of the crankshaft were fractured in 
the threads where the bolt intersected the forward face of the crankshaft.  The fracture surfaces 
on the four bolts exhibited signatures consistent with fatigue cracking and overstress.  One of 
the four bolts exhibited a multifaceted fracture surface with multiple origins around the 
circumference.  Hardness of this bolt was checked and found to be within the specified 
hardness range.  A light green material was observed between the bolt threads and the 
crankshaft threads, consistent with a thread locking material.
Heavy fretting damage was observed on the aft side of the propeller flange extension where it 
contacted the crankshaft forward face. Wear matching the thread pattern of the bolts was 
observed on the bore of the attachment bolt holes in the propeller flange extension. 
Page 5 of 7SEA08LA149
Most of the surfaces of the propeller flange extension were partially covered with a silver 
colored paint.  In some areas, the paint was flaking from the surface. In areas where the paint 
was adhered, the paint could be easily removed by scratching with a fingernail.  A sample of the 
flaked paint was removed from the surface with tweezers, and the paint deformed easily under 
pressure from tweezers.  No paint was observed on the surface that mated to the crankshaft or 
on the surface that mated to the propeller. However, paint was observed on the forward side of 
the propeller flange extension in the attachment bolt area including the washer contact area, 
and on the aft side of the propeller attachment flange.  
Silver colored paint covered surfaces up to the edges of the washer contact areas on the 
propeller flange extension.  Light gray, dark gray, and orange material was observed on the 
surface of the propeller flange extension in the washer contact area.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Part(s) separation from AC (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Part(s) separation from AC
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/30/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/26/2008
Flight Time:
640 hours (Total, all aircraft), 10 hours (Total, this make and model), 5 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7SEA08LA149
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Van Heeswyk
Registration:
N62JV
Model/Series:
Lightning 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
7
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/24/2007, Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1425 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Jabaru
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
3300
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
120 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KTUS, 2643 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
32 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0753 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
120°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / -8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Tucson, AZ (KRYN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0559 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
32.409444, -111.218333 (est)
Page 7 of 7
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joshua Cawthra
Adopted Date:
12/08/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven D D'Urso; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Nick Otterback; Arion Aircraft; Shelbyville, TN
Publish Date:
12/08/2008
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
