Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
St Charles, MO
Accident Number:
DFW08LA157
Date & Time:
06/01/2008, 1100 CDT 
Registration:
N114KT
Aircraft:
LUCAS D E/ LUCAS K A AcroSport II
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot told several people that he intended to do a flyby over the model airplane flying field. 
Later that morning, when the accident airplane was about a mile away from the model airplane 
flying field, several witnesses observed it flying straight and level at less than 100 feet above the 
ground. The airplane pitched up, rolled right and impacted the ground vertically, heading in 
the opposite direction. One witness observed the airplane flying inverted when the nose 
pitched up, suddenly performing what the eyewitness described as an aileron roll, then sharply 
rolled nose down toward the ground. The pilot did not have a previous history of aerobatic 
flight at low altitude. The pilot had a previous history of frequent episodes of abnormal heart 
rhythm resulting in markedly elevated heart rate (220 beats per minute), palpitations, and 
neck discomfort. He had severe coronary artery disease discovered on autopsy, which would 
have reduced his tolerance to such a high heart rate. Additionally, the pilot was on a 
prescription antidepressant that could increase his risk for seizure, and had been regularly 
using a prescription narcotic with the potential for impairment. He had not revealed his history 
of abnormal heart rhythm or his use of an antidepressant and a narcotic medication to the 
Federal Aviation Administration. While the circumstances of the accident suggest the 
possibility of incapacitation, potentially due to an abnormal heart rhythm or seizure, the 
investigation was unable to determine whether the pilot became incapacitated at the time of 
the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain control during an attempted low pass maneuver.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Predisposing condition - Pilot
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6DFW08LA157
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 1, 2008, about 1100 central standard time (CST), a Lucas D E/Lucas K A Acro Sport 
II, N114KT, was substantially damaged during impact with terrain, following a loss of control 
while maneuvering. The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was fatally injured. The 
amateur built airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and a flight plan had not been filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 personal flight. The flight had departed the Creve Coeur Airport (1H0) in St. Louis, 
Missouri on a local area flight.
The pilot told several people that he intended to do a flyby over the model airplane flying field.  
Later that morning, when the accident airplane was about a mile away from the model airplane 
flying field several witnesses observed it flying straight and level at less than 100 feet above the 
ground. The airplane pitched up, rolled right and impacted the ground vertically, heading in 
the opposite direction. One witness observed the airplane flying inverted when the nose 
pitched up, suddenly performing what the eyewitness described as an aileron roll then sharply 
rolled nose down toward the ground. First responders found the wreckage after several 
witnesses had made calls to 911 emergency.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman records revealed the pilot held a 
private certificate with a rating for airplane single engine land.
The pilot held a third class medical certificate, with waivers or limitations, which was issued on 
June21, 2007.  
An examination of the pilot's logbook and the airplane maintenance logbook indicated he had 
an estimated total pilot flight time of 331 hours of which 130 hours was in the accident 
airplane.  He had logged 20 hours in the last 90 days, and 3 in the last 30 days.  
An examination of the pilot™s logbook and statements from several persons that knew him did 
not show any previous history of aerobatic flight at low altitude.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a Lucas D E/Lucas K A Acro Sport II, serial number 28, equipped with a 
Lycoming IO-360-A3B6D engine. The Acro Sport II design is an amateur built, short wing-
span biplane of conventional tail dragger configuration, with open cockpits and ﬁspattedﬂ main 
undercarriage. Its structure is a fabric-covered steel tube fuselage with a wood wing structure.  
At the time of the accident, the airplane had accumulated 162.4 hours total time, with an 
engine total time of 162.4. The aircraft maintenance logs showed the most recent condition 
inspection had been completed on June 12, 2007 at 120.2 hours total time.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The weather reported at the Spirit of St. Louis Airport (SUS) at 1053 CST (5 miles southwest of 
the accident site) reported a calm wind, 10 miles visibility, few clouds at 25,000 feet, 
temperature 79 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 66 degrees Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting 
of 29.97 inches of Mercury. 
Page 3 of 6DFW08LA157
COMMUNICATIONS
According to the FAA, the St. Louis Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON) had no 
record of radar contacts or communications contacts with the accident airplane.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors that responded to the accident scene 
reported that the airplane was destroyed on impact, with extensive damage from the propeller 
spinner aft to the rear of the aft cockpit. The smell of fuel was present at the scene, but there 
was no post crash fire.
The recording ﬁGﬂ meter in the rear cockpit indicated forces of 8.7 positive and 3.0 negative. 
The FAA inspectors reported that rudder and elevator control continuity was established from 
the control surfaces up to the aft cockpit. Because of crash damage they were unable to further 
determine control continuity.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Saint Louis University Health Sciences Center completed an autopsy.  The cause of death 
was listed as:  Immediate Cause:  Massive Trauma of Head, Chest, Abdomen and Extremities. 
The FAA Toxicology and Accident Research Laboratory performed toxicological testing of 
specimens of the pilot with the following results:  NO CARBON MONOXIDE detected in Blood, 
NO CYANIDE detected in Blood, NO ETHANOL detected in Urine, AZACYCLONOL detected 
in Urine, AZACYCLONOL detected in Liver, BUPROPION detected in Blood, BUPROPION 
detected in Urine, BUPROPION METABOLITE detected in Urine, DIHYDROCODEINE 
detected in Blood, 0.012 (ug/mL, ug/g) DIHYDROCODEINE detected in Urine, 0.019 (ug/ml, 
ug/g) HYDROCODONE detected in Blood, 0.093 (ug/ml, ug/g) HYDROCODONE detected in 
Urine, LOSARTAN detected in Urine, LOSARTAN detected in Liver, QUININE detected in 
Urine, and QUININE detected in Liver.
The pilot had noted on his most recent application for airman medical certificate, dated 
6/21/2007, a history of asthma requiring only intermittent treatment, allergies, high blood 
pressure treated with losartan/hydrochlorothiazide, and use of the cholesterol-lowering 
medication atorvastatin and the antihistamine fexofenadine.  No other conditions or 
medications were noted on that application.  
The pilot™s personal medical records documented a history of chronic knee pain, chronic back 
pain treated with surgery and hydrocodone/acetaminophen (used once a day on average), 
depressive symptoms treated with bupropion extended release 150 mg twice a day, and a 
history of frequent abnormal heart rhythms.  An electrophysiologist documented in 2002 that 
the pilot had a ﬁ–history of recurrent episodes of supraventricular tachycardia – rate of 
approximately 220 beats per minute. – six to seven year history of recurrent episodes – three 
or four times a year – associated with moderate to strenuous activities – abrupt onset of 
palpitations and fullness in his neck – he will lie down and the palpitations will subside after 1 
to 5 minutes. – can be somewhat dangerous for him – discussed the treatment options ...ﬂ  A 
2004 primary care physician™s note indicated ﬁ–Episodic supraventricular tachycardia.  The 
patient has not had any episodes recently.  He has seen [an electrophysiologist] for an opinion, 
but for the time being he is not interested in pursuing that option–ﬂ  
The autopsy report on the pilot noted ﬁArteriosclerotic Heart Disease: Coronary artery, right, 
severe [75% occlusion] atherosclerosis.ﬂ  The report also noted that the blood for toxicology 
Page 4 of 6DFW08LA157
testing was ﬁfrom the chest.ﬂ
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The wreckage was moved to a storage facility. An FAA inspector examined the engine and the 
airframe and found no evidence of preexisting anomalies with either.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Abrupt maneuver
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/21/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
331 hours (Total, all aircraft), 130 hours (Total, this make and model), 20 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
LUCAS D E/ LUCAS K A
Registration:
N114KT
Model/Series:
AcroSport II 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
28
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/12/2007, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1540 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
42 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
162 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-A3B6D
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6DFW08LA157
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSUS, 463 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1054 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
240°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 25000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
ST LOUIS, MO (1H0)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
ST LOUIS, MO (1H0)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1045 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Creve Coeur Airport (1H0)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
463 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
38.703056, -90.566944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Latson
Adopted Date:
05/06/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Danny V Little; FAA St Louis FSDO; St Ann, MO
Larry E Sadowski; FAA St Louis FSDO; St Ann, MO
Publish Date:
05/06/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DFW08LA157
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
