Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Brockport, NY
Accident Number:
NYC08LA199
Date & Time:
06/01/2008, 1203 EDT 
Registration:
N3910R
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172H
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel exhaustion
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The student pilot performed a preflight inspection on the airplane prior to the instructional 
flight and observed 6 gallons of fuel in each fuel tank. The flight instructor and student then 
departed and flew to another airport to practice touch-and-go landings. After flying for 
approximately 1 hour during the return flight, the engine started to "shake" and then lost 
power. The flight instructor performed a forced landing to a field, during which the airplane 
impacted trees. Examination of the airplane revealed approximately 1 gallon of fuel in the right 
tank and 1 quart of fuel in the left tank. The fuel tanks were not compromised and there was no 
indication of a fuel leak in the fuel system. No fuel was observed in the fuel line from the fuel 
tank to the fuel strainer. Prior to the accident flight, the airplane was flown by another pilot for 
1.7 hours. The pilot who flew the previous flight departed with 18 gallons of fuel. Fuel 
consumption calculations performed by a representative of the manufacturer revealed that the 
accident flight would have consumed 8.4 gallons of fuel. The previous flight (1.7 hours in 
duration) would have consumed 11.5 gallons. The flight instructor did not verify the fuel 
quantity prior to departure, did not perform any preflight or en route fuel consumption 
calculations, and did not refuel the airplane at either airport.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion as a result of the flight instructor's 
inadequate preflight planning.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid level (Cause)
Personnel issues
Fuel planning - Instructor/check pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6NYC08LA199
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 1, 2008, at 1203 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172H, N3910R, was substantially 
damaged during a forced landing in Brockport, New York. The certificated flight instructor and 
student pilot were seriously injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed for the instructional flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91.
According to the student pilot, he performed a preflight inspection prior to takeoff and 
observed 6 gallons in each of the two fuel tanks. After departure, the pilots flew to Genesee 
County Airport (GVQ), Batavia, New York, where they practiced touch-and-go landings. During 
the return flight to Ledgedale Airpark (7G0), Brockport, New York, the engine started to 
"shake" and then "lost power," when the airplane was at an altitude of 1,600 feet. The flight 
instructor performed a forced landing to a field, during which the airplane impacted trees, and 
came to rest 150 feet from the tree line.
The flight instructor had no memory of the accident; however, he did remember checking the 
fuel gauges in flight and noting they read 1/4 tank (5 gallons) each side.
PILOT INFORMATION
The certificated flight instructor held ratings for airplane single-engine land and instrument 
airplane. He also held an airline transport pilot certificate and commercial pilot certificate. His 
most recent FAA first-class medical certificate was issued on March 19, 2008. At that time he 
reported 17,320 hours of total flight experience. Examination of the pilot's logbook revealed it 
was labeled "single engine time," and contained entries from March 29, 2008 to May 30, 2008. 
During that time period, the pilot logged 48 hours of flight time, all of which was accumulated 
in make and model of the accident airplane.
 
The student pilot held an FAA second-class medical certificate, issued on April 1, 2008. At that 
time, he reported 14 hours of total flight experience. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The aircraft was owned by the flight instructor and powered by a Continental O-300 engine. 
According to the airplane and engine logbooks, the most recent annual inspection was 
completed on July 10, 2007, with no anomalies noted. The tach time at the annual inspection 
was 7,300 hours and the tach time at the accident was 7,557 hours.
The aircraft had a fuel capacity of 38 gallons of useable fuel, and 1 gallon of unusable fuel.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather reported at Rochester International Airport (ROC), Rochester, New York, about 11 
miles to the east, at 1154, included wind from 280 degrees at 13 knots, gusting to 19 knots, 10 
miles visibility, a broken cloud layer at 3,800 feet, an overcast cloud layer at 4,600 feet, 
temperature 17 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 8 degrees C, and altimeter setting 29.79 inches 
mercury. 
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
Page 3 of 6NYC08LA199
Examination of the airplane by a representative of the airplane manufacturer and the FAA 
inspector revealed approximately 1 gallon of fuel was observed in the right tank and 1 quart of 
fuel was observed in the left tank. The fuel tanks were not compromised and there was no 
indication of a fuel leak in the fuel system. No fuel was observed in the fuel line from the fuel 
tank to the fuel strainer. The fuel selector was set to the 'both' position. The throttle knob was 
full forward, the carburetor heat was in the off position, and the mixture was in the 'rich' 
position. 
The flaps were in the retracted position.
The engine crankshaft was rotated at the propeller flange and valve train continuity and 
compression were obtained on all cylinders. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to the pilot who flew the airplane prior to the accident flight, he departed for his 
flight with 18 gallons of fuel, and flew for 1.7 hours. The pilot reported no mechanical 
anomalies with the airplane during his flight.
The airplane was not refueled prior to the accident flight, which was 1.1 hours in duration, 
according to the aircraft flight log.
Fuel consumption calculations performed by a representative of the manufacturer revealed the 
accident flight would have consumed 8.4 gallons of fuel. The previous flight (1.7 hours in 
duration) would have consumed 11.5 gallons.
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Preflight or dispatch event
Enroute-cruise
Fuel exhaustion (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
47
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/19/2008
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
17320 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 6NYC08LA199
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
26, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/01/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 14 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N3910R
Model/Series:
172H 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
17255410
Landing Gear Type: 
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
O-300 SER
Registered Owner:
MERRITT AIRE LLC
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
Merritt Aire LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC08LA199
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ROC
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1154 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
13 knots / 19 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Batavia, NY (GVQ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Brockport, NY (7G0)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
43.181111, -77.915556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jill M Andrews
Adopted Date:
06/22/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Chris Holliday; FAA/FSDO; Rochester, NY
Tom Moody; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
06/22/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC08LA199
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
