The left main landing gear tire blew out as the airplane rotated for takeoff. The pilot continued 
the takeoff and was able to climb without further incident. He proceed to the field that he 
intended to spray. After dispensing the load of fertilizer, the pilot elected to return to a nearby 
unobstructed auxiliary airstrip to execute a precautionary landing. The pilot stated that he 
touched down on the right wheel, and during the landing roll, he tried to keep the weight of the 
airplane off the left wheel. The airplane started to pull to the left as more weight was placed on 
the flat left tire. Eventually, the tire dug into the ground resulting in the left main gear 
assembly collapsing. The reason for the failure of the left main tire could not be determined. 
failure of the left main tire, which resulted in the pilot's inability to maintain directional control 
of the airplane during the landing roll. 
 On June 1, 1998, at 1600 central daylight time, a Grumman-Schweizer G-164B agricultural 
airplane, N943QC, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while landing near 
Coy, Arkansas.  The non-instrument rated commercial pilot, sole occupant to the airplane, was 
not injured.  The airplane was owned by Farmer's Flying Service of Coy, Inc., and was being 
operated under Title 14 CFR Part 137 at the time of the accident.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local aerial application flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  
The flight originated from a local airstrip approximately 15 minutes prior to the accident.  
According to the pilot, the left main landing gear tire blew out as the main wheels rotated off 
the ground during takeoff.  The aerial application flight was scheduled to dispense a load of 
"Urea" fertilizer on a local rice field.  After the tire blow out, the pilot continued the takeoff and 
was able to climb without further incident and proceed to the field he intended to spray. 
After dispensing the load of fertilizer, the pilot elected to return to a nearby unobstructed 
auxiliary airstrip, located 3 miles south of his home base, known as the Coleman Brothers 
Farm airstrip, to execute a precautionary landing to the north.  The pilot stated that he touched 
down on the right wheel, and during the landing roll, he tried to keep the weight of the airplane 
off the left wheel.   The airplane started to pull to the left as more weight was placed on the flat 
left tire.  Eventually the tire dug into the ground resulting in the left main gear assembly 
collapsing.  The airplane came to rest in the upright position on the east side of the airstrip. 
The pilot stated that he had accumulated over 11,000 flight hours, of which 10,347 were in the 
same make and model of airplane. 
Examination of the 1983 turbine powered biplane by the operator revealed that both left wings 
and the fuselage sustained structural damage.  The reason for the failure of the left main tire 
could not be determined.
