The homebuilt departed the runway and was climbing through 200 feet (AGL) when the pilot 
started a gentle turn to reverse course.  Halfway through the turn the engine lost power.  The 
pilot completed the course reversal, but was unable to maneuver to a suitable landing area 
because of limited attitude and airspeed, and the airplane collided with a track hoe.  Water was 
found in both carburetors and main fuel screen.  According to the pilot/builder, the position of 
the fuel tank sump required the airplane to be in a level attitude in order to completely drain 
water from the tank. 
The pilot's inadequate preflight of the airplane which resulted in water contamination of the 
fuel system.  A factor was the location of the fuel tank's sump. 
 On June 1, 1998, at 1830 eastern daylight time, a home built Fisher Classic airplane, N485AJ, 
was destroyed during a forced landing and collision with a track hoe at Virginia Highlands 
Airport (VJI), Abingdon, Virginia.  The certificated private pilot was seriously injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight, and no flight plan was filed for the 
flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
During a telephone interview, the pilot stated that after completing the preflight inspection, he 
ran the airplane's engine for 20 to 30 minutes before departing Runway 24. After takeoff he 
climbed to 200 feet above ground level (AGL), then started a gentle turn to reverse course.  
Halfway through the turn, he felt a loss in power.  He completed his course reversal, but was 
unable to maneuver to a suitable landing area because of limited attitude and airspeed.  Just 
prior to impacting the track hoe the pilot pitched the nose of the airplane up in an attempt to 
avoid the obstacle, however the airplane impacted the track hoe belly first.
A Federal Aviation Administration Inspector examined the wreckage on June 1, 1998.  The 
examination revealed that both carburetor bowls were 1/4 full of water, and that 2 tablespoons 
of water were found in the main fuel screen. Total time on the airplane was 19 hours.
In a telephone interview, the pilot, who also built the airplane, stated the position of the fuel 
tank sump prevented him from checking the lowest point in the fuel tank, and once the 
airplane was level, water was allowed to flow from the back of the tank to the engine collection 
point.
