The student pilot reported that the itinerary for his solo cross-country flight included stops at 
Mentone and Wink, and a return flight to Pecos. While in cruise flight, the engine began to run 
rough and the engine RPM dropped to somewhere around 1,200 to 1,500 RPM. After 
completing his emergency procedures, the pilot elected to execute a precautionary landing on 
the service road to an operating oil pump. During the precautionary landing on the narrow 
domed road, with the flaps fully extended, the pilot lost control of the airplane. The pilot added 
that the right main landing gear tire dug into the sand. The right main landing gear collapsed 
rearward after striking a large rock. Subsequently, the right wing impacted the ground. The 
reason for the reported rough running engine was not determined. 
a partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons, and the pilot's failure to maintain 
directional control during landing. 
 On June 2, 1998, at 1250 central daylight time, a Cessna 150 airplane, N6486T, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following a partial loss of engine power near 
Mentone, Texas.  The student pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  The 
airplane was owned and operated by the student pilot under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local instructional flight for which a flight plan was 
not filed.  The flight originated from the Lukins Flying Service airstrip near Pecos, Texas, at 
approximately 1230.
The student pilot reported to the FAA inspector that the itinerary for his solo cross country 
flight included stops at Mentone and Wink, and a return flight to Pecos.   While in cruise flight, 
the engine began to run rough and the engine RPM dropped to somewhere around 1,200 to 
1,500 RPM.  After completing his emergency procedures, the pilot elected to execute a 
precautionary landing on the service road to an operating oil pump, located approximately 2 
miles away. 
During the precautionary landing on the narrow domed road, with the flaps fully extended, the 
pilot lost control of the airplane.  The pilot added that the right main landing gear tire dug into 
the sand.  The right main landing gear collapsed rearward after striking a large rock.  
Subsequently, the right wing impacted the ground.
Examination of the airplane by the FAA inspector confirmed that the right wing, the fuselage, 
and the landing gear attaching point for the right main gear, sustained structural damage.  The 
reason for the reported rough running engine could not be determined; however, the pilot 
suspected vapor lock.  The engine could not be started at the accident site due to a dead 
battery. 
According to maintenance records provided by the FAA inspector, the 1960 model airplane had 
been modified on June 15, 1996, when a 150 horsepower Lycoming O-320-E3D engine was 
installed to replace the stock 100 horsepower Continental engine.  The modification, 
performed under STC SA4795SW, also featured a larger propeller and the addition of an STOL 
kit.
According to FAA medical records, the student pilot had accumulated a total of 85 hours at the 
time of his last medical examination on February 11, 1997.  His total time at the time of the 
accident was 107 hours.
