The airline transport pilot reported that, shortly after takeoff on the local sightseeing flight, the 
engine experienced a partial loss of power about 400 ft above ground level. The pilot initiated a 
turn back to the airport and subsequently landed hard on the runway, substantially damaging 
the airplane. 
During the postaccident engine examination, an obstruction was found in one end of the fuel 
hose between the gascolator to the carburetor. The firesleeve on the hose was removed, which 
revealed that the hose entered the fitting at a slight angle that was not visible with the 
firesleeve in place. To facilitate further examination, the hose was cut close to the obstruction. 
The inner surface of the hose appeared cut and curled into the hose near the fitting, consistent 
with the improper assembly of the hose and fitting. It is likely that the curled piece of hose 
acted as a flapper valve that either restricted or cut off fuel flow to the carburetor. The high 
demand for fuel during takeoff depleted the supply of fuel in the carburetor and resulted in the 
loss of power. Although maintenance log entries indicated that the last replacement of the fuel 
hoses occurred 49 years before the accident, given the condition of the hoses, it is likely that a 
subsequent replacement was performed but not documented. 
Improper assembly of a fuel hose, which restricted the fuel supply to the carburetor and 
resulted in a loss of engine power during the initial climb after takeoff. 
On March 2, 2016, about 1300 Pacific standard time, a Boeing A75N1 (PT17), N63555, touched 
down hard during a forced landing following a loss of engine power during the initial climb at 
Palm Springs International Airport, Palm Springs, California. The airline transport pilot 
sustained minor injuries and the passenger was seriously injured. The airplane was 
substantially damaged. Palm Springs Air Museum Inc. was operating the airplane under the 
provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91. The local sightseeing flight was 
originating at the time. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
The pilot reported that the engine lost power passing through 400 ft after takeoff from runway 
31L. He saw houses and other obstacles straight ahead and decided to turn around to land on 
runway 13R. The airplane landed hard on the runway centerline but came to rest aligned about 
30° left of the runway heading.
During the initial examination, the forward end of the fuselage sustained crush damage around 
the front cockpit. The throttle lever in the cockpit would not move due to the damage; all 
linkages were connected from the cockpit to the carburetor. The mixture lever in the cockpit 
would not move due to the damage; all linkages were connected from the cockpit to the 
carburetor. Examination of the wreckage established flight control continuity for all flight 
controls. Portions of the bottom cylinders, numbers four and five, fractured and separated. A 
clear blue fluid, consistent with the smell of Avgas, was drained from the gascolator, and a 
water paste test had no reaction indicating that water contamination was not present. All 
fittings that could be reached were tight. A black fluid consistent with motor oil was evident on 
the dipstick. There was no external evidence of catastrophic mechanical malfunction.
A follow-up examination revealed that the exhaust tube coloration was light brown in color.
The air filter was clean. There was no discoloration in the intake tube at the filter.
The crankshaft was rotated using the propeller; there were no metallic sounds or binding. All 
valves except for the damaged bottom two cylinders moved approximately the same amount of 
lift in firing order. The gears in the accessory case turned freely. Thumb compression was 
obtained on all cylinders in firing order except for the two damaged bottom cylinders.
The carburetor was removed and disassembled. The floats were metal; the bowl contained no 
fluid. The accelerator pump operated without resistance. The throttle lever would not move; 
the housing was crushed; the butterfly valve was almost vertical (fully open). The mixture lever 
moved freely from stop to stop.
The carburetor heat arm was crushed at the box, and the rod end at the bellcrank fractured and 
separated along a jagged and angular plane. The fuel line was removed from the gascolator to 
the carburetor and nothing drained out from the line. The line was connected back to the 
gascolator and the fuel selector valve was turned on; blue fluid came out of the line. The line 
was removed again and an obstruction was seen near one end of the line. The firesleeve was 
removed on the hose. The hose went into the fitting at a slight angle that was not visible with 
the firesleeve in place. The line was cut close to the obstruction. The inner surface of the hose 
appeared cut and curled into the hose at the fitting.
An entry in the maintenance logbooks dated October 20, 1967, recorded that all new gas lines 
were made. There were no entries after that to indicate any work was performed on the gas line 
hoses.
