The airline transport pilot and the passenger departed in the experimental amateur-built 
airplane that he had recently purchased on a cross country flight. After takeoff, the airplane 
drifted slightly right in a wings-level climbing attitude. A turn to the left with a bank angle of 
more than 30° began, and the airplane pitched nose-up followed by an immediate nose-down 
spin to the left. An onboard display unit recorded a left roll in excess of 80° and an indicated 
airspeed of 79 knots. Given that the airplane's estimated stall speed in level flight was about 49 
knots and its estimated stall speed in a 75° bank is about 98 knots, it is likely the airplane 
entered an aerodynamic stall. An examination of the wreckage did not reveal evidence of any 
preimpact anomalies that would have prevented normal operation of the airplane. Damage to 
the propeller blades was consistent with engine power being delivered to the propeller, and 
witness marks indicated that the canopy was latched.
The investigation was unable to determine if the pilot's psychiatric conditions impaired his 
ability during the accident. There was no evidence that the pilot's cardiovascular disease was 
impairing. However, toxicology testing detected high levels of the medications buspirone and 
hydroxyzine and of tetrahydrocannabinol, the active compound in the illicit drug marijuana, in 
the pilot's blood. All three of these drugs are potentially-impairing, central nervous system 
(CNS) depressants, and, in combination, each drug may enhance the CNS depressant effects of 
the other drugs. Therefore, it is likely that the combination of the three drugs impaired the 
pilot's ability to safely fly the airplane. 
The pilot's failure to maintain airplane control during takeoff, which resulted in the airplane 
exceeding its critical angle of attack and an aerodynamic stall/spin. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's impairment due to his combined use of central nervous system 
depressant medications and the illicit drug marijuana, which degraded his ability to maintain 
control of the airplane.
