National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Trenton, SC
Accident Number: ERA14LA059
Date & Time: 12/02/2013, 1530 EST
Registration: N355PT
Aircraft: MOFFITT OSCAR/ KIT PROSTAR A/C
PT2
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, he was conducting a presale inspection of his experimental, amateur- built airplane.
He ensured no debris was present in the gascolator and then conducted a test flight.
During the test flight and while on final approach to land, the engine lost all power, and the pilot subsequently made a forced landing in a field.
A postaccident examination of the gascolator revealed that the strainer bowl was not installed and safety wired in accordance with a service letter issued by the gascolator manufacturer.
As a result, the gascolator strainer bowl became separated from the bail, which caused fuel starvation to the engine and total loss of engine power.
The private pilot sustained minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to and operated by the private pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight.
The flight departed from Twin Lakes Airport (S17), Graniteville, South Carolina at 1500.
According to the pilot, he was conducting an inspection of his airplane in preparation of selling it.
During the inspection he noted that the main fuel tank lines were old and brittle.
He replaced the main fuel tank lines and drained the fuel system.
While draining the fuel system, he discovered debris within the gasculator.
He continued to drain the fuel system until debris was no longer present within the gasculator.
He then checked the system for leaks.
No leaks were noted and the pilot conducted a test flight.
During the test flight, while on final approach to land, the engine lost all power and the pilot conducted a forced landing in a field.
During the descent the airplane struck a tree before coming to rest at the base of the tree.
A post-accident examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed damage to both wings and the airframe.
An examination of the engine conducted and valve train continuity and compression were observed on all cylinders.
Further examination revealed that there was a hole in the number 1 cylinder valve cover.
The cowling was against the valve cover and the screws were punctured through the valve cover.
Examination of the ignition system revealed that the magnetos and leads were all intact.
Due to external damage to the engine an engine run was not performed.
Examination of the intake system revealed no blockage in the air box or carburetor venturi.
The carburetor drain plug was removed and no fuel was observed in the carburetor.
The fuel selector was moved to the "on" position to take a fuel sample from the gasculator and fuel was noted running freely from the gasculator .
The fuel inlet line at the carburetor was removed; air was blown through it and no blockage was noted.
Further examination of the gascolator revealed that between the thumb wheel and the gascolator bowl there was supposed to be an inverted bell that applied pressure to the bottom of the bowl; it was missing.
There was no observable impact damage to the gascolator.
The gascolator also contained a handmade gasket made from a cork material and there was no safety wire on the gascolator.
The pilot stated to the FAA inspector that he believed that the gascolator was salvaged from a PA-28 airplane when his airplane was built.
He went on to say that the gascolator always seemed to be loose, but the thumb wheel would not turn any more to tighten it further.
Oil and dirt residue were found throughout the cowling.
In the area were the gascolator was mounted the oil and dirt residue was gone and the cowling appeared clean.
The gascolator was consistent with a Piper part number 63839-03 gascolator.
A review of the Piper Service Letter 1141, dated April 11, 2011 was performed.
The service letter called out a new procedure for safety wiring the bail assembly on the gascolator.
The gasket that Piper required for this gascolator was made from rubber.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88502
