Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
ALMYRA, AR
Accident Number:
FTW01LA018
Date & Time:
11/01/2000, 1405 CST 
Registration:
N8710W
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28-235
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that the flight was in cruise at 7,000 feet when ' the engine quit without 
notice, as though the mags had been turned off-no sputtering or gradual loss of engine power.'  
He executed a forced landing to a field, where the airplane came to rest upright.  Postaccident 
examination of the engine revealed that the upper retaining screw for the crankshaft idler gear 
had separated.  The lower retaining screw remained intact; however, it exhibited excessive 
wear and the bolt hole for this screw was severely elongated.  Metallurgical examination 
revealed that the upper retaining screw fractured in high stress, low cycle fatigue.  The 
examination further revealed that the upper screw most likely fractured after the lower screw 
had come loose. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the loss of engine power due to the crankshaft idler gear's loose lower retaining screw, which 
resulted in the fatigue failure of the crankshaft idler gear's upper retaining screw. 
Page 2 of 6FTW01LA018
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - LOOSE
2. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - FATIGUE
3. ACCESSORY DRIVE ASSY,DRIVE GEAR - FAILURE
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - OPEN FIELD
Page 3 of 6FTW01LA018
Factual Information
 On November 1, 2000, at 1405 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-235 airplane, N8710W, 
was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power near 
Almyra, Arkansas.  The airplane was registered to Internet-Duncan, Inc, of Duncan, Oklahoma.  
The commercial pilot, who was the operator of the airplane, sustained serious injuries and his 
passenger sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an IFR 
flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The cross-
country flight originated from the Texarkana Regional Airport, Texarkana, Arkansas, at 1250, 
and was destined for the Tunica Municipal Airport, Tunica, Mississippi.
According to the pilot, the flight departed Texarkana with 84 gallons of fuel and climbed to a 
cruising altitude of 7,000 feet.  He stated that "the engine quit without notice, as though the 
mags had been turned off-no sputtering or gradual loss of engine power."  The pilot declared 
an emergency to air traffic control (ATC) and attempted to re-start the engine; however, the 
engine would not re-start.  Air traffic control provided the pilot with vectors to the Almyra 
Municipal Airport, Almyra, Arkansas.  Subsequently, the pilot informed ATC that he would be 
unable to make Almyra and was executing a forced landing in a field.  The airplane came to rest 
upright in the field, one mile north of the Almyra Airport.   
The FAA inspector, who examined the airplane at the accident site, reported that the left wing 
was bent 90 degrees upward at the wing root and the right wing was structurally damaged.  
Fuel was observed in the right main fuel tank and right wing tip tank.  The left main fuel tank 
and left wing tip tank were compromised.  Initial responders to the accident site stated that a 
"puddle of fuel" was observed beneath the left wing in the area of the main fuel cell.  The 
inspector added that both propeller blades were bent aft and the engine firewall was buckled.
According to the aircraft's maintenance logbooks, the airframe and engine underwent their 
most recent annual inspection on October 5, 2000, 9.01 flight hours prior to the accident.  At 
the time of the accident, the airframe had accumulated a total of 3,067.51 flight hours and the 
engine had accumulated a total of 1,635.00 hours since overhaul.  No record of open 
maintenance discrepancies was found in the logbooks.
The Textron Lycoming O-540-B4B5 engine was examined at Dawson's Aircraft, Clinton, 
Arkansas, by the NTSB Investigator-In-Charge, an FAA Inspector, and a representative from 
Textron Lycoming.  The propeller was rotated by hand and continuity to the accessory gear 
section was not established.  The accessory housing was removed and the gear teeth of 
crankshaft idler gear were found worn and uneven around the gear's entire circumference.  The 
crankshaft idler gear was removed exposing the gear shaft.  The shaft is secured to the engine 
housing with two 5/16" hexhead screws.  The upper retaining screw was separated at the 
crankcase with one half of the screw remaining in the crankcase.  The other half of the screw 
was found in the oil sump.  The lower retaining screw remained intact; however, the bolt hole 
for the screw was elongated 0.5-inch in width and 1.0-inch in length and the screw was severely 
worn.  The crankshaft idler gear shaft locking plate was found in the oil sump.
The separated upper retaining cap screw, the lower retaining cap screw, the crankshaft idler 
gear shaft, crankshaft idler gear, and crankshaft idler gear shaft locking plate were sent to the 
Textron Lycoming Materials Laboratory, Williamsport, Pennsylvania, for examination.  The 
metallurgist determined that "the upper retaining cap screw fractured in high stress low cycle 
fatigue."  The metallurgist further determined that the upper screw "most likely fractured after 
Page 4 of 6FTW01LA018
the lower retaining cap screw had come loose."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/12/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
659 hours (Total, all aircraft), 405 hours (Total, this make and model), 628 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 33 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N8710W
Model/Series:
PA-28-235 PA-28-235
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-10243
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/05/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
9 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3067 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-540-B4B5
Registered Owner:
INTERNET-DUNCAN, INC.
Rated Power:
235 hp
Operator:
TERRY D. WOMACK
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW01LA018
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SGT, 224 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
12 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1355 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 21 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
190°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
TEXARKANA, AR (TXK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
TUNICA, MS (M97)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1250 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
ALMYRA (M73)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
208 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JASON      A RAGOGNA
Adopted Date:
07/10/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
JACKIE   BROWN; LITTLE ROCK, AR
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW01LA018
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
