Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
RIDGEFIELD, CT
Accident Number:
NYC01LA030
Date & Time:
11/02/2000, 1845 EST 
Registration:
N4654G
Aircraft:
Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that shortly before takeoff, she switched the airplane's fuel selector from the 
"right" position to the "both" position.  During the initial climb after takeoff, the airplane's 
engine experienced momentary roughness followed by a loss of power.  The pilot began 
performing the loss of engine power emergency checklist and verified that both the mixture 
and throttle controls were in the full forward position; however, she then needed to use both 
hands to maintain the airplane's glide attitude and was not able to verify the fuel selector 
position.  The airplane struck trees, fell to ground and a post crash fire ensued.  The majority of 
the airplane was consumed in the fire.  A complete teardown of the engine did not reveal any 
pre-impact mechanical failures.  Examination of the fuel selector revealed its position was 
approximately 35-degrees counterclockwise from the "both" tanks position, towards the "left" 
tank position; which would have resulted in a restricted fuel flow. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to verify the airplane's fuel tank selector position, which resulted in a loss of 
engine power. 
Page 2 of 6NYC01LA030
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
2. (C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - NOT VERIFIED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6NYC01LA030
Factual Information
 On November 2, 2000, about 1845 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172N, N4654G, was 
destroyed during a forced landing and post crash fire in Ridgefield, Connecticut, after takeoff 
from the Danbury Municipal Airport (DXR), Danbury, Connecticut.  The certificated private 
pilot sustained minor injuries.  Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan had been filed for the local flight.  The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 
91.
In a telephone interview, the pilot stated that she performed a pre-flight inspection of the 
airplane, and noted that the airplane's fuel tanks were completely filled.  Additionally, she 
stated that she drained fuel from the airplane's three drain sources and the fuel was absent of 
contamination.  She started the engine with the fuel selector positioned to the left wing fuel 
tank, and switched to the right wing fuel tank just prior to taxi.  She performed an engine run-
up, which included a check of the carburetor heat system and then taxied to runway 26 for 
takeoff with the intention of practicing "touch and go" landings.  After the engine run-up she 
switch the fuel selector to the "both" position.  The time between the engine run-up and takeoff 
was "less than 5 minutes."
The pilot described the takeoff as "perfectly normal."  When the airplane was about 450 feet 
above the ground she glanced at the engine instruments, which were all in the normal range; 
however, immediately thereafter the airplane's engine experienced momentary roughness 
followed by a loss of power.  The pilot began performing the loss of engine power emergency 
checklist and verified that both the mixture and throttle controls were in the full forward 
position; however, she then needed to use both hands to maintain the airplane's glide attitude 
and was not able to verify the fuel selector position.  The pilot made a left turn and the airplane 
descend into treetops and initially came to rest about 12 to 15 feet above the ground.  The 
airplane then fell to ground and a post crash fire ensued.  The pilot exited the airplane through 
the front windshield, which was broken during the accident sequence, and the majority of the 
airplane was consumed in the fire.
The pilot reported 560 hours of total flight experience, with 250 hours in make and model.  
Additionally, she stated that she flew the airplane eight days prior to the accident and did not 
experience any problems.
The airplane's engine also sustained fire damaged.  Both magnetos and the ignition harness 
were destroyed.  Additionally, the carburetor was destroyed by impact and fire damage.  The 
engine was retained and forwarded to Textron Lycoming, Williamsport, Pennsylvania, where it 
was examined under the supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration inspector.  A 
complete teardown of the engine did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical failures.    
The airplane's fuel selector, which was partially melted, was retained and forwarded to the 
Safety Board's Materials Laboratory, Washington, DC, for further examination.  Examination 
of the fuel selector revealed its "as received" position was approximately 35-degrees 
counterclockwise from the "both" tanks position, towards the "left" tank position.
A representative from Cessna Aircraft Company stated that the position of the fuel selector as 
observed after the accident would have resulted in a fuel restriction; however, he noted the 
effect on engine performance if the valve remained in that position over an extended period of 
time had never been tested.
Page 4 of 6NYC01LA030
Review of the Airplane Information Manual, Section 4 - Normal Procedures, Before Takeoff 
Checklist instructed that the fuel selector valve be placed in the "both" position.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/08/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
560 hours (Total, all aircraft), 250 hours (Total, this make and model), 480 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N4654G
Model/Series:
172N 172N
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17273280
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/02/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
125 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3000 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A4M
Registered Owner:
SUSAN L. BOGDAN
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
SUSAN L. BOGDAN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC01LA030
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DXR, 458 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1853 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
52°C / 34°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (DXR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1845 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
DANBURY MUNICIPAL (DXR)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
458 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
26
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4422 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
LUKE         SCHIADA
Adopted Date:
09/27/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
WILLIAM K DEKINE; WINDSOR LOCKS, CT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC01LA030
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
