National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LAKE ELMO, MN
Accident Number: CHI98LA003
Date & Time: 10/02/1997, 0605 CDT
Registration: N916TM
Aircraft: Beech E18S
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The pilot reported that the airplane lifted off at 70 knots.
After accelerating in ground effect the airplane became 'unstable in the roll axis' so he added power.
He reported that the left wing tip contacted the runway approximately 3/4 the way down the runway.
The pilot then added additional power at which point the left wing contacted the grass off the left side of the departure end of the runway.
The pilot then reduced the power to idle and landed the airplane in the grass collapsing the landing gear.
The pilot reported that the engines sounded normal throughout the accident sequence.
Investigation revealed another Beech 18 had taken off on the same runway, but in the opposite direction of N916TM less than one minute prior to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure identify the unsafe condition (vortex turbulence) which existed due to departing airplane and his subsequent inability to control the airplane once encountering the turbulence.
Findings Occurrence #1: VORTEX TURBULENCE ENCOUNTERED Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) UNSAFE/HAZARDOUS CONDITION - NOT IDENTIFIED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: DRAGGED WING,ROTOR,POD,FLOAT OR TAIL/SKID Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 3.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
Neither the pilot nor the pilot-rated passenger on board were injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The airplane was being flown to Minneapolis, Minnesota, to pick up a cargo load when the accident occurred.
The airplane lifted off at 70 knots.
He reported he allowed the airplane to accelerate in ground effect for several seconds after which time the airplane became "... unstable in the roll axis."
He reported he added power as there was not enough runway left to land on.
The airplane was 3/4 the way down the runway when the left wing tip touched the runway.
He reported that at this point he added more power at which point the left wing tip contacted the terrain off the left side of the departure end of the runway causing the nose to pitch up.
He then reduce the power to idle and the aircraft touched down in the grass collapsing the landing gear.
The pilot stated that the airplane normally lifts off between 70 and 75 knots when it is light.
In addition, he stated that the engines sounded normal during the accident sequence.
An inspector from the Minneapolis, Minnesota, FAA Flight Standards District Office reported that another Beech 18 had taken off on the same runway, but in the opposite direction of N916TM less than one minute prior to the accident.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
