National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: FORT LAUDERDALE, FL
Incident Number: MIA98IA001
Date & Time: 10/01/1997, 1615 EDT
Registration: N168WS
Aircraft: Grumman G-73
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis After lowering the landing gear the pilot confirmed that it was down and locked while on final approach.
After touchdown during the landing roll, the nose landing gear collapsed.
Post incident trouble shooting of the hydraulic system revealed that the landing gear hydraulic selector valve failed to hold pressure resulting in the collapse of the nose landing gear.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be: the partial failure of a component of the hydraulic system resulting in the collapse of the nose landing gear during the landing roll.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) HYDRAULIC SYSTEM - FAILURE,PARTIAL Factual Information On October 1, 1997, about 1615 eastern daylight time, a Grumman G-73, N168WS, registered to Pantechnicon Aviation Ltd., experienced a collapse of the nose landing gear during the landing roll at the Fort Lauderdale-Hollywood International Airport, Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 type-rating flight.
The airplane sustained minor damage and the airline-transport rated type rating applicant/pilot, second pilot, and an FAA operations inspector were not injured.
The flight originated about 1215 from the same airport.
The pilot-in-command stated that the gear operated normally during the flight which included several gear extensions and retractions.
While on final approach, the landing gear indicator indicated that the gear was down which was confirmed once after landing gear extension, and again on short final.
After touchdown during the landing roll at an indicated airspeed of about 40 knots, the nose landing gear collapsed.
Post incident trouble shooting of the hydraulic system revealed that the landing gear hydraulic selector valve failed to hold pressure resulting in the collapse of the nose landing gear.
Pressure testing of the valve revealed that a poppet valve part number 27580, was bypassing fluid.
The O-rings were replaced and the poppet valve continued to bypass fluid.
: 12500 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 35 Hours Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 7145 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: R-1340 Registered Owner: PANTECHNICON AVIATION LTD.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
