National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FARGO, ND
Accident Number: CHI98LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/1997, 0830 CDT
Registration: N5168A
Aircraft: Cessna T210N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot extended the landing gear 3 to 4 miles prior to landing.
During the landing flare the landing gear warning horn sounded.
The pilot reported that it was too late to initiate a go- around so he continued the landing during which the landing gear collapsed.
Postaccident testing of the landing gear system revealed the hydraulic pump circuit breaker would pop when the landing gear was extended.
This resulted in the gear being in a trailing unlocked position.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the circuit breaker for the hydraulic pump popped during gear extension which resulting in the failure of the landing gear to lock in the extended position.
Findings Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM,CIRCUIT BREAKER - POPPED/TRIPPED 2.
(C) HYDRAULIC SYSTEM,PUMP - INOPERATIVE 3.
(C) LANDING GEAR,GEAR LOCKING MECHANISM - NOT ENGAGED 4.
GEAR DOWN AND LOCKED - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On October 1, 1997, at 0830 central daylight time, a Cessna T210N, N5168A, operated by a commercial pilot collided with the terrain when the landing gear collapsed on touchdown.
The landing was being made on runway 17 at the Hector International Airport, Fargo, North Dakota.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The pilot was not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The flight originated from a private airstrip in Hillsboro, North Dakota, at 0800.
The pilot reported he extended the landing gear 3 to 4 miles prior to touchdown at an airspeed of 120 knots.
He reported that he kept his hand on the gear lever until it was down at which time he made a visual check to assure it was down.
He reported that during the landing flare he heard the gear warning horn; however, it was too late to initiate a go-around.
The landing gear collapsed as the airplane touched down.
Post accident testing of the landing gear system revealed the hydraulic pump circuit breaker would pop when the landing gear was extended leaving the gear in a trailing unlocked position.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 71, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 4000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 54 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2641 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: TSIO-520-R Registered Owner: DANIEL J.
DOWN Rated Power: 310 hp Operator: DANIEL J.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
