National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NEW IBERIA, LA
Accident Number: FTW98LA002
Date & Time: 10/02/1997, 1440 CDT
Registration: N2163Y
Aircraft: Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The flight instructor (CFI) was demonstrating an autorotation with a 180 degree turn to a soft sod area.
The CFI reported that the helicopter touched down with only slight forward speed in a slightly nose low attitude.
Following touchdown, the skids dug into the soft ground, and the helicopter began pitching forward.
The CFI applied 'slight downward collective.'
Subsequently, the helicopter nosed over, the main rotor blades contacted the ground, and the helicopter came to rest on its left side.
The commercial pilot, who was receiving instruction, reported that the helicopter touched down smoothly in a level attitude 'carrying 5 to 10 knots forward speed.'
An FAA inspector recommended that local helicopter operators discontinue using the sod area for running landings and autorotations until the ground is considered hard enough for practice running landings.
The CFI stated that at the time of the accident, the wind was variable, but generally aligned with the direction of landing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: improper touchdown by the flight instructor.
A related factor was: soft sod in the touchdown/landing area.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - SIMULATED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 4.
The flight instructor sustained minor injuries, and the commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company flight plan was filed.
The flight originated from the Lafayette Regional Airport, Lafayette, Louisiana, about 40 minutes prior to the accident.
According to the operator, the flight instructor was demonstrating an autorotation with a 180 degree turn to the sod area adjacent to Seaway 34.
The operator added that "the winds were variable, but were generally aligned with the landing direction."
The fight instructor reported to the operator that "the aircraft touched down with only slight forward speed in a slightly nose low attitude."
Following touchdown, the helicopter began pitching over on its nose and the flight instructor applied "slight downward collective."
Subsequently, the helicopter nosed over, the main rotor blades contacted the ground ,and the helicopter came to rest on its left side.
The commercial pilot receiving instruction stated in the narrative portion of the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), that the aircraft touched down smoothly in a level attitude.
He added that "we were carrying 5 to 10 knots forward speed" during the landing.
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that the tailboom was separated at the fuselage, the airframe sustained structural damage, and the main rotor and tail rotor blades were damaged.
The FAA inspector confirmed that the ground was very soft and this condition contributed to the skids of the helicopter to dig into the soft ground, resulting in the helicopter to nose over.
The FAA inspector recommended that the local helicopter operators to discontinue using the sod area for running landings and autorotations until the sod area is hard enough to practice running landing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial; Private Age: 27, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Helicopter Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
