National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Sanford, FL
Accident Number: MIA02LA163
Date & Time: 09/01/2002, 1000 EDT
Registration: N68414
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student said it was his first solo flight, and he had made an uneventful approach and landing.
As he was reconfiguring the airplane for takeoff following the touch-and-go landing, and as he applied takeoff power, the airplane veered to the left of the runway centerline, into the grass and subsequently into a shallow ditch where it flipped over incurring damage.
Prior to the accident, there had been no mechanical failures or malfunction to the aircraft or any of its systems.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The student-rated pilot was not injured, and the airplane incurred substantial damage.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the student, it was his first solo flight, and he had made an uneventful approach and landing.
He said he was reconfiguring the airplane for takeoff following the touch-and-go landing, and as he applied takeoff power the airplane veered to the left of the runway centerline, into the grass and subsequently into a shallow ditch where the ground had been wet after much rain.
The nosewheel dug into the soft ground and the airplane flipped over onto its back, incurring damage to the wings and fuselage.
Prior to the accident, there had been no mechanical failures or malfunction to the aircraft or any of its systems.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 26, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
