National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ANCHORAGE, AK
Accident Number: ANC02LA112
Date & Time: 09/01/2002, 1900 AKD
Registration: N6981B
Aircraft: Piper PA-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private certificated pilot was landing at a remote airstrip.
The landing strip, oriented southeast/northwest, is about 600 feet long, by 15 feet wide, and is positioned on a ridge of a mountain.
The pilot said he was landing toward the southeast, and touched down on the strip about 1/3 of its total distance beyond the landing threshold.
He applied the airplane's brakes, but the tires began to slide on wet grass.
The airplane departed off the end of the landing strip.
The left main landing gear tire struck a hole about 300 feet past the end of the landing strip, and the left main landing gear was sheared off.
The airplane received damage to the propeller, the left wing lift strut, and the left wing.
The pilot reported that after the accident, he utilized a hand-held wind meter and discovered he had landed with about a 5 knot tailwind.
The Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, contained an optional area for recommendations as to how the accident could have been prevented.
The pilot indicated that his recommendation was, "Perform go-around instead of landing long."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to attain the proper touchdown point on a remote airstrip, and his failure to perform a go-around that resulted in the airplane overrunning the end of the strip.
Factors in the accident were the pilot's inadequate evaluation of a tailwind condition, and a wet landing surface.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 2.
(F) WEATHER EVALUATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - WET 5.
(C) GO-AROUND - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 6.
LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - OVERLOAD Factual Information On September 1, 2002, about 1900 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire-equipped Piper PA-18 airplane, N6981B, sustained substantial damage when the airplane collided with a ditch during an overrun while landing at a remote airstrip, about 32 miles west of Anchorage, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a Title 14, CFR Part 91 visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the pilot.
The private certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The flight originated at the Lake Hood Strip, Anchorage, about 1830.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on September 4, the pilot reported that he was landing near the top of Little Mount Susitna.
The landing strip, oriented southeast/northwest, is about 600 feet long, by 15 feet wide, and is positioned on a ridge of the mountain.
The pilot said he was landing toward the southeast, but touched down on the strip about 1/3 of its total distance beyond the landing threshold.
He applied the airplane brakes, but the airplane tires began to slide on wet grass.
The airplane departed off the end of the landing strip into an area of low bushes on a down sloping portion of the landing area.
The left main landing gear tire struck a hole about 300 feet past the end of the landing strip.
The airplane's left main landing gear was sheared off.
The pilot reported that after the accident, he utilized a hand-held wind meter, and discovered about a five knot tailwind.
The airplane received damage to the propeller and the left wing lift strut.
Additionally, the outboard end of the left wing was bent upward about 20 degrees.
The Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, contained an optional area for recommendations as to how the accident could have been prevented.
The pilot indicated that his recommendation was, "Perform go-around instead of landing long."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
