National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SEWARD, AK
Accident Number: ANC02LA126
Date & Time: 09/02/2002, 1600 AKD
Registration: N9808X
Aircraft: Cessna 185
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The commercial certificated pilot was departing a remote grass-covered airstrip in a tundra tire-equipped airplane.
The airstrip is oriented northeast/southwest, and is about 800 feet long by about 30 feet wide.
The pilot said that he taxied to the end of the airstrip to depart toward the southwest.
He applied full power and the airplane began to veer to the left.
He said he attempted to correct the left turn by application of the right brake, but the airplane slid on the wet grass surface of the runway.
The left wing struck the top of a small tree along the left side of the airstrip.
The pilot indicated the airplane continued in a left arc, off the left side of the runway, and collided with a large tree.
The airplane received damage to the left wing, fuselage, engine motor mounts, and propeller.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of directional control of the airplane due to the failure of the pilot to correct for torque/P Factor during the takeoff roll.
A factor in the accident was a wet grass surface.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - WET 2.
(C) TORQUE/P-FACTOR - NOT CORRECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS 4.
DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 5.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On September 2, 2002, about 1600 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire-equipped Cessna 185 airplane, N9808X, sustained substantial damage when it collided with trees during the takeoff roll from a remote airstrip, about 58 miles east of Seward, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the pilot, with an intended destination of Merrill Field, Anchorage, Alaska.
The commercial certificated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
No flight plan was filed, nor was one required.
On October 1, 2002, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) personnel notified the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) that the accident airplane received damage during takeoff from a grass-covered airstrip on Montague Island.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on October 2, the pilot reported that he was departing an old Forest Service airstrip located at Patton Bay on Montague Island for a flight to Merrill Field.
The airstrip is oriented northeast/southwest, and is about 800 feet long by about 30 feet wide.
The pilot said that he taxied to the end of the airstrip to depart toward the southwest.
He applied full power and the airplane began to veer to the left.
He said he attempted to correct the left turn by application of the right brake, but the airplane slid on the wet grass surface of the runway.
The left wing struck the top of a small tree along the left side of the airstrip.
The pilot indicated the airplane continued in a left arc, off the left side of the runway, and collided with a large tree.
The airplane received damage to the left wing, fuselage, engine motor mounts, and propeller.
The pilot reported the wind at the time of the accident was from the north at 10 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
