National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CHICKALOON, AK
Accident Number: ANC02LA113
Date & Time: 09/02/2002, 1700 AKD
Registration: N3233M
Aircraft: Piper PA-12
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The commercial certificated pilot was landing the tundra tire-equipped airplane on a remote airstrip to pick up a hunter.
The gravel surface airstrip, oriented north/south, is about 900 feet long and 10 feet wide.
The pilot said he was landing toward the north.
During the landing roll, the pilot reported that the tail came up too high, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane received damage to the propeller, cowling, right wing, the right wing lift strut, and the top of the rudder.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during the landing roll, which precipitated a nose over.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country positioning flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by Grasshopper Aviation, Wasilla, Alaska.
The commercial certificated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated at the Wasilla Airport, about 1615.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on September 3, the pilot reported he was landing on an airstrip known as 30 mile strip to pick up a hunter.
The gravel surface airstrip, oriented north/south, is about 900 feet long and 10 feet wide.
The pilot said he was landing toward the north.
During the landing roll, the pilot reported that the tail came up too high, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane received damage to the propeller, cowling, right wing, the right wing lift strut, and the top of the rudder.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
