National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fort Pierce, FL
Accident Number: MIA02LA165
Date & Time: 09/01/2002, 1253 EDT
Registration: N33N
Aircraft: Cessna T337D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he estimated that at takeoff the airplane had about 35 gallons of fuel on board, and after about 45 minutes, while in cruise flight, at an altitude of 4500 feet, the front engine suddenly ceased operating.
He stated that he had experienced problems in the past with water in the fuel tanks, so he did not declare an emergency, even after unsuccessful attempts to restart the engine.
He said the airplane was maintaining 120 knots, and fully controllable while being only powered by the rear engine.
He said that in his mind,  it was only water in the left tank, and his destination,  Fort Pierce, Florida,  was only 10 miles away, so he continued to his destination.
He said the only area to land was a small field on the right, so he turned 90 degrees, and entered a dive to prevent the airplane from stalling.
The aircraft impacted in an orange grove, rebounded once,  and then stopped in a canal.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's misjudgment of the fuel supply, and subsequent fuel exhaustion.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) FUEL SUPPLY - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On September 1, 2002, about 1253 eastern daylight time, a Cessna T337D, N33N, registered to K.R.
Aviation Inc., and operated by a private individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, made a forced landing in an orange grove in Fort Pierce, Florida.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The commercial-rated pilot received serious injuries, and the commercial-rated passenger received minor injuries.
The airplane incurred substantial damage.
The flight departed from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, the same day, about 1130.
The pilot stated that he estimated that at takeoff the airplane had about 35 gallons of fuel on board, and after about 45 minutes, while in cruise flight, at an altitude of 4,500 feet, the front engine suddenly ceased operating.
He stated that he had experienced problems in the past with water in the fuel tanks, so he did not declare an emergency, even after unsuccessful attempts to restart the engine.
He said the airplane was maintaining 120 knots, and fully controllable while being only powered by the rear engine.
He said that in his mind,  it was only water in the left tank, and his destination,  Fort Pierce, Florida,  was only 10 miles away, so he continued to his destination.
He said the only area to land was a small field on the right, so he turned 90 degrees, and entered a dive to prevent the airplane from stalling.
The aircraft impacted in an orange grove, rebounded once,  and then stopped in a canal.
The pilot stated the engines failed due to fuel "starvation", and added that "the airplane had not been loaded with enough fuel..."   Prior to the accident, the pilot said that there were no mechanical failures or malfunctions to the airplane or to any of its systems.
The FAA Inspector who responded to the accident scene stated that during his examination he discovered no fuel in the fuel tanks, and mimimal fuel at the scene.
: Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: TSIO-360-A3 Registered Owner: K. R. Aviation Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
