National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Stow, MA
Accident Number: NYC02LA179
Date & Time: 09/01/2002, 1150 EDT
Registration: N5091X
Aircraft: Champion 7ECA
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was landing the tail-wheeled airplane on runway 3, a 2,770 foot-long, 48 foot-wide, asphalt runway.
After touchdown, the airplane began to bounce and veer to the right.
The airplane departed the right side of the runway and the pilot applied full power in an attempt to climb; however the airplane struck a car parked in an aircraft tie down area.
Winds reported at an airport about 11 miles east of the accident site were from 120 degrees at 8 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper recover from a bounce landing, which resulted in a loss of directional control and collision with a vehicle.
A factor in this accident was the crosswind condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 3.
OBJECT - VEHICLE Factual Information On September 1, 2002, about 1150 eastern daylight time, a Champion 7ECA, N5091X, was substantially damaged when it struck a parked vehicle while landing at the Minute Man Air Field (6B6), Stow, Massachusetts.
The certificated private pilot and passenger sustained minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The tail-wheeled airplane was landing on runway 3, a 2,770 foot-long, 48 foot-wide, asphalt runway.
The pilot reported that the approach was normal; however, after touchdown, the airplane bounced and began to veer to the right.
The airplane departed the right side of the runway and the pilot applied full power in an attempt to climb; however the airplane struck a car parked in an aircraft tie down area.
Two witnesses at the airport stated they observed the airplane bouncing after touchdown.
One witness said: "...Once the main gear touched, the tail came down swiftly, touched the surface, and just as swiftly went back up.
It appeared that the propeller was about to strike when the tail started lowering again and the aircraft went airborne, after which the aircraft porpoised once or twice.
On what I believe was the second porpoise, the left wing came up first, and the plane veered towards the right.
The plane continued on this course, bouncing once on the right main gear in the grass, then the tail wheel bounced, but the left main gear did not touch this final time.
The plane was headed straight for the line of parked cars and planes..." The pilot reported 421 hours of total flight experience, which included 35 hours in make and model.
He did not report any mechanical malfunctions.
Winds reported at an airport about 11 miles east of 6B6, at 1156, were from 120 degrees at 8 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
