Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Walkerville, MI
Accident Number:
CEN13LA086
Date & Time:
12/01/2012, 1420 CST 
Registration:
N3755Z
Aircraft:
BELL 47G-2
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Low altitude operation/event
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The passenger reported that the pilot was maneuvering the helicopter over an area of tree-
covered marsh at a low altitude when the helicopter entered a descent, collided with trees, and 
impacted the ground on its left side. An examination of the wreckage found damage consistent 
with the main rotor blades being driven by the engine when they contacted the trees. Although 
the passenger reported hearing a loud sound before the helicopter started descending, 
postaccident examination of the helicopter revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical 
malfunction or failure that would have precluded normal operation. The circumstances of the 
accident are consistent with the pilot failing to maintain altitude while maneuvering at low 
airspeed and low altitude, which resulted in the helicopter descending into trees.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain altitude while maneuvering, which resulted in a collision with 
trees. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's decision to fly at a low altitude, which did not 
provide enough margin to recover from the descent.
Findings
Aircraft
Altitude - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Page 2 of 5CEN13LA086
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On December 1, 2012, about 1420 central standard time, a Bell 47G-2 helicopter, N3755Z, 
collided with trees and impacted terrain near Walkerville, Michigan. The commercial pilot was 
fatally injured and the passenger was seriously injured. The helicopter was substantially 
damaged. The helicopter was owned and operated by a private individual under the provisions 
of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight plan. The flight originated from private 
property at an undetermined time.
According to information provided by local law enforcement and the responding Federal 
Aviation Administration inspectors, the helicopter travelled at a low altitude when a loud noise 
was heard by the passenger. The helicopter descended and impacted trees and a marsh.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 49, held a commercial helicopter pilot certificate. On May 2, 2000, the pilot was 
issued an unrestricted second class medical certificate. On the medical application, the pilot 
reported having accumulated 4,000 hours of total time. The pilot's logbook was not available 
for review during the investigation. It is unknown when the pilot accomplished his most recent 
flight review.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The single engine, low skid, full bubble canopy, three-seat helicopter, serial number 1698, was 
manufactured in 1957. It was powered by a 200-horsepower Lycoming VO-435-A1 engine. The 
log books were not available for review and the helicopter's last annual inspection is unknown.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
At 1414, an automated weather reporting facility at Fremont Municipal Airport, located 17 
nautical miles to the south-southeast of the accident location, reported wind from 110 degrees 
at 7 knots, visibility 4 miles, haze, ceiling broken at 1,000 feet, broken at 1,600 feet, 
temperature 43 degrees Fahrenheit (F), dew point 37 F, and a barometric pressure of 30.03 
inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The wreckage was located in a wooded marsh in the Manistee National Forest, also known as 
Tanner's Swamp. Only the trees within about a rotor disk circumference of the helicopter 
exhibited blade strikes. The helicopter came to rest on its left side. All parts of the helicopter 
were accounted for at the accident site and the helicopter was recovered and transported to a 
hanger for an examination. 
Inspectors from the Federal Aviation Administration and representatives from Scott's Bell 47 
attended the examination. The main rotors were fractured a few feet from the rotor mast with 
corresponding impact damage to the leading edge of the blades. The flight controls were 
fractured in several locations, but exhibited no preimpact malfunctions. Several of the engine 
cooling fan blades had leading edge damage with signatures consistent with the fan being 
driven at the time of impact. Engine control continuity was established from the controls to the 
carburetor throttle shaft. The main fuel strainer and carburetor fuel inlet finger screen 
Page 3 of 5CEN13LA086
contained an unmeasured amount of fuel.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An autopsy was conducted on the pilot by Spectrum Health, Grand Rapids, Michigan. The 
cause of death was blunt force injuries of the chest and abdomen. The manner of death was 
ruled an accident.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The specimens tested negative for 
carbon monoxide, ethanol, and drugs.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Bell 47 Flight Characteristics
Scott's Bell 47 representatives reported the following concerning turns in a Bell 47:
A characteristic of the Bell 47 is a best power to airspeed combination encountered in level 
flight at 45 miles per hour (MPH), indicated airspeed (IAS.) This characteristic is often 
demonstrated in flight training and may be validated when in level flight at 45 MPH IAS 
increasing or decreasing airspeed by cyclic input alone results in loss of altitude. For this 
reason pilots must always be mindful of airspeed and power when maneuvering at low level 
and reduced airspeed. As 45 MPH is the best power / airspeed combination and also the target 
airspeed for best autorotational descent, this is also the best and safest airspeed selected for 
low level observation and reconnaissance flight. When turning downwind from stabilized flight 
into wind at 45 MPH IAS, if no control input is made, the turn into downwind will result in 
reduced airspeed and the aircraft will tend to settle. The settling tendency is avoided by a 
coordinated management of increased power and airspeed control to maintain the desired 
altitude.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Low altitude operation/event (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
49
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/03/2000
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
4000 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5CEN13LA086
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N3755Z
Model/Series:
47G-2 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1698
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
VO-435-A1
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KFFX
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1414 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
345째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Broken / 1000 ft agl
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 1000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.03 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6째C / 3째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Haze; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hart, MI 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Hart, MI 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
43.675000, -86.107222 (est)
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jason T Aguilera
Adopted Date:
01/30/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
John Miller; FAA FSDO; Rapid City, MI
Don Maguire; Scott's-Bell 47; Le Sueur, MN
Publish Date:
05/11/2016
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85720
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
