The airplane ground looped during landing and the left main landing gear strut fractured and 
separated.  The pilot told a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that the landing 
gear strut collapsed unexpectedly, and without warning, during the landing roll, and the 
airplane ground looped to the right.  It was not subjected to an abnormal load during landing 
and the airplane was relatively light with no chemical load aboard and about 1,300 pounds of 
fuel.  The inspector examined the airplane and said the left landing gear leaf broke inside the 
saddle.  There was rust and beach marks in the fracture face indicative of a pre-existing crack.  
The FAA inspector said the left landing gear strut, a single spring steel leaf, separated in the 
shoulder area where the strut enters the saddle at the fuselage skin line.  The left landing gear 
wheel was broken in the outboard flange area and the tire was deflated.  The tire exhibited deep 
radial scratch marks on the outboard side wall.  The aileron hinge bracket at the left wing tip 
was bent inboard and striations on the left wing lower surface were oriented spanwise.  The left 
wing outer half-span was bent upward accompanied by compression wrinkling of the upper 
wing skin.  Examination of the fracture by a metallurgical laboratory revealed that the strut 
met the manufacturer's chemical, hardness, and materials specifications for the component.  
The fracture through the strut was characterized by two distinct modes.  The first was 0.08 
inches in depth and 0.37 inches in width and exhibited features consistent with fatigue.  The 
fatigue crack had multiple initiation sites along the top surface in an area that had fretting 
damage.  The remainder of the fracture face displayed gross overload features.  According to 
the laboratory report, the transverse failure of the strut resulted from an overload condition, 
with high side and drag loads, well in excess of the design ultimate load for the component.
The failure of the pilot to maintain directional control during landing.
On May 1, 2000, at 1858 Pacific daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-802A, N90802, main landing 
gear collapsed during landing roll at the Kingman, Arizona, airport.  The airline transport 
certificated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  
The flight departed from Eagle Airpark, Bullhead City, Arizona, about 1840.  The repositioning 
flight of the agricultural application aircraft was operated under 14 CFR Part 91 by Eagle 
Aviation.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot told an inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (Las Vegas, Nevada) 
Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) that the landing gear strut collapsed unexpectedly, and 
without warning, during the landing roll, and the airplane ground looped to the right.  It was 
not subjected to an abnormal load during landing and the airplane was relatively light with no 
chemical load aboard and about 1,300 pounds of fuel. 
The inspector examined the airplane and said the left landing gear leaf broke inside the saddle.  
There was rust and beach marks in the fracture face indicative of a pre-existing crack.  The 
model year 2000 airplane had about 1,100 hours total flying time and had recently received a 
100-hour maintenance inspection; however, the inspector said the area where the crack 
occurred was difficult to inspect.
The FSDO inspector said the left landing gear strut, a single spring steel leaf, separated in the 
shoulder area where the strut enters the saddle at the fuselage skin line.  The left landing gear 
wheel was broken in the outboard flange area and the tire was deflated.  The tire exhibited deep 
radial scratch marks on the outboard side wall.  The aileron hinge bracket at the left wing tip 
was bent inboard and striations on the left wing lower surface were oriented spanwise.  The left 
wing outer half-span was bent upward accompanied by compression wrinkling of the upper 
wing skin.
Examination of the fracture by a metallurgical laboratory revealed that the strut met the 
manufacturer's chemical, hardness, and materials specifications for the component.  The 
fracture through the strut was characterized by two distinct modes.  The first was 0.08 inches 
in depth and 0.37 inches in width and exhibited features consistent with fatigue.  The fatigue 
crack had multiple initiation sites along the top surface in an area that had fretting damage.  
The remainder of the fracture face displayed gross overload features.  According to the 
laboratory report, the transverse failure of the strut resulted from an overload condition, with 
high side and drag loads, well in excess of the design ultimate load for the component.  The 
complete metallurgical report is in the docket for this accident.
