While in cruise flight, approximately two hours and ten minutes after departure, the engine 
lost power, and the pilot was unable to restart the engine.  During the forced landing, the 
airplane touched down in a rice field.  During the landing roll, the nose landing gear impacted a 
levee, and the airplane nosed over coming to rest inverted.  Earlier in the day during a fuel 
stop, an individual loaned the pilot a pair of needle nose pliers after the pilot stated that the 
locking tabs were broken from the cap on the left main fuel tank.  The individual suggested to 
the pilot that he purchase a new fuel cap; however, the pilot did not purchase one.  At the 
departure airport, ground personnel reported to the pilot that the left main tank had a "bad 
fuel leak."  After fueling the airplane, the pilot duct taped the left main fuel tank filler cap.  An 
examination of the fuel system by an FAA inspector revealed that the left fuel filler cap was 
loose and its clip was broken.  No fuel was found in either tank, and there was no evidence of a 
fuel spill; however, there was blue streaking from the left fuel tank filler port.
The pilot's operation of the airplane with a known equipment deficiency, which resulted in fuel 
leakage and a loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.  A contributing factors was the lack 
of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
On May 2, 2002, at 1645 central daylight time, a Cessna 182G single-engine airplane, N3146S, 
was substantially damaged when it impacted a levee during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power near Tuckerman, Arkansas.  The airplane was registered to Silver Air Inc. of 
Wilmington, Delaware, and operated by Silverwing Aviation of Searcy, Arkansas.  The 
commercial pilot sustained minor injuries, and his  passenger was seriously injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed 
and activated for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The cross-country 
flight departed from Sherman Army Field (FLV), Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, approximately 
1430, for a destination of Newport, Arkansas.
The 1050-hour pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, (NTSB Form 
6120.1/2), that he "had the airplane topped off before leaving FLV."  He took off and climbed 
out with the fuel selector in the "BOTH" position.  After leveling off, he switched the fuel 
selector to the "LEFT" tank, and flew for approximately 1 hour and 20 minutes, then switched 
to the "RIGHT" tank.  The engine sputtered after just a few minutes so he checked the 
carburetor heat and switched back to "BOTH".  "The engine began running normal again."  The 
pilot stated that they were in VFR conditions and could see his destination, so he canceled his 
IFR clearance.  The enginelost power and his attempt to restart it was unsuccessful, so he 
landed in a field short of his destination.  During the landing roll in the field, the nose landing 
gear impacted a levee and separated.  The airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.
According to an FAA inspector, earlier in the day, the airplane departed Newport for Fort 
Leavenworth.  During a fuel stop at Harrisonville, Missouri, an individual loaned the pilot a 
pair of needle nose pliers after the pilot stated that the locking tabs were broken from the cap 
on the left main fuel tank.  The individual suggested to the pilot that he purchase a new fuel 
cap; however, the pilot did not purchase one.  The airplane was serviced with 46.390 gallons of 
100LL fuel, and the airplane departed for the 15 minute flight to Fort Leavenworth.  After 
landing, the pilot purchase approximately 27 gallons of 100LL fuel from a self service pump.  
Ground personnel reported to the pilot that the left main tank had a "bad fuel leak," and the 
pilot stated that the cap was broken.  The pilot was offered duct tape, and he taped the left 
main fuel tank filler cap with approximately 2 square feet of the duct tape.  During the flight to 
Newport, approximately two miles west of Tuckerman, the engine lost power.  The airplane 
was found in a rice field about 60 feet short of a private grass strip, which the pilot was 
attempting to land.
An examination of the airplane, by FAA inspectors who responded to the accident site, revealed 
that the landing gear, the firewall, and the left wing spar were damaged.  Examination of the 
fuel system revealed that the left fuel filler cap was loose and the clip was broken.  No fuel was 
found in either tank, and there was no evidence of a fuel spill; however, there was blue 
streaking from the left fuel tank filler port to the trailing edge of the wing.
The total fuel capacity of the Cessna 182G is 65 gallons
