Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Wellsville, UT
Accident Number:
WPR13LA108
Date & Time:
02/02/2013, 1350 MST 
Registration:
N8125T
Aircraft:
CESSNA 175B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
5 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that during a climb to cruise flight, he observed the engine rpm suddenly 
reduce, and he immediately applied carburetor heat. The pilot stated that the engine rpm 
increased for about 3 seconds before it decreased again. The pilot began troubleshooting the 
engine and performing the emergency landing checklist. The pilot stated that when he turned 
the ignition switch off and back on, the engine backfired once; however, the engine rpm 
remained at 1,000. He initiated a forced landing to an open, snow-covered field. During the 
landing roll, the airplane nosed over. A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine 
revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal 
operation. The carburetor was disassembled and examined internally. The carburetor float 
bowl contained a liquid consistent with fuel, which tested positive for water using water-
finding paste. 
A local reporting station recorded the temperature at 25 degrees Fahrenheit and dew point at 
19 degrees Fahrenheit. The reported weather conditions were conducive to carburetor icing at 
glide and cruise power. Given the sudden loss of engine rpm before and the rise in engine rpm 
following the application of carburetor heat, it is likely that carburetor ice was the reason for 
the loss of engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power during cruise flight due to carburetor ice.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel control/carburetor - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Contributed to outcome (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR13LA108
Factual Information
On February 2, 2013, about 1350 mountain standard time, a Cessna 175B, N8125T, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing near Wellsville, Utah.  The airplane was 
registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91.  The private pilot and his four passengers were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight.  The 
local flight originated from Logan, Utah, at 1300.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the pilot reported that while climbing through about 8,500 feet mean sea level 
(msl), he observed the engine RPM suddenly reduce and immediately applied carburetor heat.  
The pilot stated that the engine RPM increased for about 3 seconds before it decreased again.  
The pilot began troubleshooting the engine and performing the emergency landing checklist.  
The pilot stated that when he turned the ignition switch off and back on, the engine back fired 
once, however, the engine RPM remained at 1,000.  The pilot initiated a forced landing to an 
open snow covered field.  During the landing roll, the airplane nosed over.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
that the fuselage, vertical stabilizer, and rudder were structurally damaged.  The airplane was 
recovered to a secure location for further examination.
Examination of the recovered airframe by the NTSB IIC and an FAA inspector revealed that 
both wings remained attached to the fuselage and contained fuel in both wing fuel tanks.  
Control continuity was established from the carburetor heat, throttle, and mixture controls to 
their respective linkages on the engine and air box.  
Examination of the recovered Lycoming O-360-A1D engine, serial number L-7542-36, revealed 
that it remained attached to the fuselage via its mounts.  The engine mount structure was 
displaced downward.  All engine accessories remained attached to the engine.  The top spark 
plugs, carburetor, and propeller were removed from the engine and the magneto "P" leads were 
disconnected from the left and right magnetos.  The crankshaft was rotated by hand and 
mechanical continuity was established throughout the engine and valve train.  Thumb 
compression was obtained on all six cylinders.  Both the left and right magnetos produced a 
blue colored spark on all ignition leads when the crankshaft was rotated.
The carburetor throttle and mixture levers moved from stop to stop by hand.  When the 
throttle control arm was moved, the accelerator pump functioned and expelled liquid.  The fuel 
inlet screen contained a slight amount of debris, however, was mostly unobstructed.  The 
carburetor was disassembled and examined internally.  Both metal floats were intact and 
undamaged.  The carburetor float bowl contained a liquid consistent with fuel.  The liquid was 
tested with water finding paste with positive results.  
Examination of the recovered airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation
Weather conditions recorded at the Logan-Cache Airport, located about 9 miles northeast of 
the accident site, at 1351, were wind calm, visibility 7 statute miles, clear sky, temperature 25 
degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 19 degrees Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting of 30.46 inches 
of mercury.  According to the Federal Aviation Administration Special Airworthiness 
Information Bulletin, entitled Carburetor Icing Prevention, the temperature and dew point 
Page 3 of 5WPR13LA108
were conducive to the formation of icing at glide and cruise power.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Nose over/nose down
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
55
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
318 hours (Total, all aircraft), 53 hours (Total, this make and model), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N8125T
Model/Series:
175B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17556825
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/06/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A1B
Registered Owner:
Lynn Goodsell
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Lynn Goodsell
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5WPR13LA108
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LGU, 4457 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
9 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1351 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
8°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.46 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-4°C / -7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Logan, UT 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Logan, UT 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1300 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
4 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
5 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.791111, -111.851389 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joshua Cawthra
Adopted Date:
08/07/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
David J Rodda; Federal Aviation Administration; Salt Lake City, UT
Publish Date:
08/07/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86122
Page 5 of 5WPR13LA108
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
