Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
College Station, TX
Accident Number:
CEN13LA149B
Date & Time:
02/01/2013, 0805 CST 
Registration:
N93124
Aircraft:
CESSNA 152
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Midair collision
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
A review of available flightpath data established that there was a midair collision between a 
Cessna 152 and a Cirrus SR22 at 3,500 ft mean sea level (msl). The flight instructor of the 
Cessna 152 reported that he was conducting a local training flight with a primary student on 
her second instructional flight. The commercial pilot of the Cirrus SR22 was on a business 
flight en route to the same airport from which the Cessna 152 had departed. Both flights were 
operating in visual meteorological conditions (VMC).
The flight instructor stated that they had been practicing basic attitude flight maneuvers, and, 
as the airplane was climbing to 3,500 ft msl while maintaining a southeast heading, they felt an 
impact that originated from the right side of the airplane, aft of the main cabin, and heard a 
loud bang. He added that they were not in radio contact with the tower controller before the 
collision. The flight instructor subsequently observed that the right main landing gear wheel 
had separated from the airplane. After informing the tower controller of the damage, they were 
asked to perform a low pass and then to circle the airport until emergency equipment was in 
position. After circling the airport several times, the flight instructor made an uneventful 
landing.
The Cirrus pilot reported that, while established in cruise flight at 3,500 ft msl, the airplane™s 
windshield suddenly imploded from an apparent impact with an object. His initial thought was 
that the airplane had collided with a bird because he had not received any alerts from the 
airplane™s traffic advisory system nor did he see another aircraft. He subsequently recovered 
from an unintended descent before continuing directly toward the planned destination and 
declaring an emergency with the tower controller. The pilot reported that he had not 
established radio contact with the tower controller before the collision. He subsequently landed 
the airplane without further incident.
The flightpath data showed that the Cirrus had maintained a 080-degree true course at 3,500 
ft msl for about 14 minutes before the collision. About 90 seconds before the collision, the 
Cessna was in a climbing left turn from a west-southwest course to the south-southeast. The 
plotted data established that, during the 70 seconds before the collision, the Cessna maintained 
Page 2 of 9CEN13LA149B
a 160-degree true course and continued to climb from 3,100 ft to a maximum GPS altitude of 
3,573 ft, which was recorded about 12 seconds before the collision. The Cessna subsequently 
descended about 60 ft during the 12-second period before the collision. The calculated angle 
between each airplane™s flightpath was about 80 degrees at the time of the collision. During the 
70 seconds before the collision, the Cessna™s relative position to the Cirrus flightpath averaged 
27 degrees left of course (11-o™clock position). Conversely, the Cirrus™s position relative to the 
Cessna flightpath averaged 72 degrees right of course (between the 2- and 3-o™clock positions).
Additional review of air traffic control radar track data revealed no transponder beacon returns 
associated with the Cessna until 2 minutes 34 seconds after the collision. During the same time 
period, primary radar returns were recorded by the radar sensor that closely matched the 
flightpath as recorded by the flight instructor™s portable GPS receiver. However, after the 
collision, the radar sensor began receiving transponder beacon returns from the Cessna that 
included a 1200 beacon code with associated mode-C altitude data. A reinforced beacon return 
was received for a remainder of the flightpath. When presented with a summary of the radar 
track data, the flight instructor acknowledged that he likely departed with the transponder off, 
or in the standby position, and then subsequently turned it on following the collision. 
Additionally, postaccident testing of the airplane™s altitude, static, and transponder systems 
revealed no anomalies that would have precluded their normal operation.
The Cirrus was equipped with a traffic advisory system, which actively interrogates other 
nearby aircraft transponders to provide the pilot with relevant traffic advisories; however, the 
system only displayed traffic targets from those aircraft that have transponders that could be 
interrogated. When a target airplane has its transponder turned off, selected to standby, or is 
malfunctioning, the system does not generate a traffic advisory. Additionally, the system™s 
operating manual cautioned that pilots should remain vigilant for nontransponder-equipped 
aircraft or aircraft with unresponsive transponders. A postaccident data extraction from the 
Cirrus™s recoverable data module established that a traffic advisory was issued shortly after 
takeoff while the airplane was on initial climb from the departure airport; however, there were 
no traffic advisories issued for the remainder of the accident flight.
In conclusion, given the flightpath data and that VMC existed at the time of the accident, the 
pilots should have been able to see the other airplane and maintain adequate separation. The 
Cirrus was equipped with a traffic advisory system; however, the flight instructor likely had the 
Cessna's transponder turned off or placed in standby before the collision, which prevented a 
traffic advisory message from being issued to the pilot of the Cirrus. However, if the flight 
instructor had turned on the transponder before departure, a traffic advisory would likely have 
been issued to the pilot of the Cirrus and the collision avoided.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The flight instructor™s and commercial pilot™s failure to see and avoid the other airplane, which 
resulted in a collision during cruise flight. Contributing to the accident was the failure of the 
flight instructor to activate the transponder before departure, which resulted in no traffic 
Page 3 of 9CEN13LA149B
advisories being issued to the pilot of the other airplane before the collision.
Findings
Aircraft
ATC transponder system - Not used/operated (Factor)
Personnel issues
Monitoring other aircraft - Pilot of other aircraft (Cause)
Monitoring other aircraft - Instructor/check pilot (Cause)
Use of equip/system - Instructor/check pilot (Factor)
Page 4 of 9CEN13LA149B
Factual Information
On February 1, 2013, at 0805 central standard time, a Cirrus model SR22 airplane, N247RB, 
and a Cessna model 152 airplane, N93124, collided inflight about 13 miles west-southwest of 
Easterwood Field Airport (CLL), College Station, Texas. Both airplanes were able to land at 
CLL following the collision. The Cirrus SR22 sustained substantial damage to the upper cockpit 
fuselage structure and the commercial pilot sustained minor injuries. The Cessna 152 sustained 
minor damage to the right main landing gear assembly and the flight instructor and the 
student pilot were not injured. The Cirrus SR22 was owned by a private individual, but 
operated by the Cirrus Aircraft Corporation as a demonstration airplane. The Cessna 152 was 
owned and operated by the Texas A&M Flying Club. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the time of the accident. Both flights were being conducted under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91. The Cirrus SR22 departed Austin Executive Airport (EDC) at 
0748 and was en route to CLL. The Cessna 152 departed CLL at 0744 for a local instructional 
flight.
According to a statement provided by the Cirrus pilot, after climbing above the departure 
airport's traffic pattern altitude he engaged the autopilot system and continued direct toward 
CLL under visual meteorological conditions. The cruise portion of the flight was at 3,500 feet 
mean sea level (msl). The pilot reported that as the flight approached CLL, with the autopilot 
system engaged, at 3,500 feet msl, the windshield suddenly imploded from an apparent impact 
with an object. His initial thought was that the airplane had collided with a bird because he had 
not received any alerts from the airplane's traffic advisory system nor did he see another 
aircraft. He subsequently recovered from an unintended descent before continuing direct 
toward CLL and declaring an emergency with the tower controller. The pilot reported that he 
had not established radio contact with the tower controller before the inflight collision. A 
normal landing was subsequently made on runway 16 without further incident.
The Cessna flight instructor reported that the local training flight was with a primary student 
on her second instructional flight. The flight consisted of basic attitude flight maneuvers, which 
included level and climbing turns, climbs and descents to predetermined altitudes, and 
maintaining level flight while tracking a course. The flight instructor stated that as they were 
climbing to 3,500 feet msl, while maintaining a southeast heading, they felt an impact and 
heard a loud bang. He reported that the impact originated from the right side of the airplane, 
aft of the main cabin. The flight instructor noted that there were no apparent flight control 
issues following the collision and that he observed no damage to the right wing. Shortly after 
the collision, his student saw another airplane in a rapid descent at their 10 o'clock position. 
The flight instructor entered a descending left turn to follow the other airplane. Shortly 
thereafter, the flight instructor heard another airplane declare an emergency on the tower 
frequency due to an imploded windshield. He noted that they were monitoring the tower 
frequency before the collision, but had not established radio contact with the tower controller. 
He turned in the general direction of CLL with the intention of returning to the airport, while 
continuing to monitor the tower controller's communications with the other aircraft. The flight 
instructor noted that at some point he told the tower controller that they had hit something 
and were returning to the airport. The tower controller requested that the Cessna stay west of 
the airport while the other aircraft landed. After the other airplane had landed, the tower 
controller transmitted that the other airplane had tire marks on its roof and requested that 
they make a low approach to verify the condition of their landing gear. The flight instructor 
Page 5 of 9CEN13LA149B
stated that he then observed that the right main landing gear wheel had separated from the 
airplane. His student, seated in the left seat, confirmed that the left landing gear and wheel 
appeared undamaged. After informing the tower controller of their damage, they were asked to 
perform a low pass and then to circle the airport until emergency equipment was in position. 
After circling the airport several times the flight instructor made an uneventful landing on 
runway 22.
Global positioning system (GPS) data was extracted from the Cirrus airplane and the Cessna 
flight instructor's portable GPS receiver. The extracted GPS data was reviewed using software 
that displayed the individual flight paths in a simulated three-dimensional environment. After 
departure, the Cirrus proceeded direct toward CLL at a cruise altitude of 3,500 feet msl. The 
plotted GPS data indicated that the Cirrus SR22 was established on a 080 degree true course at 
3,500 feet msl for about 14 minutes before the collision. After departure, the Cessna proceeded 
northwest of CLL where it completed several maneuvers that were consistent with basic 
attitude flight instruction. About 90 seconds before the collision, the Cessna was in a climbing 
left turn from a west-southwest course to the south-southeast. The plotted data established 
that during the 70 seconds before the collision, the Cessna maintained a 160 degree true 
course. While on the south-southeast course the Cessna continued to climb from 3,100 feet to a 
maximum GPS altitude of 3,573 feet, which was recorded about 12 seconds before the collision. 
The Cessna subsequently descended about 60 feet during the 12 second period before the 
collision. The calculated descent rate, during the 12 second period before the collision, was 
about 300 feet per minute.
According to available flight path data, at 0805:47, the two airplanes collided at 3,500 feet msl. 
The calculated angle between the each airplane's flight path was about 80 degrees at the time 
of the collision. During the 70 seconds before the collision, the Cessna's relative position to the 
Cirrus flight path averaged 27 degrees left of course (11 o'clock position). Conversely, the 
Cirrus's position relative to the Cessna flight path averaged 72 degrees right of course (between 
2 and 3 o'clock position).
A review of air traffic control (ATC) radar data revealed no transponder beacon returns 
associated with the Cessna after its departure from CLL until 2 minutes 34 seconds after the 
collision. During the same time period, raw radar returns, also known as primary radar 
returns, were recorded by the ATC radar sensor that closely matched the flight path as 
recorded by the Cessna flight instructor's portable GPS receiver. Primary radar data does not 
include any altitude or beacon code information. The beacon code and encoded altitude 
information is received by ATC radar when the airplane transponder is turned on and selected 
to transmit. According to radar data, after the collision, at 0808:21, the ATC radar sensor 
began receiving transponder beacon returns from the Cessna that included a 1200 beacon code 
with associated mode-C altitude data. A reinforced beacon return was received for a remainder 
of the Cessna flight path. Further review of the ATC radar data established that there were 
reinforced beacon returns for the Cirrus airplane throughout its entire flight.
The Cirrus was equipped with a Garmin model GTS 800 traffic advisory system, which actively 
interrogates other nearby aircraft transponders to provide the pilot with relevant traffic 
advisories. According to manufacturer documentation, the Garmin GTS 800 only displays 
traffic targets from those aircraft that have transponders that can be interrogated. In the event 
when a target airplane has its transponder turned off, selected to standby, or is malfunctioning, 
the system will not generate a traffic advisory. Additionally, the Garmin GTS 800 operating 
Page 6 of 9CEN13LA149B
manual notes that pilots should remain vigilant for non-transponder equipped aircraft or 
aircraft with unresponsive transponders.
When presented with a summary of the ATC radar data, the flight instructor acknowledged 
that he likely departed with the transponder off, or in the standby position, and then 
subsequently turned it on following the collision. Additionally, postaccident testing of the 
Cessna's altitude, static, and transponder systems revealed no anomalies that would have 
precluded their normal operation.
The Cirrus was equipped with a Recoverable Data Module (RDM) that recorded, among other 
flight parameter data, when a traffic advisory was issued. A postaccident data extraction 
revealed that a traffic advisory was issued shortly after takeoff, while the Cirrus was on initial 
climb from the departure airport. No additional traffic advisories were issued for the 
remainder of the accident flight.
At 0753, the CLL automated surface observing system reported the following weather 
conditions: wind calm, visibility 10 miles, sky clear, temperature 7 degrees Celsius, dew point 3 
degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.35 inches of mercury. According to astronomical 
data, at the time of the inflight collision, the location of the sun was between 8-10 degrees 
above the horizon and about 115 degrees east of true north.
History of Flight
Enroute
Midair collision (Defining event)
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/21/2012
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/29/2011
Flight Time:
897 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300 hours (Total, this make and model), 757 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 36 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 7 of 9CEN13LA149B
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
19, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/26/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2 hours (Total, this make and model), 2 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N93124
Model/Series:
152 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
15285409
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/12/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1670 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
12185.7 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-235-L2C
Registered Owner:
Texas A&M Flying Club
Rated Power:
110 hp
Operator:
Texas A&M Flying Club
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 8 of 9CEN13LA149B
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CLL, 321 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
11 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0753 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
80°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.35 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
College Station, TX (CLL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
College Station, TX (CLL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0744 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
Easterwood Field Airport (CLL)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
321 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
30.556389, -96.572778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
08/01/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
James D Moore; Federal Aviation Administration - Houston FSDO; Houston, TX
Brannon D Mayer; Cirrus Aircraft Corporation; Duluth, MN
Publish Date:
08/01/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86138
Page 9 of 9CEN13LA149B
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
