Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Venice, LA
Accident Number:
CEN17LA174
Date & Time:
05/02/2017, 0635 CDT 
Registration:
N457PH
Aircraft:
BELL 407
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Part(s) separation from AC
Injuries:
6 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The commercial pilot was conducting a nonscheduled, cross-country passenger flight. He 
reported that, while en route, he detected an in-flight vibration and made a precautionary 
landing on an oil platform. As he was shutting down the engine, the vibration increased, and he 
initiated an emergency shutdown using the rotor brake.
Postaccident examination revealed that a tip block and weights had separated from one of the 
tail rotor blades. Cracks were noted on the tail rotor gear box, which was detached from the 
tailboom support casting. The casting was entirely fractured and exhibited cracking consistent 
with overstress separations. The left-side attachment studs were fractured and exhibited 
reversed bending fatigue fractures. The casting also had cracks at the two forward stud hole 
locations, and stud hole elongation was noted at the two aft stud hole locations.
The separation of the tip block from the tail rotor blade resulted from an incomplete bond area 
due to a waffle pattern in the adhesive and contamination of the bond line by repair debris. 
About 50% of the adhesive surface had smooth and glossy surfaces consistent with voids and 
lack of contact between the adhesive and the tip block, which was likely due to insufficient 
vacuum pressure being applied while curing the adhesive. 
The blade tip exhibited worn separation surfaces and the presence of dark material, consistent 
with engine exhaust, indicating that a crack had formed along the flat side bond line and then 
progressed until the degraded bond strength was exceeded by operational loads, and the tip 
block separated. This resulted in a violent rotor imbalance and induced sufficient loads to crack 
the gearbox attachment studs and produce rapid fatigue cracking in the left-side attachment 
studs and to crack and nearly fracture the gearbox support assembly. 
The tip block had been repaired about 65 hours before the flight. According to the helicopter 
manufacturer, after the repairs were made, the blade passed the postbond pull test of 1,320 lbs, 
which was equal to the load on the tip block at maximum tail rotor rpm, and it was returned to 
service. Given the postaccident condition of the adhesive, the postrepair test procedures were 
not adequate to detect the insufficient adhesive bonding, which resulted in the separation of 
Page 2 of 6CEN17LA174
the tip block from the tail rotor blade. After the accident, the helicopter manufacturer revised 
its approved repair and inspection procedures. The changes included, in part, a revision to the 
cure cycle process to use only positive pressure (not vacuum pressure) during the cure cycle 
that cures the adhesive that bonds the block on the blade tip and an expansion of its postrepair 
inspection procedures.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
An in-flight separation of the tip block from the tail rotor blade due to an inadequate blade 
repair, which resulted in a rotor imbalance sufficient to crack the gearbox attachment studs 
and gearbox support assembly, and inadequate postrepair test procedures, which failed to 
detect the inadequate adhesive bonding.
Findings
Aircraft
Tail rotor blade - Failure (Cause)
Tail rotor blade - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Repair - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Organizational issues
Adequacy of policy/proc - Manufacturer (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN17LA174
Factual Information
***This report was modified on January 8, 2018. Please see the docket for this accident to 
view the original report.***
On May 2, 2017, about 0635 central daylight time, a Bell 407 helicopter, N457PH, registered to 
and operated by PHI Helicopters, Inc., Lafayette, Louisiana, made a precautionary landing at 
Grand Bay Receiving Station near Venice, Louisiana, after the pilot noticed an in-flight 
vibration. The pilot and five passengers on board the helicopter were not injured and the 
helicopter sustained substantial damage. The non-scheduled domestic passenger flight was 
being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135, and a 
company VFR flight plan had been filed. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time 
of the accident. The cross-country flight originated from Boothville (LS08), Louisiana, at 0629, 
and was en route to Main Pass 311A in the Gulf of Mexico when the accident occurred.
The pilot said he detected an in-flight vibration and made a precautionary landing on the 
Grand Bay oil platform. As he was shutting down the engine, the vibration increased and he 
initiated an emergency shutdown using the rotor brake. Post-accident inspection revealed the 
tip block and weights had separated from one of the tail rotor blades. Cracks were noted on the 
tail rotor gear box mounting hardware and the tail boom.
The tail rotor hub and blade assembly, tail rotor gear box with two fractured studs, and tail 
boom support casting were sent to NTSB's Materials Laboratory for examination. In addition 
to NTSB's staff, representatives from PHI, Inc., and Bell Helicopter were present for the 
laboratory examination. Visual examination of the tail rotor confirmed the tip block and blade 
tip weights were missing from one of the tail rotor blades. According to PHI, the blade had a 
total service life of 2,658.65 hours, and had a tip block replacement repair approximately 65 
hours prior to the separation. The examination found that the tip block separated along the 
adhesive interface, leaving the majority of the adhesive attached to the blade skin. The adhesive 
remaining on both skins appeared as a waffle pattern, indicative of partial bonding and 
subsequent interfacial separation. Approximately 50% of the adhesive surface had smooth and 
glossy surfaces consistent with voids and lack of contact between the adhesive and the tip 
block.
The tail rotor gearbox was detached from the tail boom support casting, and the two outboard 
attach studs were fractured. The entire support casting was fractured and all but 2.7 inches of 
the skin and the four-inch wide cover were cracked. The fracture in the casting and crack in the 
skin were consistent with overstress separations. Both fractured left-hand studs displayed 
reversed bending fatigue fractures. Magnification of the fracture faces revealed features and 
topographies consistent with multiple origin reversed bending fatigue initiating in the 
respective root radii on opposed sides of each studs. Fretting and rub marks were observed on 
both the support casting and tail rotor gearbox where the attach studs were fixed. The tail rotor 
gearbox alignment dowel pins were missing. The tail boom support casting had cracks at the 
two forward stud hole locations, and stud hole elongation was noted at the two aft stud hole 
locations. A circumferential crack had formed from the forward left stud hole along the left 
side. 
Page 4 of 6CEN17LA174
According to Bell Helicopters, after repairs were made to tail rotor blades, a 1,320-lb. pull test 
was performed on the tip block, a tap test was performed to check for voids, a peel test was 
performed from skin patch material, and a water leak test was performed. Bell reported that no 
blade had ever failed the 1,320-lb. pull test, and the facility had made approximately 25 tail 
rotor tip block crack repairs per year. 
After the accident, the helicopter manufacturer revised its approved repair procedure, 
including the block replacement. The changes included, in part, a revision to the cure cycle 
process to use only positive pressure during the cure cycle that cures the adhesive that bonds 
the block on the blade tip. The manufacturer also expanded its postrepair inspection 
procedures. For more information, see the document titled "New Bell Helicopter Approved Tail 
Rotor Repair Procedures" in the public docket for this accident.
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft maintenance event
Aircraft inspection event
Enroute-cruise
Part(s) separation from AC (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
29, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/22/2016
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/06/2016
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 3272 hours (Total, all aircraft), 100 hours (Total, this make and model), 2377 hours 
(Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6CEN17LA174
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N457PH
Model/Series:
407 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
1997
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
53121
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/05/2017, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5250 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
5839 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls-Royce
ELT:
C126 installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250 C478
Registered Owner:
PHI, Inc.
Rated Power:
600 hp
Operator:
PHI, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Boothville, LA (LS08)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Main Pass 311A, GM 
(NONE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0629 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Grand Bay Receiving Station (NONE)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
0 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Page 6 of 6CEN17LA174
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
5 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
6 None
Latitude, Longitude:
29.310000, -89.298056
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
11/05/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Keith J Kibodeaux; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Baton Rouge, LA
Kevin R Smith; PHI, Inc.; Houma, LA
Thomas A Yakubovich; PHI, Inc.; Houma, LA
Publish Date:
11/05/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=95102
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
