Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Nacogdoches, TX
Accident Number:
DFW05LA115
Date & Time:
05/01/2005, 1900 CDT 
Registration:
N204RH
Aircraft:
Lancair Legacy
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The 20,000-hour pilot reported that while maneuvering at an altitude of 700-800 feet above 
ground level (agl), when the "sound of the engine suddenly changed" followed by a loss of 
engine power.  The pilot initiated a forced landing to an open field.  As the airplane touched 
down, the main landing gear separated and the airplane skidded to a stop in an upright 
position.  Subsequently, a post crash fire ensued and destroyed the airplane.  The pilot added 
that about three to four minutes prior to the change in the engine sound, he verified on the 
engine monitoring instrument that all indications where within the green bands.  No 
mechanical anomalies were found during an engine examination.  The reason for the loss of 
engine power was undetermined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 6DFW05LA115
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
----------
Occurrence #4: GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Page 3 of 6DFW05LA115
Factual Information
On May 1, 2005, approximately 1900 central daylight time, a single-engine Lancair Legacy 
homebuilt experimental airplane, N204RH, registered to and operated by the pilot, was 
destroyed during a forced landing following a reportd loss of engine power while maneuvering 
near Nacogdoches, Texas.  The airline transport pilot and pilot rated passenger were not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The local flight originated from the A. L. 
Mangham Jr. Regional Airport (OCH), near Nacogdoches, Texas, approximately 1845.
The 20,000-hour pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 
6120.1/2) that he was maneuvering at an altitude of 700-800 feet above ground level (agl), 
when the "sound of the engine suddenly changed" followed by a loss of engine power.  As the 
pilot pitched the airplane up, "to trade airspeed for altitude," he verified the throttle, propeller, 
and mixture control positions.  The pilot stated that he switched from the right fuel tank to the 
left fuel tank and cycled the throttle, but the engine continued to lose power, as he initiated a 
forced landing to an open field.  
As the airplane touched down, the main landing gear "sheered off" and the airplane skidded to 
a stop in an upright position.  Subsequently, a post-crash fire ensued and both occupants 
evacuated the airplane.    
The pilot added that about three to four minutes prior to the change in the engine sound, he 
verified on the engine monitoring instrument that all indications where within the green 
bands.  
Examination of the airplane by an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who 
responded to the accident site, revealed that the fuselage and inboard portions of the airplane 
were consumed by the fire.
The wreckage of airplane, which had accumulated approximately 30.1-hours since new, and the 
Teledyne Continental Motors IO-550-N13B engine which had accumulated 23.7-hours since 
new, were recovered to the facilities of Air Salvage of Dallas, near Lancaster, Texas, for further 
examination.
Examination of the engine was conducted on June 9, 2005, at the facilities of Teledyne 
Continental, of Mobile, Alabama, under the supervision of an NTSB representative.  The 
examination revealed that rotational continuity was established throughout the engine and 
accessory gearbox when the propeller was rotated by hand.  The top and bottom sparkplugs 
were removed and when compared to the Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug Wear Guide (Part 
Number AV-27), displayed signatures of normal operation.  All six cylinders remained attached 
to the crankcase and were fire damaged.  Cylinder #1, #2, #3, #4, #5, and #6 pistons, rings, 
pins, and connecting rods remained intact and free of anomalies.  The crankshaft and 
counterweight were free of anomalies.  
The reason for the reportd loss of engine power could not be determined.
Page 4 of 6DFW05LA115
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/01/2004
Flight Time:
20000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 32 hours (Total, this make and model), 19000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 31 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 31 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Lancair
Registration:
N204RH
Model/Series:
Legacy 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
L2K-226
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
30.1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
30.1 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Teledyne Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550-N13B
Registered Owner:
Randall M Hurst
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
Randall M Hurst
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6DFW05LA115
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LFK, 296 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
21 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1953 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.09 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 10°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Nacogdoches, TX (OCH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1845 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
31.585556, -94.133333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alexander Lemishko
Adopted Date:
09/13/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Tom Schmitt; Federal Aviation Administration; Houston, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DFW05LA115
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
