Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bismarck, ND
Accident Number:
CHI05LA109
Date & Time:
05/03/2005, 2100 CDT 
Registration:
N2338V
Aircraft:
Piper PA-31T
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
Analysis 
The airplane was substantially damaged during an emergency landing when the landing gear 
did not extend properly.  The pilot noted that when he attempted to lower the landing gear on 
approach to the intended destination nothing happened.  He elected to divert to an airport with 
additional capabilities and assistance available.  The pilot stated that he executed the 
emergency gear extension procedure, however, this procedure was not successful.  The left 
main landing gear appeared to be fully extended, the nose landing gear was in a "dragging" 
condition, and the right main landing gear was retracted when observed by the tower controller 
prior to landing.  The pilot noted that the red gear unlocked indicator light was illuminated and 
the green landing gear down/locked indicators were not illuminated.  Since no further options 
were available to extend the gear, the pilot executed an emergency landing.  The airplane 
touched down on the left main wheel which did not collapse initially.  The right wing 
subsequently dropped and contacted the runway.  The pilot applied left wheel brakes, however, 
the airplane departed the right side of the runway pavement and came to rest in the grass. The 
left main landing gear collapsed and a runway light was damaged in the process.  The post-
accident inspection revealed that a hydraulic powerpak drain line (Piper part number 46138-
00) was ruptured.  The drain line was located in the nose section of the airplane, forward of the 
cabin pressure bulkhead.  The rupture was approximately one-half inch long.  Hydraulic fluid 
was observed in the vicinity of the line rupture.  The hydraulic reservoir was empty.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Rupture of the hydraulic powerpak drain line which resulted in a loss of hydraulic fluid and the 
inability to properly lower the landing gear despite the pilot's execution of the emergency 
extension procedures.  A contributing factor was the runway light struck during the emergency 
landing.
Page 2 of 6CHI05LA109
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) HYDRAULIC SYSTEM,LINE - RUPTURED
2. (C) FLUID,HYDRAULIC - LOSS,PARTIAL
----------
Occurrence #2: WHEELS UP LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
3. (C) GEAR EXTENSION - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. REMEDIAL ACTION - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
5. (F) OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT
----------
Occurrence #4: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6CHI05LA109
Factual Information
On May 3, 2005, about 2100 central daylight time, a Piper PA-31T, N2338V, piloted by a 
private pilot, was substantially damaged during an emergency landing on runway 21 (6,600 
feet by 100 feet, asphalt) at Bismarck Municipal Airport (BIS), Bismarck, North Dakota.  The 
flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91 on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.  The 
flight departed Jeffco Airport (BJC), Denver, Colorado, at 1630 with an intended destination of 
Bowman Municipal Airport (BPP), Bowman, North Dakota.
In his written statement, the pilot noted that when he attempted to lower the landing gear on 
approach to BPP nothing happened.  He elected to divert to BIS due to additional capabilities 
and assistance available there.
The pilot stated that he executed the emergency gear extension procedure outlined in the 
pilot's operating handbook.  However, this procedure was not successful.  He reported that the 
nose landing gear was in a "dragging/trailing" position when observed through the engine 
cowling site mirror.  He noted that the red gear unlocked indicator light was illuminated and 
the green landing gear down/locked indicators were not illuminated.  
The pilot noted that the BIS tower controller informed him that the left main landing gear 
appeared to be fully extended, the nose landing gear was in a "dragging" condition, and the 
right main landing gear was retracted.
Since no further options were available to extend the gear, the pilot prepared for and executed 
an emergency landing.  He noted that the airplane touched down on the left main wheel which 
did not collapse initially.  The right wing subsequently dropped and contacted the runway.  The 
pilot reported that he applied the left wheel brakes, however, the airplane departed the right 
side of the runway pavement and came to rest in the grass. The left main landing gear collapsed 
and a runway light was damaged in the process.
The post-accident inspection revealed that a hydraulic powerpak drain line (Piper part number 
46138-00) was ruptured.  The drain line was located in the nose section of the airplane, 
forward of the cabin pressure bulkhead.  The rupture was approximately one-half inch long.  
Hydraulic fluid was observed in the vicinity of the line rupture.  The hydraulic reservoir was 
empty.
Page 4 of 6CHI05LA109
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
57, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/01/2004
Flight Time:
6778 hours (Total, all aircraft), 397 hours (Total, this make and model), 6600 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 77 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 42 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N2338V
Model/Series:
PA-31T 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
31T-8020049
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
8
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/01/2005, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
50 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
7332 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney Canada
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-28
Registered Owner:
REMC Leasing, LLC
Rated Power:
620 hp
Operator:
REMC Leasing, LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI05LA109
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BIS, 1661 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2052 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C / -13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Denver, CO (BJC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Bismark, ND (BIS)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1630 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Bismarck Muni (BIS)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1661 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
21
IFR Approach:
Visual
Runway Length/Width:
6600 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
46.772778, -100.745833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tim Sorensen
Adopted Date:
09/13/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Rodney Vigstol; FAA-Fargo FSDO; Fargo, ND
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI05LA109
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
