On the day of the accident, the pilot was returning to his home airport, after dropping off 
friends at a different airport.  No weather briefing or flight plan was filed with Flight Service for 
either flight.  A witness and radar data depicted the accident airplane on a straight-in approach 
for runway 1, in a landing configuration, at a groundspeed of approximately 120 knots.  The 
last radar target was recorded about 1/4 mile from the runway threshold, at an altitude of 
approximately 150 feet agl.  The wreckage was later found about 1/2 mile east of the runway 
threshold.  Review of weather information revealed general VFR conditions along the route of 
flight, and at reporting stations near the accident site.  Gusty winds, low-level wind shear, and 
moderate to severe turbulence also prevailed at the time of the accident.  In addition, weather 
radar depicted scattered light snow showers in the vicinity of the accident site, and possibly a 
snow squall.  Examination of the wreckage did not reveal any preimpact mechanical 
malfunctions.  The pilot had a total flight experience of 14,000 hours, with 8,500 hours in 
multiengine airplanes, including 2,600 hours in the same make and model as the accident 
airplane.  He also had 4,100 hours of instrument flight experience.
A loss of control during approach for undetermined reasons, which resulted in a collision with 
trees.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 2, 2006, about 1245 eastern standard time, a Ted Smith Aerostar 601P, N9797Q, 
was destroyed when it impacted terrain while maneuvering near West Dover, Vermont.  The 
certificated commercial pilot was fatally injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the flight that departed Westchester County Airport (HPN), White Plains, New York, 
destined for Mount Snow Airport (4V8), West Dover, Vermont.  No flight plan was filed for the 
personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot's son reported that during the day prior to the accident, the pilot flew to HPN, picked 
up several friends/business associates, and returned to 4V8.  On the day of the accident, the 
pilot flew his friends back to HPN, and was returning to 4V8 alone.
A witness, who lived about 7 miles south of 4V8, stated that about the time of the accident, he 
observed the accident airplane on a final approach for runway 1, a 2,650-foot-long, 75-foot-
wide, asphalt runway.  The witness further stated that the airplane passed over his residence 
about 300 to 500 feet agl.  The landing gear was extended, and the engines "sounded good."  
The witness did not observe the impact, and assumed that the airplane had landed at 4V8.
The airport elevation was 1,953 feet msl.  Review of radar data revealed a target displaying a 
1200 transponder code.
At 1242:08, the target was approximately 8 miles south of 4V8, traveling north, at 3,300 feet 
msl, at 132 knots groundspeed.
At 1244:08, the target was approximately 2 miles south of 4V8, traveling north, at 2,600 feet, 
at 120 knots groundspeed.
At 1245:20, the last radar target recorded was approximately 1/4 mile from the runway 1 
threshold, at 2,100 feet msl, and no groundspeed was recorded; however, the previous target, 
recorded 12 seconds prior, displayed a groundspeed of 120 knots.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate, with ratings for airplane single engine land, 
airplane multiengine land, and instrument airplane.  His most recent Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) second class medical certificate was issued on September 30, 2005.
The pilot's logbook was not recovered.  According to an insurance form the pilot filed on 
September 5, 2006, he had accumulated a total flight experience of 14,000 hours.  Of the total 
flight experience, 8,500 hours were in multiengine airplanes, and 2,600 hours were in the 
same make and model as the accident airplane.  The pilot also reported 4,100 total hours of 
instrument flight experience.  The form did not differentiate between simulated and actual 
instrument flight experience.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane's logbooks were not recovered; however, copies of excerpts from the airplane's 
logbooks were included with the insurance form the pilot filed on September 5, 2006.  
According to those copies, the airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on 
February 15, 2006.  At that time, the airplane had accumulated 2,852.6 total hours of 
operation.  According to the insurance form, the airplane had accumulated 3031.6 total hours 
of operation as of September 5, 2006.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Review of FAA Flight Service information revealed that the pilot had contacted a flight service 
station (FSS) on December 1, 2006, for a trip that day from 4V8 to HPN, and return to 4V8.
There was no record of a FSS weather briefing or flight plan filed for either of the flights on the 
day of the accident.
Review of National Weather Service (NWS) information revealed general VFR conditions along 
the accident route of flight.  A regional radar mosaic, created by the National Center for 
Atmospheric Research, at 1247, depicted very light echoes in the vicinity of the accident site, 
consistent with scattered light snow showers.  The NWS Weather Surveillance Radar-1988, 
Doppler, located at Albany, New York, at 1244, depicted an area of snow showers or a snow 
squall in the vicinity of the accident site, moving east at 35 knots.
At the time of the accident, several airman's meteorological advisories (AIRMETs) were in 
effect for mountain obscuration, moderate turbulence below 12,000 feet, low-level wind shear, 
and moderate icing conditions below 8,000 feet in clouds and in precipitation.  In addition, 
several pilot reports (PIREPs) noted low-level wind shear and moderate to severe turbulence.  
(For more information, see Meteorology Factual Report in the public docket.)
The reported weather at an airport located about 17 miles west of the accident site, at 1254, 
was:  wind from 240 degrees at 9 knots, gusting to 20 knots; visibility 10 miles; overcast ceiling 
at 4,800 feet; temperature 39 degrees Fahrenheit (F); dew point 19 degrees F; altimeter 30.04 
inches Hg.
The reported weather at an airport located about 19 miles southwest of the accident site, at 
1252, was:  wind from 260 degrees at 23 knots, gusting to 30 knots; visibility 10 miles; 
scattered clouds at 5,500 feet; temperature 41 degrees F; dew point 19 degrees F; altimeter 
30.05 inches Hg.
The reported weather at an airport located about 27 miles east of the accident site, at 1255, 
was:  wind from 280 degrees at 12 knots, gusting to 27 knots; visibility 10 miles; broken ceiling 
at 5,000 feet; temperature 41 degrees F; dew point 19 degrees F; altimeter 30.00 inches Hg.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The wreckage was located in a wooded area on December 3, 2006, about 1/2 mile east of the 
approach end of runway 1.  The wreckage was examined on December 4, and all major 
components of the airplane were accounted for at the scene.  An approximate 200-foot debris 
path was observed, that originated with tree strikes.  The debris path extended on a course of 
approximately 095 degrees, and terminated at the main wreckage.  Eight freshly cut tree 
branches were recovered along the left and right side of the debris path.  They varied in 
diameter up to approximately 3 inches, and were cut at approximately 45-degree angles.  The 
right outer wing panel was located near the beginning of the debris path, and slightly left of 
centerline.  The right engine cowl and right engine intercooler were located about midpoint 
along the debris path, and were left of centerline.  The left outer wing panel was located near 
the end of the debris path.  The fuselage nosecone was located abeam the left outer wing panel, 
and right of centerline.
The main wreckage was resting inverted, and oriented about a 180-degree heading.  The cabin 
and cockpit area were consumed by fire.  Due to the damage, flight control continuity could not 
be verified.  The empennage, including vertical stabilizer, rudder, right horizontal stabilizer, 
and elevator, remained intact.  The left horizontal stabilizer had folded underneath the aft 
fuselage.  The left elevator had separated from the stabilizer, and was located in two pieces at 
the main wreckage.  A measurement of the elevator trim jackscrew corresponded to an 
approximate neutral/slight nose up position.  A measurement of the rudder trim jackscrew 
corresponded to an approximate neutral/slight nose right position.
The landing gear and flaps were observed in the retracted position.  The throttle quadrant was 
located in the cockpit area, but had been consumed by fire.  Approximately two-thirds of both 
wings, the inboard sections including engines, remained intact, but were fire damaged.  The 
approximate one-third outboard section of both wings had separated.  The propellers remained 
attached to both engines, and were partially buried in the ground.
The engines were subsequently examined on January 9 and 10, 2007, at a recovery facility.
The left engine was removed from the airframe for inspection.  The valve covers and 
sparkplugs were removed from the engine.  The top and bottom sparkplug electrodes were 
intact, and light to medium gray in color.  The left engine sustained more heat damage than the 
right engine, and the left engine crankshaft could not be rotated.  However, the oil sump and 
lower crankcase had melted away from the left engine, which provided an access opening.  
Crankshaft, camshaft, and valve train continuity was confirmed via borescope through the 
cylinders and access opening.
The number five cylinder on the left engine was also removed to provide an additional access 
opening.  There was no evidence of catastrophic failure or lack of oil lubrication throughout the 
engine.  The magnetos were destroyed by fire and could not be tested.  The oil filter sustained 
heat damage, and some ferrous material was recovered.  The turbochargers were removed.  
The compressor impeller blades had melted, but the shafts were able to be rotated with a drive 
tool.  The fuel manifold was removed and found to be clear of any debris.
One propeller blade on the left propeller exhibited s-bending and blade tip damage.  The other 
two blades exhibited heat damage and were bent aft.
The right engine was removed from the airframe for inspection.  The valve covers and 
sparkplugs were removed from the engine, and oil was present throughout the engine.  The 
sparkplug electrodes were intact, and medium to dark gray in color.  The magnetos were heat 
damaged and could not be tested.  The turbochargers were also heat damaged and could not be 
rotated.  The turbocharger compressor impeller blades had melted.  The fuel manifold was 
removed and found to be clear of any debris.  The oil filter was also found to be absent of 
debris.
The right engine propeller was rotated by hand.  Thumb compression was obtained on all 
cylinders.  Crankshaft, camshaft, and valve train continuity were confirmed.  The right 
propeller blades exhibited s-bending, chordwise scratching, and leading edge gouging.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Vermont State Department of Health, Office of 
the Chief Medical Examiner, Burlington, Vermont.
Toxicological testing was conducted on the pilot at the FAA Toxicology Accident Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to a representative of the owner's insurance company on December 
4, 2006.
