Witnesses observed the airplane impact the water as the pilot maneuvered it at low altitude 
over the ocean.  The weather conditions at the time were clear and sunny.  One witness 
reported that he observed the airplane about 500 feet above ground level in a slightly nose 
down attitude (about 15 degrees nose low) with the wings "near vertical."  As it descended, the 
"wings fluttered," and the airplane entered a steeper dive.  The airplane's "nose went even more 
vertical," and the airplane accelerated towards the water.  It hit nose first, then right wing, and 
sank immediately.  Another witness reported that the airplane went by his position going 
north, flying parallel to the shoreline.  It then made a "real tight, real fast"  180-degree turn and 
headed south.  The airplane was "flying just fine but was real low," maybe 200 to 300 feet 
above ground level.  It "went sideways" so that he could see the top of the airplane and then 
immediately nose-dived into the ocean.  The wing and nose hit at about the same time, and the 
airplane sank immediately.  A search of the area using boats and a helicopter revealed an oil 
slick and several small pieces of floating debris.  The wreckage of the airplane was not 
recovered.
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from the water while performing low altitude 
maneuvering flight resulting in an in flight collision with the water.
On December 2, 2006, about 1600 Pacific standard time, a Holloway RV6A amateur-built 
experimental airplane, N914C, collided with ocean water about 500 yards off Horsefall Beach, 
located about 2 miles northwest of North Bend, Oregon.  The airplane sank and is presumed 
destroyed, and the two occupants, a private pilot and a passenger, were fatally injured.  The 
airplane was registered to the passenger and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight conducted under 
14 CFR Part 91.  The airplane departed from Southwest Oregon Regional Airport in North Bend 
at an unknown time.
According to information provided by the Coos County Sheriff's Office, witnesses reported that 
they saw a small airplane traveling at a high rate of speed flying parallel to Horsefall Beach in a 
northerly direction.  A few moments later, they saw the same airplane fly southbound in a 
similar fashion and nose into the ocean about 500 yards off of the beach.  Sheriff's Office 
personnel reported that the weather conditions at the time were clear and sunny with a 
temperature near 55 degrees F.  A search of the area using boats and a helicopter revealed an 
oil slick and several small pieces of floating debris.  The passenger's body was recovered on 
December 7, 2006, approximately 4 miles south of the accident site.  The pilot's body was 
recovered on December 16, 2006, approximately 40 miles north of the accident site, near 
Florence, Oregon.  Small pieces of wreckage washed ashore; however, the majority of the 
airplane was not recovered.
During a telephone interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), a witness 
reported that he was standing on the beach with his back to the water when he caught sight of 
the airplane to his left, about 1/2 mile north of his position.  It was about 500 feet above 
ground level in a slightly nose down attitude (about 15 degrees nose low) with the wings "near 
vertical."  The port wing was facing up and the belly of the airplane was facing towards him.  
The airplane was descending and when it was about half way to the ground, the "wings 
fluttered," and the airplane entered a steeper dive.  The airplane's "nose went even more 
vertical," and the airplane accelerated towards the water.  He saw the water splash when the 
airplane hit the ocean.  It hit nose first, then starboard wing, and sank immediately.  He did not 
hear any sound at all, except the impact with the water.
A second witness was also interviewed by the NTSB IIC.  This witness reported that he was 
riding in a friend's truck, and they were driving south along the beach.  He had seen the 
accident airplane flying with another airplane a couple of hours earlier.  When he saw the 
airplane earlier, it was "a lot higher," it was "not doing tricks," and it was following the 
coastline.  When he saw the airplane for the second time, it was "pretty low" maybe about 500 
feet above ground level.  It went by his position going north, flying parallel to the shoreline.  He 
had the window rolled down, and he could hear the airplane's engine running.  The airplane 
turned and went south.  It was a "real tight, real fast" turn.  He lost sight of the airplane for a 
couple of seconds and when he saw it again, it was directly offshore from his position in the 
truck.  The airplane was "flying just fine but was real low," maybe 200 to 300 feet above 
ground level.  It "went sideways" so that he could see the top of the airplane and then 
immediately nose-dived into the ocean.  The wing and nose hit at about the same time, and the 
airplane sank immediately.  
The airplane's maintenance records were not located during the investigation.  FAA records 
indicated that the airplane was issued an experimental airworthiness certificate in the amateur 
built category on August 19, 2005.  The records listed the passenger as the builder of the 
airplane.
According to FAA records, the pilot held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single 
engine land rating.  His most recent medical certificate was a third class medical issued on May 
23, 2005, with no limitations.  On the application for this medical certificate, the pilot reported 
that he had a total flight time of 285 hours with 3 hours flown in the past 6 months.  The 
passenger held a student pilot certificate/third class medical issued on October 27, 2005, with 
the limitation, must wear corrective lenses.  On the application for this medical certificate, the 
passenger reported that he had a total flight time of 40 hours with no hours flown in the past 6 
months.
An autopsy of the pilot was conducted on December 19, 2006, at the Sacred Heart Medical 
Center Morgue in Eugene, Oregon by a Deputy State Medical Examiner.  The cause of death 
determined was severe blunt trauma.  Toxicological tests conducted by the FAA's Toxicology 
and Accident Research Laboratory were negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, and drugs.  
Ethanol was detected in the samples; however, the report noted that the ethanol found was 
from sources other than ingestion.
