PURPOSE OF THE FLIGHT WAS TO PRACTICE AEROBATIC MANEUVERS. WITNESSES 
STATED THE AIRPLANE ENTERED A 'FLAT SPIN' FROM WHICH THE PILOT DID NOT 
RECOVER. THE ENGINE WAS RUNNING AT TIME OF IMPACT. THE AIRPLANE 
IMPACTED THE TERRAIN AND A FIRE ENSUED. 
The pilot not performing proper stall/spin recovery procedures. 
 History of Flight
     On April 1, 1995, at 1230 central standard time (CST), a Pitts S-2B, N876CB, operated as a 
personal aircraft by an instrument rated commercial pilot impacted level terrain 1/2 mile east 
of Ottawa Municipal Airport (OWI), Ottawa, Kansas, and was destroyed.  A post-crash fire 
occurred.  The commercial certificated pilot sustained fatal injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions existed at the time of the accident, no flight plan was filed.  The flight operated 
under 14 CFR Part 91, and had originated from OWI at 1220 cst.  
     The purpose of the flight was an aerobatic practice session. Witnesses stated the airplane 
climbed to an altitude of approximately 3,000 feet, leveled off, and entered a "flat-spin" 
maneuver, one mile east of the airport.  The airplane remained in the spin until ground impact.
Personal Information
     The 57 year old pilot held a commercial pilot certificate number 488386430, with privileges 
for single engine land, instrument, and multi-engine and glider tow rating limited to private 
pilot privileges.  In addition he held flight instructor rating with single engine land and 
instrument airplane privileges.
     The pilot's last medical examination was accomplished on October 25, 1994, at which time 
he was issued a Second Class medical certificate with limitations for near vision.  
     The pilot has a total of 5851.0 flight hours at the time of the accident.  His most recent 
biennial flight review was completed on June 13, 1994, in a T-34B.
Airplane Information
     The airplane was a Pitts Aerobatic, S-2B, N876CB, manufactured in 1984, with serial 
number 5033.  The airplane had accumulated 561.2 total hours at the last annual inspection on 
February 3, 1995.  The last entry in the engine log was dated March 13, 1995, at which time 
eight new engine mount rubbers were installed.
Meteorological Conditions
     Olathe, Kansas (IXD) reported that visual meteorological conditions existed at the time of 
the accident, this is consistent with the observations of witnesses near the accident site.
Wreckage and Impact Information
     The airplane came to rest approximately one mile directly east of the Ottowa Airport, in an 
open field.  Inspection of the airframe failed to reveal any pre-existing anomalies.  Engine and 
flight control continuity could not be established due to the post impact fire.  The integrity of 
the engine was confirmed.  All airplane components were located at the point of impact with no 
scatter pattern being noted.
Medical and Pathological Information
     An autopsy was not performed and toxicological samples were not taken.
Fire
     Most of the cockpit was consumed by the post-impact fire.  The exact ignition source is 
unknown.  Much of the fuel system was consumed by fire.
