National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Middlefield, OH
Accident Number: CEN10LA035
Date & Time: 11/01/2009, 1610 EST
Registration: N1142
Aircraft: Blanik L-13
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The glider pilot, who was a certificated flight instructor (CFI), reported that he was following the student pilot on the controls during the takeoff climb.
He observed the tow plane rock its wings indicating to the glider to ﬁwave offﬂ.
The CFI took control of the glider and stated, ﬁIt™s my airplane.ﬂ  He released the tow line, turned 180 degrees to return to the airport, and lowered the nose to increase aircraft energy.
The student felt they were too low to the ground and panicked.
The student pilot grabbed the controls and pulled back on the stick.
The CFI could not overpower the student on the controls and the airplane started to spin left.
He picked up the left wing by applying opposite rudder.
The glider impacted a tractor dealer™s parking lot.
The inspection of the glider revealed that it sustained substantial damage to the fuselage and wings.
No pre-impact anomalies were noted.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's improper control inputs which resulted in the inadvertent stall of the glider.
The certified flight instructor (CFI) and student pilot received serious injuries.
The 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight was departing 7G8 on a local flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The CFI reported that he was following the student pilot on the controls during the takeoff climb.
He observed the tow plane rock its wings indicating to the glider to ﬁwave offﬂ.
The CFI took control of the glider and stated, ﬁIt™s my airplane.ﬂ  He released the tow line and turned 180 degrees to return to the airport.
The CFI lowered the nose to increase aircraft energy.
He reported that the student pilot grabbed the controls and pulled back on the stick.
He could not overpower the student on the controls and the airplane started to spin left.
He picked up the left wing by applying opposite rudder.
The glider impacted a tractor dealer™s parking lot.
Meanwhile, the tow airplane returned to the airport without incident.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector interviewed the student pilot.
The student pilot stated that she observed several puffs of black smoke coming from the tow airplane.
The CFI told her that he had the controls and started a turn back to the airport.
She stated that she felt they were too low to the ground and she panicked, grabbed the controls, and pulled back on the stick.
She heard the CFI shout, ﬁDon™t stall, don™t stall,ﬂ but it was too late and the airplane impacted the ground.
The inspection of the glider revealed that it sustained substantial damage to the fuselage and wings.
No pre-impact anomalies were noted.
