National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Palmer, AK
Accident Number: ANC10LA007
Date & Time: 11/03/2009, 1600 AST
Registration: N1042A
Aircraft: PIPER PA-18-160
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The solo commercial pilot was taking off from a gravel bar on a personal local flight when the accident occurred.
The pilot said that he was taking off from a gravel bar when the left main landing gear tire struck a rock before collapsing.
The left wing then struck the ground, resulting in structural damage to the wing.
According to the pilot there were no mechanical problems with the airplane prior to the accident.
The airplane was not examined by the NTSB.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for takeoff.
Findings Personnel issues Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause) Environmental issues Rough terrain - Contributed to outcome Factual Information On November 3, 2009, about 1600 Alaska standard time, a Piper PA-18-160 airplane, N1042A, sustained substantial damage during takeoff from a gravel bar, about 40 miles southeast of Palmer, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated by the pilot as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91.
The solo commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on November 10, the pilot said he was taking off from a gravel bar when the left main landing gear tire struck a rock, and the left main landing gear collapsed.
He said when the landing gear collapsed, the left wing struck the ground, resulting in structural damage to the wing.
He said there were no mechanical problems with the airplane prior to the accident.
The pilot did not submit an NTSB accident report form as requested.
