National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CLOVERDALE, OH
Accident Number: IAD96LA103
Date & Time: 07/01/1996, 2000 EDT
Registration: N7730V
Aircraft: Aero Commander CALAIR A-9B
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot stated that while spraying a corn field with agriculture products he began climbing to clear some trees and noticed that the fuel pressure light was on.
He switched on the boost pump and switched fuel tanks however, the engine quit.
The aircraft was destroyed when it crashed between two trees and subsequently burned.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Powerplant failure due to undetermined reasons.
Contributing to the severity of the crash was the unsuitable terrain in which the aircraft landed and post-crash fire.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(C) POWERPLANT - FAILURE 2.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information HISTORY OF THE FLIGHT On July 1, 1996, at about 2000 eastern daylight time, a Aero Command Calair A-9B, N7730V, lost fuel pressure, then engine power while spraying agricultural products near Cloverdale, Ohio.
The pilot, the sole occupant, sustained serious injuries.
The airplane was destroyed during the forced landing and post-crash fire.
Visual Meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The local flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 137, and originated from Continental, Ohio, at approximately 0730.
The pilot stated that he departed Hiltner field, his home at about 0730, to spray a field of corn.
He said that the field was in a tight river bottom and as he was about to pull up over some tall trees he noticed that the fuel pressure light was on.
He said that he turned on the boost pump and switched tanks but the engine had already quit.
He said that he made it over the trees and dumped the rest of his chemicals.
The aircraft crashed between two trees.
He said he unfastened his restraints and rolled out the right side of the aircraft and crawled away.
He said he sustained head injuries, and burns to his left arm, face and back.
WRECKAGE EXAMINATION/DOCUMENTATION On July 18, 1996, the wreckage was examined by an Airworthiness Inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and a representative from Lycoming, the engine manufacturer.
The following is a summary of their findings: The cockpit, left wing and the inboard portion of the right wing were destroyed by impact and subsequent post-crash fire.
The empennage remained intact but was impact damaged.
The engine remained attached to the fuselage however, most of the accessory section and fuel lines were destroyed by fire, including the left and right magnetos, engine driven fuel pump, and the fuel injector servo.
The engine crankshaft could be rotated, and all pistons and valves moved in sequence.
There were no pre-existing mechanical failures found during the examination.
According to the FAA inspector the aircraft had been fueled prior to the flight.
The propeller remained attached to the engine.
One blade was bent forward at the midpoint and the opposite blade had an 'S type' curl at the outboard 1/3 of the blade.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
