National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RIO LINDA, CA
Accident Number: LAX96LA256
Date & Time: 07/01/1996, 1145 PDT
Registration: N3229F
Aircraft: Mooney M20E
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the winds were calm when he crossed the threshold 'a little high and 10 knots fast' on the 2,620-foot-long runway 17.
The pilot said, 'I was able to get the wheels on the ground before midfield, but I bounced the airplane and had a very hard time getting it back on the runway.'
The pilot was unable to stop the aircraft prior to running off the departure end about 5 mph.
The aircraft traveled about 15 feet into an area of tall dried grass.
As the pilot shut down the engine he noticed a fire behind the aircraft's wing and evacuated the aircraft.
By the time the pilot could get to a phone, telephone for help, and the local fire department responded, the aircraft was engulfed in flames and eventually consumed by the ground fire.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to attain/maintain the proper approach airspeed, his failure to attain the proper runway touchdown point, and his failure to initiate a go-around when a landing overshoot became apparent.
A factor in the accident was the airport management's failure to ensure that the overrun area was clear of potential fire hazards.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED(VREF) - NOT OBTAINED/MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) DISTANCE/SPEED - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) GO-AROUND - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FIRE Phase of Operation: STANDING - ENGINE(S) OPERATING Findings 5.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY OVERRUN AREA - GRASS 6.
The aircraft was owned and operated by the pilot and was completing a personal cross-country flight from Palo Alto, California.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft was destroyed in the ground fire along with an undetermined amount of grass land and trees.
The certificated private pilot and his one passenger were not injured.
The flight originated in Palo Alto at 1100 on the day of the accident.
The pilot stated that the winds were calm when he crossed the threshold "a little high and 10 knots fast" on the 2,620-foot-long runway 17.
The pilot said, "I was able to get the wheels on the ground before midfield, but I bounced the airplane and had a very hard time getting it back on the runway."
The pilot was unable to stop the aircraft prior to running off the departure end about 5 mph.
The aircraft traveled about 15 feet into an area of tall dried grass.
As the pilot shut down the engine he noticed a fire behind the aircraft's wing and evacuated the aircraft.
By the time the pilot could get to a phone, telephone for help, and the local fire department responded, the aircraft was engulfed in flames and eventually consumed by the ground fire.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 31, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
