National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FRANKLIN, LA
Accident Number: FTW96LA285
Date & Time: 07/01/1996, 0930 CDT
Registration: N14637
Aircraft: Hiller UH12
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot reported that he heard a 'bang' and the engine started 'running rough' while the helicopter was operating at about 100 feet AGL.
The pilot elected to execute a precautionary landing to 'investigate the source of the engine problems.'
The pilot stated that during the precautionary landing the 'rotor RPM started to bleed and sufficient RPM could not be maintained for a successful landing.'
During the low rotor RPM landing touchdown to a muddy grass area, the front cross tube collapsed and the aft skid settled into the mud.
Examination of the airframe revealed that the tailboom, tailrotor gearbox, and a portion of the vertical stabilizer were severed from the helicopter as result of impact with the main rotor blades.
The reason for the partial loss of engine power could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: loss of engine power for undetermined reasons, and the pilot's failure to maintain rotor RPM.
A factor was the unsuitable terrain available for the precautionary landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 3.
(C) ROTOR RPM - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On July 1, 1996, at 0930 central daylight time, a Hiller UH12E helicopter, N14637, was substantially damaged while executing a precautionary landing following a partial loss of engine power near Franklin, Louisiana.
The helicopter, owned and operated by a private owner, was being operated under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the aircraft, was not injured.
The local business flight originated from Patterson, Louisiana, at 0815.
During personal interviews, conducted by the FAA inspector, the pilot reported that he heard a "bang" and the helicopter engine started "running rough" while the helicopter was operating at about 100 feet AGL en route between Patterson and Franklin.
The pilot further stated that he elected to execute a precautionary landing to "investigate the source of the engine problems."
The pilot further stated that during the precautionary landing the "rotor RPM started to bleed and sufficient RPM could not be maintained for a successful landing."
During the low rotor RPM landing touchdown to a muddy grass area, the front cross tube collapsed and the aft skid settled into the mud.
Examination of the airframe revealed that the tailboom, tailrotor gearbox, and a portion of the vertical stabilizer were severed from the helicopter as result of impact with the main rotor blades.
The reason for the partial loss of engine power could not be determined.
The pilot did not complete any of the several Pilot/Operator Reports (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) that were mailed to him.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: , Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
