National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lantana, FL
Accident Number: MIA07CA090
Date & Time: 05/02/2007, 1150 EST
Registration: N7273M
Aircraft: Cessna 172R
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot stated that four full stop landings with the instructor were conducted before the solo endorsement was issued.
After the first solo flight in the pattern, a go around was executed to give way for landing traffic.
The second solo flight around the pattern went very well; final approach and landing went smoothly, and on target.
During the landing roll, he applied brake pressure in addition to pulling back completely on the control yoke to induce aerodynamic braking with the elevator.
As braking was applied, the airplane began to veer to the right.
Full braking was applied; however, the airplane continued the right turn on to the grass.
Attempts were made to avoid the electrical equipment boxes located in the grass.
The airplane missed the far left two but came in contact with the far right box with the airplane's left main landing gear causing complete collapse.
The aircraft came to rest in the field on its left wing.
He secured the airplane and immediately exited.
The student pilot stated there were no mechanical failures or malfunctions to the airplane or any of its systems prior to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during landing roll.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
