Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Brevard, NC
Accident Number:
MIA03LA021
Date & Time:
12/01/2002, 1025 EST 
Registration:
N3529F
Aircraft:
Cessna 182J
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to the pilot during the takeoff roll the control yoke would not pull back to become 
airborne.  He aborted the takeoff, at a point about two-thirds of the way down the 2,903-foot 
runway, and applied the brakes.  The airplane departed the departure end of the runway, hit a 
ditch, and turned about 180 degrees opposite the direction of travel.  Examination of the 
airplane's controls revealed control continuity the to ailerons and rudder.  Elevator continuity 
was confirmed up to the baggage compartment.  Due to impact damage to the forward fuselage 
area, continuity could not be confirmed to the yoke assembly.  The bent control lock pin was 
found on the floorboard between the seats.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the jamming of the elevator control system for undetermined reason, which resulted in the 
airplane departing the runway, and impacting with a ditch, during the aborted takeoff.
Page 2 of 6MIA03LA021
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN
Findings
1. (C) FLT CONTROL SYST,YOKE/CONTROL STICK - UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED
Findings
2. TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH
Page 3 of 6MIA03LA021
Factual Information
On December 1, 2002, about 1025 eastern standard time, a Cessna 182J, N3529F, registered to 
and operated by an individual, impacted with a ditch during an aborted takeoff at the 
Transylvania County Airport, Brevard, North Carolina.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The 
airplane was substantially damaged.  The private-rated pilot, and two passengers reported 
serious injuries.  The flight was originating at the time, and was en route to Birmingham, 
Alabama.
According to the pilot, he performed "a thorough pre-flight inspection and he checked the 
flight controls for freedom of movement."  He added power for takeoff on runway 27, which 
was 2,900 feet long.  Upon passing a taxiway located about 2/3 down the runway, he attempted 
to rotate and was unable to pull back on the yoke, and applied the brakes.  He was unable to 
bring the aircraft to a stop prior to departing the departure end of the runway, struck a ditch, 
railroad embankment, and turned about 180 degrees opposite the direction of travel.
According to the FAA inspector's statement the airplane skidded off the end of the runway, and 
about 1,500 feet of skid marks were noted.  Examination of the airplane's controls revealed that 
control continuity was "verified" to ailerons and rudder.  Elevator continuity was confirmed up 
to the baggage compartment.  The aircraft nose section and firewall were crushed, reducing the 
cabin volume in the rudder pedal area.  The control yoke could not be moved and the control 
lock hole did not line up with the hole in the control yoke sleeve.  The control lock was 
observed on the floor between the front seats. The right main landing gear and the nose gear 
had severed.  No obvious evidence of an engine malfunction was observed and the pilot 
reported the engine was operating normally during the entire event.
According to Cessna's report to the NTSB, the wreckage was viewed in a hangar at the mishap 
airport.  Examination of the fuselage revealed that the firewall was buckled up and aft at the 
bottom, impinging into the passenger compartment.  Other than the firewall damage, the cabin 
environment was not compromised.   No evidence of fire was observed.  Flight control cable 
continuity was confirmed from the empennage to the crushed section of the fuselage.    Moving 
the right aileron up produced movement in the left control yoke.  No such movement was 
observed when moving the left aileron in either direction or the right aileron upwards.  The 
right control yoke was observed to be broken off at its attach point.  The aircraft had been 
modified by installation of a Robertson STOL kit, which included STOL fences (painted the 
same color as the wing, and leading edge cuffs (bare aluminum). The system was said to have 
included the "drooping aileron" option.  The control lock had a small red flag and the pin 
portion showed some polishing of the pin.  The control lock pin was not straight.  In the post 
recovery position, the hole in the control column did not line up with the hole for the control 
lock.  The pilot stated he would normally store the control lock between the front seats.  The 
control lock was observed on the floor between the two front seats.  The elevator control cables 
were observed to be binding in the forward lower floor structure, which was crushed by impact.  
The control cables were traced through the airframe and appeared to be properly routed and 
attached to the rear bellcrank.
   
Page 4 of 6MIA03LA021
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/28/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/28/2001
Flight Time:
800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 370 hours (Total, this make and model), 25 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N3529F
Model/Series:
182J 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
182-51529
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/28/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
25 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4024.2 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-470-R
Registered Owner:
Olen Reid
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
Olen Reid
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA03LA021
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KAVL, 2165 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
25 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0954 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
10°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
3°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Brevard, NC 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Alabaster, AL (EET)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0925 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Airport Information
Airport:
Transylvania County (22W)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2110 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2903 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
35.270278, -82.477500
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alan J Yurman
Adopted Date:
03/30/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Edward Shields; FAA; Chalotte, NC
Emile Lohman; Cessna; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA03LA021
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
