National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BOULDER, CO
Accident Number: DEN99LA111
Date & Time: 07/01/1999, 1515 MDT
Registration: N4785F
Aircraft: Piper PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot departed the airport with a glider in tow.
After the glider was released, she returned for landing.
She made a 'smooth wheel landing with no bounces,' and the aircraft rolled 'straight and smoothly' on the two main wheels.
She felt the tail of the airplane begin to rise, and she pulled back on the stick, but stated that she was unable to get a response from the elevator.
The aircraft continued to roll forward until the spinner impacted the pavement.
The airplane then nosed over onto its back.
The wind was calm during landing.
In a telephone interview with the pilot shortly after the accident, she stated that the aircraft's wheels touched down twice on the runway prior to the third actual touchdown.
Following the accident, a functional test of the elevator control system was performed.
The elevator operated effectively, and no abnormalities or discrepancies were observed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain control of the aircraft during landing roll.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
The private pilot, the sole occupant aboard, was not injured.
The local glider tow flight was being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91, and no flight plan had been filed.
The flight originated approximately 15 minutes prior to the accident, and visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
According to the pilot, she departed the airport with a glider in tow.
After the glider was released, she returned to the airport for landing.
The pilot stated that the wind was calm during landing.
She felt the tail of the airplane begin to rise, and she pulled back on the stick.
She stated that there was no response from the elevator, and the aircraft continued to roll forward slowly until the spinner impacted the pavement.
The airplane then nosed over onto its back.
The aircraft sustained damage to the propeller, firewall, vertical stabilizer, and both wing spars.
At the NTSB's request, a functional test of the elevator control system was performed by a mechanic with Jensen Aircraft, Salida, Colorado.
The elevator operated effectively, and no abnormalities or discrepancies were found.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 41, Female Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
BEACH     SCOTT Adopted Date: 10/13/2000 Additional Participating Persons: WALTER R WISE; DENVER, CO Publish Date: Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
