National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOUSTON, TX
Accident Number: FTW99LA178
Date & Time: 07/01/1999, 2040 CDT
Registration: N5788
Aircraft: Piper PA-24-260
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot failed to maintain the proper descent rate during a VFR approach, in dusk light conditions, following a complete loss of engine power, and the airplane undershot the runway.
The airplane was on the downwind leg at 1,100 feet agl and was abeam the runway numbers when the pilot extended the landing gear.
Simultaneously, she heard a loud bang and noticed a loss of engine power.
The pilot advanced the throttle and realized that the engine had lost total power.
The pilot stated that she trimmed the airplane to attain the best glide speed, but did not verify the airspeed during the ensuing forced landing.
She added that the airplane was descending 'too fast,' and she needed 'more trim to relieve back pressure, but decided to muscle it as best [she] could and try not to stall the airplane.'
Subsequently, the airplane's nose wheel contacted a cement drainage ditch at the approach end of the runway.
Following the accident, the engine was test run in the airframe and found to operate within the manufacturer's specifications.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain the proper descent rate during a forced landing, which resulted in a runway undershoot.
Factors were the total loss of engine power for an undetermined reason and the dusk light conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - DOWNWIND Findings 1.
(F) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY Findings 2.
(C) PROPER DESCENT RATE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: UNDERSHOOT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DUSK 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On July 1, 1999, at 2040 central daylight time, a Piper PA-24-260 airplane, N5788, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain following a complete loss of engine power while executing a VFR approach to the West Houston Airport near Houston, Texas.
The commercial pilot, who was one of four partners who owned the airplane, and her three passengers were not injured.
Dusk visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight and a flight plan was not filed.
The flight originated from the New Braunfels Municipal Airport, New Braunfels, Texas, at 1950.
According to the pilot and a fuel receipt, the airplane was "topped off" with 18 gallons of 100LL aviation fuel at New Braunfels.
Subsequently, the airplane departed New Braunfels for Houston.
The 357-hour pilot reported that the airplane was on a VFR approach to runway 15 at the West Houston Airport.
The airplane was on a left downwind leg, level at 1,100 feet agl, and abeam the runway numbers when she extended the landing gear.
Simultaneously she heard a "loud bang" and noticed a loss of engine power.
The instrument panel lights "flickered," and the illumination in the cockpit failed.
The pilot then advanced the throttle and realized that the engine had lost total power.
The pilot stated that she trimmed the airplane to attain the best glide speed, but did not verify the airspeed during the ensuing forced landing.
She added that the airplane was descending "too fast," and she needed "more trim to relieve back pressure, but decided to muscle it as best [she] could and try not to stall the airplane."
Subsequently, the airplane's nose wheel contacted a cement drainage area at the approach end of the runway and collapsed.
The left main landing gear penetrated the wing structure, and the airplane slid approximately 250 feet down the runway, coming to a stop upright.
The pilot reported that the following light and weather conditions existed at the time of the accident: dusk light, visibility greater than 10 miles, clear skies, and wind from 150 degrees at 15 knots.
The airplane was equipped with a 260-horsepower Lycoming IO-540-D engine, which was examined and test run at Caulkins Aero, Houston, Texas, under the supervision of an FAA inspector.
The spark plugs, magnetos, oil filter, and air filter were examined before the test run and no anomalies were noted.
The fuel selector valve "worked free and correct through all of its ranges," and fuel was present in each of the four fuel tanks.
The engine was run in the airframe for a total of 28 minutes at various rpm and manifold pressure settings, including the maximum power setting.
The engine operated within manufacturer's specifications.
For further details reference the enclosed FAA inspector's statement.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: , Female Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
