National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BILLINGS, MT
Accident Number: SEA99LA103
Date & Time: 07/01/1999, 1445 MDT
Registration: N3513A
Aircraft: Piper PA-22
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that upon touchdown the aircraft began to drift left, and right rudder was applied to correct with no effect.
As the drift continued, the pilot applied right brake, increasing brake pressure until he 'was pushing against the seat.'
The aircraft continued to veer left, tightening its turn radius until it had rotated more than 180 degrees counter- clockwise.
During the rotation, the aircraft settled to the left in line with the runway lights and came to a stop.
Post-crash examination by a certified mechanic revealed that the left main landing gear shock strut tube had separated at its attach point to the left main wheel assembly.
This would have allowed the release of the left main landing gear, permitting it to pivot into a flat (collapsed) position.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The separation of the left main landing gear shock strut for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR SHOCK ABSORBING STRUT - SEPARATION 2.
The pilot and passenger were uninjured.
Visual meteorological conditions existed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The flight, which was personal, was to have been operated under 14CFR91, and originated from Helena, Montana, at 1234.
The pilot reported that upon touchdown on runway 28R the aircraft began to drift left, and right rudder was applied to correct with no effect.
As the drift continued, the pilot applied right brake, increasing brake pressure until he "was pushing against the seat."
The aircraft continued to veer left, tightening its turn radius until it had rotated more than 180 degrees counter-clockwise.
During the rotation, the aircraft settled to the left in line with the runway lights and came to a stop.
The pilot and passenger exited and noted the left main landing gear separated from its bungee (shock strut,) but still attached to the airframe.
Post-crash examination by an IA certified mechanic revealed that the left main landing gear shock strut tube had separated at its attach point to the left main wheel assembly (refer to DIAGRAM I).
This would have allowed the release of the left main landing gear, permitting it to pivot into a flat (collapsed) position.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
