The pilot was on a local test flight after restoring the airplane and flew for about 1 hour, 
performing maneuvers and touch-and-go landings. He then returned to the airport and picked 
up another pilot for a familiarization flight. About 1/2 hour into the second flight, the engine 
sputtered and lost power. The pilot subsequently made an emergency landing on an airstrip, 
and after performing some troubleshooting, he determined that fuel was not getting from the 
header tank to the engine. The pilot was able to eventually get the fuel flowing again and ran 
the engine for about 30 minutes on the ground, followed by accomplishing a successful run up. 
The pilot then departed the airstrip. He reported that the engine ran well until about 200 feet 
above ground level. The engine then lost all power, and the pilot glided the airplane into 15-
foot-tall trees. Postaccident examination of the engine revealed modifications to the exhaust, 
intake, ignition, and fuel systems that were not approved by the manufacturer. At the 
conclusion of the examination, it could not be determined if there was a specific malfunction or 
a combination of the multiple modifications that led to the loss of engine power. According to 
FAA Advisory Circular AC 20-27F, Certification and Operation of Amateur-Built Aircraft, 
"Amateur builders are free to develop their own designs or build from existing designs.ﬂ
A loss of engine power during initial climb for reasons that could not be determined because 
postaccident examination did not reveal a specific anomaly that would have precluded normal 
operation. 
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2011, about 1045 mountain daylight time, a William Wright Avid Flyer, N613HH, 
collided with trees during an off airport forced landing following a loss of engine power on 
takeoff from a strip near Cedar City, Utah. The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The private pilot was not 
injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings from impact forces. The local 
personal flight was departing with a planned destination of Cedar City. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot stated that he departed Cedar City on a local test flight after restoring the airplane. 
He flew for approximately 1 hour, performing both maneuvers and touch-and-go takeoffs and 
landings. He returned to the airport, and picked up another pilot for a familiarization flight.
About 1/2 hour into the second flight, the engine sputtered and lost power. The pilot made an 
emergency landing on a landing strip for radio remote controlled airplanes. He performed 
some troubleshooting, and determined that fuel was not getting from the header tank to the 
engine. He was successful in getting the fuel flowing again. He ran the engine for about 30 
minutes on the ground, and performed a successful run up. The pilot decided to leave his 
passenger at the strip, and fly home alone. He planned to return by car to pick up the 
passenger.
The pilot departed the strip, and reported that the engine ran well until about 200 feet above 
ground level (agl). The engine then lost all power, and he glided the airplane into 15-foot-tall 
trees. He was wearing a three-point harness; the full extent of his injuries included bruises 
along the strap lines.
WRECKAGE EXAMINATION
On April 19, 2011, inspectors from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) supervised 
examination of the airplane by personnel from Rotech Flight Safety, Inc., who were technical 
advisers to the Austrian accredited representative per International Civil Aviation Organization 
Annex 13. The complete Rotech report is part of the public docket; pertinent parts of the report 
follow.
During the visual inspection, the investigators noted modifications to the exhaust system for 
incorporation of cabin heat by shrouding the exhaust muffler, and ducting into the cabin. They 
also observed that the exhaust gas temperature (EGT) probes had been relocated from the 
factory recommended positions, and the previous holes plugged with pop rivets. The 
installation manual noted that EGT would give the most rapid response in the event of 
improper mixture, pre-ignition, or detonation.
The investigators observed an aftermarket mixture control installed on the engine, which also 
included modifications to the fuel and air intake systems. The Rotax installation manual stated 
that no modification should be made to the carburetor and air intake system without 
consulting Rotax. The system installed did not have their approval.
The engine had dual carburetors installed. Both carburetors had jets that were different from 
the stock jets with leaner fuel to air ratios than the stock jets. Both jets were different from each 
other. According to the Rotech representative, in order for the engine to run properly, both 
carburetors must be synchronized to each other, and are required to have the exact same 
jetting.
The fuel filters were installed in the incorrect location on the fuel system. The installation 
manual called for the filters to be between the fuel pump and the carburetors. On the accident 
engine, they were installed between the fuel pump and the fuel tank.
The carburetor vent lines were improperly installed.
The fuel pump was installed improperly to the top of the engine. The installation manual stated 
to mount it in a cool place, not on the engine itself.
The spark plugs were nonstandard. The electrodes were excessively black and sooty, which the 
investigators noted was consistent with a rich fuel/air mixture. Examination of the ignition 
wires revealed that exposed bare wires had been spliced and soldered together, which had the 
potential of shorting. Solder was not an acceptable repair method, and the wire was in poor 
shape.
Improper gear oil had been used to lubricate the Rotary and water pump drive shaft rather 
than 2-stroke injection oil as specified by the manufacturer.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to FAA Advisory Circular AC 20-27F, Certification and Operation of Amateur-Built 
Aircraft, "Amateur builders are free to develop their own designs or build from existing 
designs. We do not approve these designs and it would be impractical to develop design 
standards for the wide variety of design configurations, created by designers, kit 
manufacturers, and amateur builders."
