The flight instructor and private pilot were performing touch-and-go landings. While retracting 
the landing gear, they heard a loud bang. The gear-up light illuminated, indicating that all 
three landing gears were retracted and the doors were closed. The instructor concluded that 
the noise came from the landing gear doors closing into each other. The flight continued, and 
two more landings were planned: one touch-and-go and one full stop. The landing gear 
appeared to operate normally during the touch-and-go. Upon extending the gear for the full 
stop landing, the gear-down light failed to illuminate. After checking the gear down indicating 
system, a visual check with the tower controllers confirmed that all three landing gears were in 
the down position. During touchdown, the nose gear collapsed. A postaccident examination of 
the nose gear assembly revealed that the nose landing gear strut reservoir lacked air pressure 
and the fluid level was very low. This underserviced condition caused binding in the nose gear 
fork assembly and failure of a nose gear push rod, which prevented the nose gear from 
extending to the full down and locked position.
The failure of the nose landing gear due to inadequate servicing of the nose gear strut reservoir.
On April 1, 2011, at 1545 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 310F, N6781X, registered to a private 
individual, incurred substantial damage to the fuselage after the nose gear collapsed during 
landing rollout at Sanford Orlando International Airport (SFB), Sanford, Florida. The certified 
flight instructor (CFI) and his private pilot-rated dual student were not injured. The 
instructional flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The flight 
originated from SFB at 1500.
The CFI reported that after takeoff, while retracting the landing gear, a loud ﬁbangﬂ was heard. 
It was assumed by the CFI that the noise came from the landing gear doors closing into each 
other. The gear-up light illuminated indicating that the landing gear were retracted and the 
doors were closed. The flight returned to SFB for two planned landings; first a touch-and-go 
and then a full stop. On the first landing; the gear were extended and a gear-down light 
illuminated. A touch-and-go was conducted without incident. Upon extending the gear for the 
second landing, the gear-down light failed to illuminate. The landing gear were recycled, and 
the gear light gave a gear-up indication. Another gear extension was attempted, and a gear-
down indication was not received. The CFI contacted the SFB tower to request a low fly-by for 
a visual inspection of the gear position. The tower controller reported all three gear were down 
and the airplane was cleared to land. The touchdown on the main gear was normal; but as 
weight was applied to the nose wheel, the nose gear collapsed.
The airplane was examined by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector under the 
direction of a NTSB investigator. The airplane was raised using aircraft jacks to take the weight 
off of the wheels.  The nose gear shock strut trunnion assembly remained in the compressed 
position. Approximately one inch of the strut trunnion surface was visible. An attempt to 
retract the nose landing gear was unsuccessful, due to the strut fork assembly coming into 
contact with the nose landing gear door attachment brackets. The nose strut trunnion was 
manually extended out of the cylinder until approximately three inches of the piston surface 
was visible. The nose landing gear assembly was then manually raised up into the wheel well 
area and fully retracted. The nose landing gear strut trunnion reservoir was checked for air 
pressure and was totally empty of air. The strut trunnion reservoir was checked for fluid which 
was found to be very low. There were no signs of fluid leakage around the nose landing gear 
strut trunnion. A review of the maintenance logbooks did not reveal any prior discrepancies 
with the nose landing gear assembly.
