This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Murphy, ID
Accident Number: WPR18FA026
Date & Time: 11/03/2017, 0900 MDT
Registration: N4393Z
Aircraft: PIPER PA 18-150
Injuries: 1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On November 3, 2017, about 0900 mountain daylight time, a Piper PA-18-150, N4393Z, 
impacted mountainous terrain about 25 miles south of Murphy, Idaho. The pilot/owner was 
fatally injured, and the passenger received serious injuries. The airplane was substantially 
damaged. The airplane was registered to the owner and operated under the provision of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, as a personal cross-country flight that was departing from 
a private dirt strip and was en route to Boise Air Terminal/Gowen Field (BOI), Boise, Idaho. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight and no flight plan had been filed.
According to a witness, this was a flight of two, with the intent of flying over the owner's 
property spotting for elk. The flight had originally departed from BOI about 0730. They flew 
toward the owner's property, and were flying in the area for about 1.5 hours, when they had to 
land due to the passenger getting airsick. They were on the ground for about 20 minutes, went 
back to the airplanes, and were departing at the time of the accident. The witness reported that 
he was the second airplane; he watched the accident airplane takeoff, establish a positive rate 
of climb, and when the airplane was about 150 feet above the ground, he saw the right wing 
drop with the pilot simultaneously keying the mike and saying "whoa." The airplane's nose 
continued to drop, and the airplane impacted the ground in a nose-low near vertical attitude. 
The pilot of the second airplane removed both the pilot and passenger from the airplane and 
called 911.
Life Flight, Air Ambulance, from BOI was notified of the accident at 0905.
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), an operations 
inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration, and representatives from Piper Aircraft 
and Textron Lycoming Engines responded to the accident site. The entire airplane came to rest 
at the accident site, inverted. The engine remained attached to the propeller assembly as well 
as the engine mounts. The engine mounts remained attached to the firewall. Both wings 
remained attached to the fuselage. The wings had uniform leading edge to trailing edge crush 
damage. The tail and empennage sections remained connected and attached to the fuselage 
and sustained minor damage.
The airplane was recovered to a secure facility for further examination.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: PIPER
Registration: N4393Z
Model/Series: PA 18-150 A150
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Observation Time: 
Distance from Accident Site:
Temperature/Dew Point: 
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: / ,
Lowest Ceiling: 
Visibility:
Altimeter Setting:
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Departure Point: 
Destination: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: 1 Serious
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude: 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Tealeye Cornejo
Additional Participating Persons:
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
