This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Redding, CA
Accident Number: WPR18LA039
Date & Time: 11/02/2017, 0930 PST
Registration: N2103T
Aircraft: CESSNA 172R
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
On November 2, 2017, about 0930 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 172R, N2103T, was 
substantially damaged during an off airport landing after the engine experienced a loss of 
power shortly after takeoff from Redding Municipal Airport (RDD), Redding, California. 
IASCO Flight Training operated the airplane as an instructional flight under the provisions of 
14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91. The certified flight instructor and two students were 
not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area training flight, and no 
flight plan had been filed.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the flight departed to the southeast. 
About 3 miles from the airport, the pilot contacted RDD tower personnel and reported an 
engine failure with sparks coming from the engine. The tower controller cleared the flight to 
land runway 34. During the approach, the airplane was too high, and the pilot elected to go 
around. The tower controller then cleared the pilot to land any runway. The pilot made a turn 
back for runway 16, crossed the runway and landed in a field. 
The airplane was recovered for further investigation.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CESSNA
Registration: N2103T
Model/Series: 172R R
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: IASCO FLIGHT TRAINING INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Observation Time: 
Distance from Accident Site:
Temperature/Dew Point: 
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: / ,
Lowest Ceiling: 
Visibility:
Altimeter Setting:
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Departure Point: 
Destination: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 3 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 3 None
Latitude, Longitude: 40.508889, -122.293333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Tealeye Cornejo
Additional Participating Persons: Richard T Dilbeck; Federal Aviation Administration; Sacramento, CA
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
