Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Pueblo, CO
Accident Number:
CEN12FA151
Date & Time:
02/02/2012, 1912 MST 
Registration:
N31WS
Aircraft:
GATES LEAR JET 35
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground
Injuries:
10 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilots were departing on a contaminated runway with a left crosswind at night in a 
snowstorm. According to global positioning system data, when the airplane reached a ground 
speed of 120 knots on the takeoff roll, it veered to the right. The captain was unable to maintain 
directional control, and the airplane veered off the right side of the runway. The airplane 
continued across several taxiways, and the main landing gear assemblies and the right wing tip 
fuel tank separated from the airframe, then the nose gear collapsed, and the airplane came to 
rest on a grassy area. All eight passengers and both pilots exited the airplane through the main 
cabin door. Postaccident examination revealed that damage to the right main landing gear 
torque link and both tires was consistent with the runway excursion. The cockpit voice recorder 
was not working properly, and audio from the accident flight was not recorded. Data 
downloaded from the digital electronic engine controls indicated that both engines were 
operating with no significant difference in thrust. An examination of the airplane's flight 
controls revealed no preimpact mechanical deficiencies that would have precluded normal 
operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The captain's failure to maintain airplane control during an attempted crosswind takeoff on a 
contaminated runway.
Findings
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Crosswind - Response/compensation (Cause)
Snow/slush/ice covered surface - Not specified
Page 2 of 7CEN12FA151
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 2, 2012, at 1912 mountain standard time, a Gates Learjet 35, N31WS, experienced 
a runway excursion during takeoff from Pueblo Memorial Airport (PUB), Pueblo, Colorado. 
The captain, the first officer and the eight passengers were not injured. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage to the right wing. The airplane was registered to and operated by 
Extrapoint LLC, Lewes, Delaware, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91. Night instrument meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was operated on 
an instrument flight rules flight plan destined for McCarran International Airport (LAS), Las 
Vegas, Nevada.
The flight crew planned a normal takeoff, with an allowance for wet runway conditions. The 
captain performed a preflight inspection of the airplane and found no discrepancies. He also 
confirmed that the Director of Maintenance (DOM) had checked tire pressure of the landing 
gear.
Before takeoff, reported weather conditions included a runway visual range of 5,000 feet with 
light snow. The wind was from 360 degrees at 15 knots. The captain estimated the snow depth 
on the taxiway as 1/8-inch thick. The captain chose to depart on runway 8L with a crosswind 
versus runway 35 because it was longer (10,498 feet). As they approached the hold-short line 
for runway 8L, the captain noted there was no snow on the wings. The control tower reported 
they had no current runway condition reports since there were no recent landings or 
departures. The captain said the snow on the runway seemed to be no heavier than what he 
observed on the taxiway, and he could see the end-stripes on the runway. After the pre-takeoff 
checklist items were completed, the airplane was taxied onto the runway centerline.
 
The captain reported the initial portion of the takeoff was routine. As the airplane accelerated 
toward V1, the captain felt a ﬁlurchﬂ to the right. He immediately applied full left rudder, full 
left aileron, and reduced power, but the airplane continued off the right side of the runway. He 
estimated the angle was about 10 degrees from the runway centerline. As the airplane left the 
runway, the captain heard a noise that sounded like a ﬁshotgun blastﬂ and saw a bright orange 
flash of light out the right side window.
The airplane traveled across several taxiways before coming to rest upright south of the runway 
on the grass. The captain confirmed there was no fire and secured the power levers; firewall 
shut off handles, and started evacuation procedures. The passengers safely exited the airplane 
thru the main door. 
The first officer™s account of the accident was similar to the captain™s.  He said that after 
receiving their take off clearance, the captain taxied the airplane on to the runway and lined up 
on the centerline. He then increased power and the airplane began to accelerate down the 
runway.  The takeoff was normal and there ﬁwas nothing wrongﬂ with the engines. The first 
officer said he was monitoring the instruments and when the airplane reached approximately 
120 knots, he felt a ﬁlurchﬂ to the right. The first officer then looked up and saw the airplane 
rapidly veering off of the right side of the runway. The first officer said he instinctively pushed 
down on the left rudder, but it was already full down to the stop. The first officer said thought 
they must have hit something during the takeoff roll.  The airplane continued onto the grass 
Page 3 of 7CEN12FA151
and they ﬁfloatedﬂ over three ﬁhumpsﬂ before coming to a stop. 
According to the airport manager, a foreign-object debris (FOD) check of the runway was 
conducted after the accident. No debris was found and there was no evidence that the airplane 
had struck something during the takeoff roll. 
A handheld Garmin GPSMAP 496 was removed from the airplane and the accident flight data 
was successfully downloaded at the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Vehicle 
Recorder Laboratory in Washington DC. The data was plotted on an overlay of the runway. The 
first data point was recorded at 1902:34 when the airplane was still at the hangar. The airplane 
then taxied to runway 8L and turned onto the runway at 1910:49. The airplane began the 
takeoff roll at 1910:58 and achieved an average ground speed of 97 knots at 1911:21, just after 
crossing the intersection of runway 17/35.
At 1911:26, the airplane began to veer right of the runway centerline at an average speed of 120 
knots. The airplane continued off the runway at 1911:32, at an average speed of 138 knots. The 
airplane continued to travel over several taxiways before it came to a full stop on the grassy 
area east of taxiway bravo at 1911:59. The last recorded data point was at 1912:51.
A witness, who was working on the ramp, observed the airplane spinning to the left on its belly. 
He observed sparks, flames and an explosion. The witness estimated approximately 1-inch of 
slush was on the ground, along with strong wind and a mix of snow/rain falling at the time of 
the accident.
PILOT INFORMATION
The captain held an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating for airplane multi-engine 
land. In addition, the pilot was a certified flight instructor for airplane single and multi-engine 
land, and instrument airplane. His last Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) first class 
medical certificate was issued on October 27, 2011. He reported a total of 15,584 hours; of 
which, 1,929 hours were in the same make/model as the accident airplane. 
The first officer held an airline transport certificate for airplane multi-engine land. His last 
FAA second class medical certificate was issued on April 27, 2011. He reported a total of 2,198 
hours; of which, 1,063 hours were in the same make/model as the accident airplane.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1853, weather at PUB was reported as wind from 360 degrees at 15 knots, visibility 3/4-
mile, snow, ceiling overcast 300 feet, and a barometric pressure setting of 29.93 inches Hg. (No 
temperatures were reported with this observation.)
At 1953, weather at PUB was reported as wind from 360 degrees at 24 knots gusting to 32 
knots, visibility 1/2-mile, snow, fog, temperature 0 degrees Celsius, dewpoint -1 degree Celsius, 
and barometric pressure setting 29.95 inches Hg.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
A postaccident examination of the wreckage revealed the right wing was deformed between the 
wing root and the stall fence. The right wing tip-tank had separated from the wing. Both the 
right and left main landing gears had separated from the airframe. The nose gear was bent aft 
and pushed up into the airframe. The cockpit area and the fuselage sustained minor damage. 
Flight control continuity was established for all flight control surfaces.
Page 4 of 7CEN12FA151
The right main landing gear sustained impact damage and the torque link was fractured. The 
outboard tire was missing an approximately 6-inch long diamond shaped section of rubber 
material and the inboard tire exhibited a diagonal slash mark.
Examination of the runway environment revealed visible tire marks in the grassy area south of 
the runway between taxiway A5 and A7. Tire tracks made by the right main landing gear were 
in direct line with a 2-inch tall, square concrete structure (electrical vault for airport lighting 
and navigational aid utilities) located just west of taxiway A7. The flat structure extended above 
the ground by approximately 2-3 inches. The concrete on the west side of the drain was gouged 
and scraped.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Right Main Landing Gear Torque Link
The right main landing gear torque link was sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory in 
Washington DC. Examination of the link revealed the pivot was fractured on each side of the 
pivot pin hole. The fracture surfaces exhibited features consistent with an overstress fracture.  
Tires
The right main landing gear tires were sent to the Goodyear Innovation Center in Akron, Ohio, 
and visually examined under the supervision of the NTSB IIC and Division Chief of the NTSB 
Materials Laboratory. Examination of the tires revealed there was no evidence of tire material 
failure or hydroplaning (tread rubber reversion). The observed damage was consistent with the 
tire sustaining a hard impact with an object.
Digital Electronic Engine Controls
Both digital electronic engine controls (DEECs) were successfully downloaded at Honeywell, in 
Phoenix, Arizona, under the supervision of the FAA. The data indicated that both engines were 
operating at the requested power setting and there was no indication of asymmetric thrust.
Cockpit Voice Recorder
The cockpit voice recorder (CVR) was removed from the airplane and sent to the NTSB 
Recorder Laboratory in Washington DC for download.  When the unit was opened to access the 
tape, the tape was found tangled around the final spool and was damaged. Some audio was 
recorded but did not include the accident flight. The audio was consistent with the CVR being 
inoperative at the time of the accident.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Loss of control on ground (Defining event)
Page 5 of 7CEN12FA151
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/27/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/20/2012
Flight Time:
15584 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1929 hours (Total, this make and model), 14377 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 79 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
53, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/27/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/10/2011
Flight Time:
2198 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1063 hours (Total, this make and model), 794 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 27 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7CEN12FA151
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
GATES LEAR JET
Registration:
N31WS
Model/Series:
35 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
027
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
10
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/23/2011, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
18300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
11748 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
GARRETT
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TFE 731 SER
Registered Owner:
EXTRAPOINT LLC
Rated Power:
3500 hp
Operator:
EXTRAPOINT LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PUB, 4729 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1853 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
5000 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
1°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Pueblo, CO (PUB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Las Vegas, NV (LAS)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1912 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Pueblo (PUB)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4729 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Snow; Wet
Runway Used:
08L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
10498 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 7 of 7CEN12FA151
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
8 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
10 None
Latitude, Longitude:
38.286667, -104.491111 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Leah D Yeager
Adopted Date:
04/10/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
William Watts; FAA/FSDO; Denver, CO
Dana Metz; Honeywell; Phoenix, AZ
Terry Rubek; Bombardier Learjet; Engleton, CO
Publish Date:
04/10/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82842
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
