National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fossil, OR
Accident Number: SEA04LA178
Date & Time: 09/01/2004, 1235 PDT
Registration: N4033G
Aircraft: Helio Aircraft LTD H800
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Immediately after becoming airborne the pilot realized that he had failed to remove the exterior aileron wing locks.
About 75 to 100 feet above ground level (AGL) the pilot reduced power and lowered the nose to maintain airspeed and a wings level attitude.
About 75 feet AGL the left wing started to drop slowly and eventually impacted the ground at an approximate 30 to 35 degree left bank.
A post crash examination of the accident site revealed the left and right aileron wing gust locks were located approximately 10 and 15 feet on the ground outboard of their respective wingtips.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to remove the aileron wing gust locks prior to flight, which resulted in a loss of control during the descent/emergency landing.
A factor contributing to the accident was the pilot's inadequate preflight.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(C) FLIGHT CONTROL,GUST LOCK - NOT REMOVED 2.
(F) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On September 1, 2004, approximately 1235 Pacific daylight time, a Helio Aircraft LTD H800, single-engine airplane, N4033G, was destroyed after impacting terrain following takeoff-initial climb approximately 14 nautical miles southwest of Fossil, Oregon.
The airplane was registered to Schmidt Aviation Inc., of Boring, Oregon, and operated by a private individual.
The certificated private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained serious injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight, which was conducted in accordance with 14 CFR Part 91, and a flight plan was not filed.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB form 6120.1/2), the pilot reported that he intended to make a short flight of approximately 5 miles to a friend's ranch.
The pilot stated that flight conditions were favorable with light winds, and that immediately after becoming airborne he realized that he had inadvertently failed to remove the exterior aileron wing locks.
The pilot reported that immediately after realizing this, "...I made the decision to get the plane back on the ground as quick as possible."
The pilot stated that he was about 75 to 100 feet above ground level (AGL) when he reduced power and lowered the nose to maintain airspeed and a wings level attitude.
The pilot further stated that while in his descent and about 75 feet AGL, the left wing started to drop slowly and eventually impacted the ground at an approximate 30 to 35 degree left bank.
There was no post crash fire.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector, who traveled to the accident site, reported the aft fuselage/tail section had been severed aft of the rear cabin bulkhead, coming to rest vertically against the right underside area of the forward fuselage.
The forward fuselage, comprising the cabin and cockpit areas, came to rest in a vertical position resting on the forward cockpit area and both leading edge wings.
The leading edges of both wings were wrinkled and crushed aft.
The inspector also reported that the left and right wing gust locks were located approximately 10 and 15 feet on the ground outboard of their respective wingtips.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 4000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 38.8 Hours Engines: 1 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time: 899.8 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Avco Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-720-AlB Registered Owner: Schmidt Aviation Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
