National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Greeley, CO
Accident Number: DEN04LA144
Date & Time: 09/02/2004, 0900 MDT
Registration: N6XJ
Aircraft: Aviat A-1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, he had just touched down short of his intended landing site and was rolling out when the nose wheel became stuck in the sand.
The airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted near the river causing substantial damage.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's improper in-flight decision to land on an unimproved surface and the pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control.
Contributing to the accident was the soft landing surface.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.
The pilot reported no injuries.
The cross-country flight originated from Longmont, Colorado, at approximately 0800.
According to the accident report submitted by the pilot, he had touched down short of his intended landing site and was rolling out when the nose wheel became stuck in the sand.
The pilot stated that the landing surface was a "private unimproved site."
The airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted near the river.
Both wing struts were bent, three ribs in the right wing were crushed and the rudder fin and vertical stabilizer were crushed.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 60, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
