National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: De Ridder, LA
Accident Number: FTW04LA229
Date & Time: 09/02/2004, 1725 CDT
Registration: N6517E
Aircraft: Cessna 175
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The 290-hour pilot reported that shortly after take-off, when the airplane was approximately 175 feet above ground level (agl) and approximately 4,000 feet down the 5,495- foot-long and 100-foot-wide runway, the engine lost power and was unable to maintain altitude.
He elected to execute a forced landing, and turned approximately seven degrees to the left of the runway to avoid hitting a localizer antennae located near the end of the runway; however, the airplane impacted a fence with the left wing.
The engine was later test run under the supervision of an FAA inspector.
The reason for the reported loss of engine power could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
A contributing factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
OBJECT - FENCE 3.
The private pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The airplane was registered and operated by a private individual.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident and was destined for the Leesville Airport near Leesville, Louisiana.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who responded to the accident site, interviewed the pilot.
According to the inspector, the 290-hour pilot reported that after takeoff, when the airplane was approximately 175 feet above ground level (agl) and approximately 4,000 feet down the 5,495- foot-long and 100-foot-wide runway, the engine lost power.
The pilot cycled the throttle, but the engine showed no increase in power.
After impacting the fence, the pilot re-started the engine and taxied the airplane back to the hangar.
Examination of the airframe by the FAA inspector revealed structural damage to the left wing.
The engine was run on September 8, 2004, under the supervision of an FAA inspector.
It ran at various power settings for approximately five minutes with no interruptions.
No leaks were observed at this time.
The reason for the reported loss of engine power could not be determined.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
