National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Crivitz, WI
Accident Number: CHI04CA250
Date & Time: 09/02/2004, 0930 CDT
Registration: N8173J
Aircraft: Piper PA-32-301
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis A rental airplane received substantial damage on impact with a road during an aborted landing on runway 36 (2,155 feet by 70 feet, dry asphalt).
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident with southerly winds.
The pilot stated that he touched down, "dumped" the flaps, and made a decision that he needed to go-around.
He applied full power and tried to clear the black top road at the end of the runway.
He stated that the road was higher than the runway and had a 2-3 foot "build up" over the road bed.
The main landing gear hit the lip on the black top.
The left main landing gear separated from the airplane, and the right main landing gear was bent.
He then departed and landed at an alternate airport.
The Airport Facility Directory lists runway 36 as having a displaced threshold of 518 feet.
A "road" is also listed under runway 36.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The proper touchdown point not attained by the pilot during landing.
The road and tailwind were contributing factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - RISING 2.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
: Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Engine Model/Series: IO-540 Registered Owner: Olds Forge Flyers Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
