Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Grand Rapids, MI
Accident Number:
CHI03LA063
Date & Time:
02/01/2003, 0800 EST 
Registration:
N5677X
Aircraft:
Beech A36
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The airplane received substantial damage during a high speed pull-up while recovering from an 
unusual attitude after a loss of control during an instrument training flight in actual 
instrument meteorological conditions.  The ceiling was reported to be overcast at 700 feet 
above ground level.  The airplane subsequently returned to the departure airport.  The certified 
flight instructor who was on-board the airplane reported that pre-departure checks of the flight 
instruments were normal.  He said that, during the flight the gyroscopic flight instrument 
became unusable.  A postaccident examination revealed that the turn coordinator circuit 
breaker was in the open position.  Further testing revealed no detectable defects in the 
gyroscopic flight instruments and instrument pressure system.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control which resulted in the overload of the aircraft.  
Spatial disorientation, an inoperative turn coordinator, and the pilot's misinterpretation of the 
flight instruments were contributing factors.
Page 2 of 6CHI03LA063
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM,CIRCUIT BREAKER - DISENGAGED
2. (F) FLIGHT/NAV INSTRUMENTS,TURN AND BANK INDICATOR - INOPERATIVE
3. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
4. (C) FLIGHT/NAVIGATION INSTRUMENT(S) - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
5. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
6. (F) SPATIAL DISORIENTATION - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
----------
Occurrence #2: ABRUPT MANEUVER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. (C) AIRFRAME - OVERLOAD
8. (C) PULL-UP - ABRUPT - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
9. (F) AIRSPEED - HIGH - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
Page 3 of 6CHI03LA063
Factual Information
On February 01, 2003, about 0800 eastern standard time, a Beech A36, N5677X, piloted by a 
certified flight instructor (CFI) and dual student, sustained substantial damage  during a 
recovery from an unusual attitude after a loss of control during instrument flight.  The non-
instrument rated dual student held a private pilot certificate with a single engine land rating.  
The 14 CFR Part 91 training flight was operated in instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) 
with an instrument flight plan.  No injuries were reported.  The flight originated from the 
Gerald R. Ford International Airport (GRR), Grand Rapids, Michigan, about 10 minutes prior 
to the loss of control.  The destination has not been determined.
The weather reporting station located at the departure airport recorded the ceiling and 
visibility as overcast ceiling at 700 feet above ground level, and 7 statute miles respectively.  
The report was taken about 4 minutes prior to the accident.
The CFI reported that prior to departure checks of the engine and flight instruments were 
normal.  He stated that the takeoff was uneventful.  Shortly after takeoff the airplane entered 
IMC.  The CFI said he noticed that the airplane was in a 30 degree bank and he applied right 
aileron to correct.  He said that a subsequent scan of the turn coordinator showed wings level.  
He said that another scan of the attitude indicator showed a bank angle in excess of 60 degrees.  
The CFI stated that he assumed control of the airplane and determined that the gyroscopic 
instruments were not usable.  According to the CFI, the airplane exited IMC in an unusual, 
high speed, nose down, left bank attitude and the he used right aileron and up elevator to 
recover.  The CFI regained control below the overcast and returned to the departure airport.  
The airplane was substantially damaged due to the pull up during recovery.
A postaccident examination of the airplane was conducted.  The wings, horizontal stabilizer 
skins were wrinkled.  Further examination revealed that the wing and horizontal stabilizer 
spars were damaged.  During the examination, the turn coordinator circuit breaker was found 
in the open position.  A run up and taxi test confirmed that the primary and backup instrument 
pressure systems were operational.  The pressure gyroscopic instruments functioned without 
noticeable defect during the test.  Additionally, the turn coordinator circuit breaker was reset 
and no noticeable defects in operation were found during the test.  
Subsequent to the taxi testing, the artificial horizon indicator (AHI) was removed for further 
examination.  Bench testing of the AHI was performed by a certified repair station under the 
supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration official.  The testing of the AHI revealed that 
the unit was in an airworthy condition.
Page 4 of 6CHI03LA063
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
37, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/23/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1230 hours (Total, all aircraft), 16 hours (Total, this make and model), 1160 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 87 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Age:
Airplane Rating(s):
Seat Occupied:
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N5677X
Model/Series:
A36 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
EZ797
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/02/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
14 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
IO 550B
Registered Owner:
Hole Shot Racing Inc.
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
Larry L. Brown
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI03LA063
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GRR, 793 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0756 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.89 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
0°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Grand Rapids, MI (GRR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Unknown 
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0750 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Gerald R. Ford International (KGRR)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
Unknown
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
42.880833, -85.522778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John M Brannen
Adopted Date:
09/30/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Don Finney; FAA-Grand Rapids, Michigan-FSDO; Grand Rapids, MI
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI03LA063
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
