The pilot reported that while in cruise flight at 2500 feet '. . . just past the [Cedar Lake] VOR . . 
. there was a loud 'pop' from the engine compartment and an immediate loss of power.'  During 
a subsequent forced landing, the aircraft struck a large fence post causing the right wing to 
separate. The aircraft rotated 90 degrees and the landing gear collapsed. Examination of the 
aircraft revealed the magneto had disconnected from the accessory gear box. An inspection 
disclosed the upper magneto hold down stud was intact and the associated hardware consisting 
of the nut, washer, lock washer, and hold-down clip were installed; however, the same pieces of 
hardware for the lower hold down stud were missing. Also noted was that a significant section 
of the magneto housing hold-down flange was fractured. 
inadequate maintenance, which resulted in a failure of the magneto housing hold-down flange, 
a disconnect of the magneto from the engine, and loss of engine power.  The obstruction (fence 
post) in the emergency landing area was a related factor. 
 On June 1, 1996, at about 1630 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-32R, N8186G, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing near Williamstown, New Jersey.  The private 
pilot and two passengers were not injured.  The personal flight originated from Kinston, North 
Carolina (ISO), at 1400 with Trenton, New Jersey as the intended destination.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that while in cruise flight at 2500 feet "...just past the [Cedar Lake] VOR 
...there was a loud 'pop' from the engine compartment and an immediate loss of power."  The 
pilot said he trimmed the airplane for best glide speed, located the nearest airport with his 
Loran, and turned the airplane to the heading provided by the Loran.  The front seat passenger 
announced over the Trenton tower frequency the engine power loss, aircraft location, and 
aircraft status throughout the forced landing sequence.
The pilot explained that he chose a "...large pair of adjoining fields..." for landing when he 
could not visually confirm the airport cited by the Loran, and after he determined that all other 
airport options were outside of the airplane's gliding distance.  He said, "We touched down 
near the end of the first field, which was separated from the second field by a barbed wire 
fence.  Unfortunately, one of the posts was, as I learned later, a large railroad tie.  The right 
wing struck the post at the location of the inner fuel tank, causing separation of the tank and 
other significant damage to the right wing.  The impact turned the plane about 90 degrees, the 
landing gear collapsed, and the plane skidded on its belly to a stop in the middle of the second 
field."
Examination of the aircraft revealed the magneto had disconnected from the accessory gear 
box.  The inspection disclosed the magneto hold down stud was intact and the associated 
hardware consisting of the nut, washer, lock washer, and hold-down clip were installed; 
however, the same pieces of hardware for the lower hold down stud were missing.  Also noted 
was a significant section of magneto housing hold-down flange was fractured.
