Both the Fairchild KR-31, N7780, and the Waco QCF, N12428, were occupied by a PIC and a 
pilot-rated passenger. Witnesses observed both biplanes collide at the downwind/base position 
and descend uncontrolled to the ground. Left wing portions from each biplane were found at 
the initial impact site. The lower left wing outboard section of the Waco was found between the 
left wings of the Fairchild. The Fairchild did not have an electrical system. The Waco was 
equipped with navigation lights and an electrical system; however, the type and status of 
avionics equipment could not be determined due to the postimpact fire damage. A light gun 
was available in the temporary control tower; however, it was not being used at the time of the 
collision, and neither biplane was in communication with the tower in Class D airspace. An 
ATC letter to the airport indicated that ATC would separate arriving and departing traffic, with 
ground movement by airport management, operators and pilots, with safety items/factors 
brought to the attention of ATC prior to the operation of the tower. The biplane association and 
the airport representatives stated that the tower was a 'control tower' and applicable control 
airspace procedures were expected by ATC and the pilots. Neither the NBA nor the airport had 
established rigid communication, routing and altitude procedures for the fly-by period, and 
pilot briefings were not conducted. In tension with the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, the 
Federal Aviation Administration did not offer and/or provide the NBA and airport authorities 
with clearly delineated insight and guidance that fostered the safest use of the airspace during 
the fly-in. 
The failure of each pilot-in-command to maintain visual lookout. Factors were: the lack of each 
pilot-in-command obtaining/maintaining communication with the control tower, and 
inadequate lookout by each pilot-rated passenger, the inadequate procedures/directives by the 
biplane association management and the airport management, and inadequate supervision by 
the Federal Aviation Administration. 
 SEE NARRATIVE FOR FTW96FA234A.
