The student pilot, who was flying solo at the time of the accident, reported that during the 
landing roll, the aircraft's left wing dropped and that he was unable to counter this wing drop 
with aileron.  He stated that the tailwheel-equipped aircraft began a 'sweeping [right-hand] 
turn' at this point.  He indicated on a sketch of the accident sequence that a 'L.H. tire skid 
mark' began at the point where the uncontrollable wing drop occurred, curving to the right 
until its termination point on the runway pavement, where he stated he believed the gear 
collapsed.  The aircraft came to rest on the right shoulder of the runway. FAA Advisory Circular 
61-21A, Flight Training Handbook, states that pilots of tailwheel aircraft must be especially 
vigilant for directional control problems during the after-landing roll since the aircraft's center 
of gravity is behind the main wheels, and notes that ailerons and rudder become less effective 
as the airplane slows during the landing roll.  The pilot reported that he had 87.4 total pilot 
hours including 33.8 hours in type, 16.4 solo hours in type, and 45.8 hours of tailwheel aircraft 
time; and had received his solo and tailwheel endorsements within the previous 2 1/2 months. 
the pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during the landing roll, which 
resulted in an inadvertent ground swerve and collapse of the left main gear. 
 On June 1, 1996, at approximately 1230 Pacific daylight time, a Piper PA-20, N1645A, being 
flown by a student pilot, sustained substantial damage in a loss of directional control and 
subsequent main landing gear collapse during landing rollout at Tri-Cities Airport in Pasco, 
Washington.  The pilot of the tailwheel-equipped aircraft, who was its sole occupant, was not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the 
local 14 CFR 91 solo instructional flight.
The pilot's landing attempt was on Pasco runway 21R (7,700 by 150 feet grooved asphalt.)  The 
pilot reported: 
Approach normal.  Flared for 3-point.  [Aircraft] ballooned slightly.  Added slight power 
to arrest second descent to a 3-point touchdown.  Right wing rose suddenly.  Pilot 
corrected....(windsock had just been observed with slight breeze from South).  Aircraft 
leveled momentarily; as ailerons lost effectiveness [aircraft] began sweeping [right hand] 
turn.  Pilot added takeoff power to realign [aircraft with centerline; power aggravated 
situation.  Pilot pulled power as aircraft passed through approximately 30 [degrees] from 
centerline.  [Aircraft] was settling on right hand side....Aircraft came to rest on shoulder of 
runway.
On a hand-sketched diagram of the accident sequence, the pilot indicated that a "L.H. tire skid 
mark" began at approximately the point where a "2nd wing drop" occurred which he "could not 
bring up [with] ailerons", and that the aircraft began a right turn at this point.  The pilot 
depicted the skid mark as curving to the right, and indicated at the skid mark's termination 
point on the diagram:  "gear folds under (I guess)".  The indicated termination point of the skid 
mark was on the pavement in the right half of the runway.  The pilot described the weather at 
the time of the accident as fair, temperature 70 degrees, and winds less than 5 knots.
FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 61-21A, Flight Training Handbook (1980), states the following 
regarding the after-landing roll:
The pilot must be alert for directional control difficulties immediately upon and after 
touchdown due to the ground friction on the wheels.  This is especially true in tailwheel-type 
airplanes because...the center of gravity [CG] is behind the main wheels....Any difference 
between the direction the...airplane is traveling and the direction it is headed will produce a 
moment about the pivot point of the wheels and the airplane will tend to swerve....The 
combination of centrifugal force acting on the CG and ground friction of the main wheels 
resisting it...may... impose a sideward force which could collapse the landing gear.  Tailwheel-
type airplanes are most susceptible to ground loops late in the after-landing roll because 
rudder effectiveness decreases with the decreasing flow of air along the rudder surface as 
the airplane slows.
AC 61-21A also notes in the same section that "as the forward speed of the airplane decreases, 
the ailerons will become less effective."
The pilot reported that at the time of the accident, he had 87.4 hours of total pilot time 
including 33.8 hours in the accident aircraft type, 16.4 hours solo in type, and 45.8 hours of 
tailwheel aircraft time.  The pilot's instructor authorization to solo the PA-20 on his student 
pilot certificate (per 14 CFR 61.87c), and his instructor tailwheel aircraft endorsement in his 
pilot logbook  (per 14 CFR 61.31g), were both dated March 18, 1996, about 2 1/2 months before 
the accident.
