The pilot reported that he was landing on a beach near a remote river to pick up fishermen.  
During the landing roll-out, the pilot slowed the airplane to about 5 knots and was beginning to 
turn the airplane around.  The nose wheel encountered an area of soft sand during the turn and 
the nose wheel strut fractured.  The airplane was equipped with 10.5 X 28.5 X 15 tundra tires, 
wheels, and hubs that were installed on the main landing gear under an FAA Supplemental 
Type Certificate.  The STC requires that the airplane must be equipped with an FAA approved 
nose wheel/tire installation.  The airplane had an oversized 8.50 nose wheel tire and tube 
installed that was approved by an FAA FSDO inspector under a field approval.  The FAA's 
handbook for airworthiness inspectors indicates that modifications to landing gear are major 
alterations and require an STC. 
The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for landing.  Factors in the accident were: soft terrain, 
the use of an oversize nose wheel tire, and the FAA's inadequate field approval process for 
tundra tires. 
 On June 1, 1996, about 1430 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Cessna 206, 
N9608G, sustained a broken nose wheel strut during landing on a remote beach, about 74 
miles southwest of Kodiak, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) cross-country positioning flight under Title 14 CFR Part 91 when the incident occurred.  
The airplane, registered to Redemption Inc., Kodiak, Alaska, and operated by Island Air 
Service, sustained minor damage.  The certificated airline transport pilot, the sole occupant, 
was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  VFR company flight following 
procedures were in effect.  The flight originated at the Kodiak airport about 1350.
The pilot reported that he was landing on a beach near the Ayakulik River to pick up 
fishermen.  During the landing roll-out, the pilot slowed the airplane to about 5 knots and was 
beginning to turn the airplane around. The nose wheel encountered an area of soft sand during 
the turn and the nose wheel strut fractured.  The airplane received damage to the engine 
cowling and propeller.
The airplane is equipped with Bushmaster Management Company, 10.5 X 28.5 X 15 (Model 
SWS-1100-A) tundra tires, wheels, and hubs that were installed on the main landing gear 
under a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) 
SA3611NM.  The STC requires that the airplane must be equipped with an FAA approved nose 
wheel/tire installation.  The airplane did have an 8.50 tire and tube installed that was field 
approved by an FAA airworthiness inspector from the Anchorage Flight Standards District 
Office (FSDO) on 5/11/89.
A review of the FAA's Airworthiness Inspectors Handbook, order 8300.10, revealed that in 
Volume 2, Chapter 1, Perform Field Approval of Major Repairs and Major Alterations, 
Paragraph 7, Required Engineering Approval, states in part: "...A.  Many alterations that are 
commonly called major alterations are actually major design changes and will require a 
Supplemental Type Certificate.  Previously unapproved major changes to structural strength, 
reliability, and operational characteristics affect the airworthiness of the product and therefore 
require engineering approval.  Typical major alterations in the category include the 
following:...(2)  Installation or relocation of equipment and systems or changes that may 
adversely affect structural integrity, flight, or ground handling characteristics of the 
aircraft...(5)  Changes in basic dimensions or external configurations of the aircraft, such as 
wing and tail platform or incidence angles, canopy, cowlings, contour or radii, or location of 
wing and tail fairings...(6)  Changes to landing gear, such as internal parts of chock struts, 
length, geometry of members, or brakes and brake systems...(8)  Changes to primary structure 
that may adversely affect strength or flutter and vibration characteristics."
