The pilot attempted to take off from a 2,471-foot-long rough turf runway. He reported that the 
takeoff attempt went normally until the airplane reached a speed of 40 to 45 MPH and that the 
airplane did not accelerate beyond that speed. Unable to accelerate or to get airborne by the 
point on the runway at which he was accustomed to doing so, the pilot aborted the takeoff and 
initiated braking. The tailwheel-equipped airplane nosed over onto its back about 200 feet 
short of the runway end. After the accident, an FAA inspector computed the airplane to be 32 
pounds over maximum gross weight. The U.S. Government and Washington state airport 
directories indicated that the unattended airport was closed form October 1 through June 1. 
Density altitude at the airport was calculated to be 3,424 feet. 
the pilot's delay in aborting the takeoff, and his excessive use of brakes while decelerating the 
airplane during the aborted takeoff.  Factors relating to the accident were: the pilot's loading 
the airplane above its maximum gross weight, high density altitude, and the rough surface of 
the runway. 
 On June 1, 1996, at approximately 1500 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 120, N2965N, 
sustained substantial damage when it nosed over during an aborted takeoff at Tieton State 
Airport near Rimrock, Washington.  The private pilot received a minor injury; his single 
passenger was uninjured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed for the 14 CFR 91 local flight. 
The pilot was attempting to take off on runway 20, which according to the U.S. Government 
Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD)  is a 2,471 by 140 foot turf runway with a rough surface.  The 
airport elevation is 2,961 feet above sea level.  The pilot reported that the takeoff proceeded 
normally until the airplane reached an indicated airspeed of 40 to 45 MPH, but that "after that 
the indicated airspeed didn't increase."  He reported what happened during the rest of the 
accident sequence as follows:
After landing and taking off about 30 or 40 times from this strip, and in this airplane, 
over the last five or six years, I knew where I should be developing lift and able to get the 
mains off the  rough ground and build airspeed in ground effect.  This was not 
happening.  Even though the airspeed indicator had not risen over about 40 or 45 I was 
still attempted [sic] to ease the yoke back and see if the airplane wanted to fly....The plane 
still did not want to lift into ground effect. Based on previous experience I should have 
had the plane developing lift before the camp ground [just beyond midfield according to a 
hand-drawn sketch furnished with the pilot's statement.] When I passed the camp ground, 
went a little further and still was not developing lift, I pulled all the power...and started 
applying the [brakes].  I eased back on the yoke lowering the tail to the ground and then 
continued to hold the yoke in my gut while applying brakes.  As we slowed I applied more 
brakes....The tail rose and I saw the nose go down as we nosed over the front and  came to rest 
upside down...approximately 200 [feet] from the end of the strip.
The pilot reported the weather at the airport as clear, 30 miles visibility, temperature 72 
degrees F, and altimeter setting 30.80 inches Hg, with no precipitation or restrictions to 
visibility.  He stated in his narrative that the wind sock at the top of the field "was hanging limp 
at the time I launched."  Based on the reported temperature and altimeter setting and the field 
elevation, density altitude was computed by the investigator to be 3,424 feet.
The FAA investigator assigned to the accident, an operations air safety inspector from the 
Flight Standards District Office at Renton, Washington, furnished a post-accident weight and 
balance computation which indicated (based on weight and balance data in the aircraft 
records, and fuel and occupant loading reported by the pilot) that the aircraft's gross weight at 
the time of the accident was 32 pounds over its maximum gross weight (1,482 pounds actual 
versus 1,450 pounds maximum.)
The pilot made the following recommendations on his accident report as to how the accident 
could have been prevented:  "(1) greater power  (2) less weight  (3) abort sooner  (4) go easier 
on the brakes as airplane slows."
The A/FD and the Pilot's Guide to Washington Airports (published by the Washington State 
Department of Transportation Aeronautics Division, which also maintains the unattended 
airport) both indicate that Tieton State Airport is closed from October 1 through June 1.  The 
A/FD contains an instruction to contact the state Aeronautics Division prior to use of the 
airport.
