Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
DFW AIRPORT, TX
Accident Number:
FTW96FA282
Date & Time:
07/01/1996, 0711 CDT 
Registration:
N335AE
Aircraft:
Saab-Scania AB (Saab) SF340B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
15 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
The airplane departed runway 13L and climbed to an altitude of approximately 400 feet AGL 
when the flight crew 'heard a loud bang.'  The right engine upper cowling departed the 
airplane, the right engine shut itself down, and the right propeller automatically feathered.  
The flight crew declared an emergency and executed a single engine landing without further 
incident.  Examination of the airplane's right CT7-9B turboprop engine revealed that the Stage 
2 turbine disk was missing and that approximately one third of the disk was found in the right 
landing light compartment.  One end of the disk fragment progressed through a cooling air 
hole and there was evidence of a fatigue fracture that had initiated from multiple origins on the 
inboard side of the cooling air hole.  Research revealed a layer of deformed microstructure and 
an associated zone of increased disk hardness near the origin area of the fatigue crack.  Test 
disks were drilled using dull and worn drill bits which resulted in plastic deformation and 
increased hardness of the inner diameter hole surfaces.  The manufacturer reported that the 
deformed microstructure correlates to a zone of reduced fatigue properties. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The manufacturer's inadequate procedure for manufacturing the number two turbine disk. 
Page 2 of 7FTW96FA282
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. 1 ENGINE
2. TURBINE ASSEMBLY,TURBINE WHEEL - FAILURE,TOTAL
3. TURBINE ASSEMBLY,CASING - PENETRATED
4. (C) PROCEDURE INADEQUATE - MANUFACTURER
Page 3 of 7FTW96FA282
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 1, 1996, at 0711 central daylight time, a Saab SF340B, N335AE, sustained an 
uncontained engine failure resulting in structural damage to the airframe, while on initial 
takeoff climb from the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Texas.  The two pilots, one 
flight attendant, and 12 passengers were not injured.  The airplane was being operated by 
Wings West as American Eagle Flight 547, under Title 14 CFR Part 121.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the scheduled passenger flight which originated from DFW Airport, 
Texas, approximately 1 minute before the accident.  An IFR flight plan had been filed with 
Shreveport, Louisiana, as its intended destination. 
The airplane departed runway 13L and climbed to an altitude of approximately 400 feet AGL 
when the flight crew "heard a loud bang."  The right engine upper cowling departed the 
airplane, the right engine shut itself down, and the right propeller automatically feathered.  
The flight crew declared an emergency and continued their climb to 2,000 feet MSL while 
coordinating a flight path reversal with DFW tower.  The flight crew executed a single engine 
landing on runway 31R without further incident 7 minutes after the engine failure.
DAMAGE TO AIRCRAFT
Examination of the airplane's right General Electric Aircraft Engines CT7-9B turboprop engine, 
serial number 785-199, revealed two holes in the turbine case in the Stage 2 turbine disk plane 
of rotation, and that the Stage 2 gas generating disk was missing.  Approximately one third of 
the disk exited the engine case at the 9 o'clock position, separating the engine nacelle's left 
nacelle longeron, penetrating the landing light fairing, and coming to rest in the right landing 
light compartment.  The outer passenger window for seat 6C had two puncture holes in it with 
one having a piece of the gas generating disk fir tree lodged in the window.  The skin on the 
right side of the fuselage and the wing root fairing was penetrated 12 times, with 6 of the holes 
containing debris from the right engine.
The right side of the engine case was penetrated with corresponding penetrations to the nacelle 
from approximately 1 to 3 o'clock position.  The right nacelle longeron was deformed, but was 
not severed.  The remaining portion of the number two gas generator disk was not recovered.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
The Stage 2 turbine disk, part number 6064T12P01, serial number GAT2M710, was 
approximately 6 inches in diameter and was manufactured from Rene 95 nickel alloy material.  
The disk had 15 holes through the web area for 5 each tiebolt holes, cooling plate bolt holes, 
and cooling air holes.
The engine and the Stage 2 disk were mated at the time of manufacture.  At the time of the 
accident, they had accumulated a total of 10,502.9 hours and 10,133 cycles since new.  They 
had accumulated 4,472.6 hours and 4,549 cycles since the last shop visit when the Stage 2 disk 
was exposed and inspected.
The engine was removed from the airplane and shipped to the manufacturer's facility for 
disassembly and examination.  See the enclosed Powerplant Group Chairman's Report for 
details of the examination. 
Page 4 of 7FTW96FA282
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The NTSB's materials laboratory examined the wedge shaped fragment of the Stage 2 turbine 
disk which was recovered from the right landing light cavity and observed the following: One 
end of the disk fragment progressed through a cooling air hole.  The portion of the fracture 
radially inboard of the hole contained a heat tinted region that ranged in color from dark blue 
to gray and covered approximately 2/3 of the area between the cooling hole and the bore.  The 
crack arrest marks and river pattern within the heat tinted region were indicative of a fatigue 
fracture that had initiated from multiple origins on the inboard side of the cooling air hole 
adjacent to the radius at the front face of the disk.  Examination of the origin area of the 
fracture with the scanning electron microscope showed that the surface of the air hole did not 
have any mechanical gouges or visible defects that could have contributed to the initiation of 
the crack.  The fracture surfaces on the outboard side of the cooling hole and on the other end 
of the disk fragment had ductile dimple features that are an indication of an over stressed 
fracture. 
Further analysis of the disk fragment by the metallurgists from the NTSB and the 
manufacturer determined that the chemical composition, grain structure, and material 
properties all conformed to the specifications for properly processed Rene 95.  There were no 
indications of any inclusions or handling damage to the part.  A cross section of the disk's air 
hole adjacent to the fracture surface showed the front face of the disk, which was the drill exit 
side, was slightly mushroomed at the tangent to the radius.  Additionally, the metallurgists 
found a layer of deformed microstructure and an associated zone of increased disk hardness 
near the origin area of the fatigue crack.  See the enclosed NTSB Metallurgist's Group 
Chairman Report and the manufacturer's metallurgists report for details. 
The manufacturer reported that they drilled a number of holes, in test disks, using dull and 
worn drill bits.  Examination of these holes revealed displaced material similar to that noted on 
the fractured disk from the accident airplane's engine.  Additionally, the manufacturer found 
that the inner diameter of these test drill holes exhibited plastic deformation of the hole surface 
and these deformed areas were found to exhibit increased hardness.   
ADDITIONAL DATA
The FAA Engine Certification Office, Burlington, Massachusetts, advised the NTSB that it had 
worked with the manufacturer to publish three service bulletins affecting the inspection of the 
CT7 Stage 1 and 2 turbine disk holes (see attached service bulletins).  The FAA also reported 
that they had published an airworthiness directive (AD), which became effective April 15, 1997, 
requiring the inspection of all CT7 Stage 1 and 2 turbine disk holes by the end of 1997 (see 
attached AD).  As the result of this investigation, the manufacturer has made several changes in 
manufacturing procedures of these turbine disks (see attached letter) and in their Overhaul 
Manual for the CT7 engine. 
The airplane was released to the owner's representative.
Page 5 of 7FTW96FA282
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
41, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
9200 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model), 8000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 173 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 58 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Saab-Scania AB (Saab)
Registration:
N335AE
Model/Series:
SF340B SF340B
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
340B-335
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
27
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/12/1996, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
29000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
121 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
6501 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
GE
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
CT7-9B
Registered Owner:
AMR LEASING CORPORATION
Rated Power:
1750 hp
Operator:
WINGS WEST AIRLINES, INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
AMERICAN EAGLE
Operator Designator Code:
WWMA
Page 6 of 7FTW96FA282
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KDF, 603 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0653 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
270°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (DFW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
SHREVEPORT, LA (SHV)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0711 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class B
Airport Information
Airport:
DFW INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT 
(DFW)
Runway Surface Type:
Concrete
Airport Elevation:
603 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
13L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
9000 ft / 200 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
12 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
15 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 7 of 7
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JAMES      F STRUHSAKER
Adopted Date:
03/31/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
TONY D PIRRELLO; DFW AIRPORT, TX
BO-GORAN G WINDOFF; SWEDEN,   
MARK E TAYLOR; LYNN, MA
STEVE   DICKEY; SAN LUIS OBISPO, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
