Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Kalispell, MT
Accident Number:
SEA07LA002
Date & Time:
10/01/2006, 1800 MDT 
Registration:
N1920E
Aircraft:
Cessna 340A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
While extending the landing gear the pilot heard a "loud bang" in the nose of the airplane.  
With both main landing gear having extended normally and the nose gear failing to extend, the 
pilot carried out the emergency landing gear checklist, but was unable to get the nose gear to 
extend.  Air traffic control tower personnel subsequently confimred that the nose landing gear 
had not extended after the pilot did two flybys.  The pilot then landed the airplane on both 
main landing gear, letting the aircraft settle onto its nose as airspeed bleed off, and it came to 
rest approximately 2,000 feet down the runway.  A post-accident examination revealed that the 
adjusting bellcrank was fractured at the upper end where the fork bolt is normally inserted.  
The fracture features were consistent with overstress, and there was no evidence of any 
preexisting damage.  The deformation and fractures appeared consistent with the bellcrank 
rotating relative to a stationary fork bolt during nose gear extension, such as could occur as a 
result of some obstruction or binding in the linkage forward of the bellcrank.  The nature and 
cause of the binding in the linkages could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The fracture of the adjusting bellcrank in overstress due to binding in a linkage forward of the 
bell crank.
Page 2 of 6SEA07LA002
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL RETRACTION/EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - BINDING(MECHANICAL)
2. (C) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL RETRACTION/EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - FRACTURED
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - RUNWAY
Page 3 of 6SEA07LA002
Factual Information
On October 1, 2006, approximately 1800 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 340A, N1920E, 
sustained substantial damage following an emergency landing as a result of the airplane's nose 
landing gear failing to extend prior to landing at the Glacier Park International Airport (GPI), 
Kalispell, Montana.  The left seat airline transport-rated student and the right seat commercial-
rated flight instructor pilot were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for 
the 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The local flight departed 
GPI about 1630.
In a statement submitted to the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot-rated student 
reported that after taking off, the landing gear retracted normally.  The pilot-rated student 
stated that during the subsequent practice instrument approach the landing gear was extended 
during the initial configuration, and retracted again during the missed approach procedure; the 
extension and retraction were both normal.  The pilot-rated student revealed that while 
configuring during the second practice instrument approach, and during the landing gear 
extension sequence, "We heard a loud bang in the nose of the aircraft.  I looked at [the 
instructor] and then at the landing gear lights.  We saw the main gear lights come on but no 
nose gear light, and the [nose] gear unsafe light remained on."  The pilot-rated student and 
instructor then referred to the airplane's Pilot Operating Handbook, carried out the emergency 
landing gear checklist, but were unable to extend the nose gear to the down and locked 
position.  After doing two flybys in close proximity to the Federal Aviation Administration 
control tower, tower personnel confirmed that both main landing gear were down, while the 
nose landing gear remained in the retracted position.  After shutting both engines down on 
short final, the pilot-rated student landed the airplane on Runway 02.  The airplane came to 
rest approximately 2,000 feet down the runway, resting on its nose and both main landing 
gear.  
The IIC retained the adjusting bellcrank from the nose landing gear retraction linkage, which 
was subsequently sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, D.C., for 
examination.  An NTSB Senior Materials Engineer reported that the bellcrank was fractured at 
the upper end where the fork bolt is normally inserted, and that the fracture features were 
uniform light gray and rough, consistent with overstress fracture.  The engineer stated that the 
upper piece of the bellcrank was also cracked and deformed, with the greatest crack opening 
distance located at the forward end of the bellcrank, with corresponding upward deformation 
at the upper side of the piece adjacent to the crack.  The lower piece of the bellcrank contained 
portions of the forwardmost 6 threads for attaching the fork bolt, with thread peaks on the 
lower piece of the bellcrank deformed to the aft.  (Refer to the Materials Laboratory Factual 
Report for a detailed description of the examination.)    
Page 4 of 6SEA07LA002
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/01/2005
Flight Time:
3600 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1200 hours (Total, this make and model), 3500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
69, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N1920E
Model/Series:
340A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
340A0669
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2006, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5990 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
3.4 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6648.2 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520
Registered Owner:
Northwestern Tire Inc.
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
James D. Roth
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6SEA07LA002
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GPI, 2977 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1755 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.83 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Kalispell, MT (GPI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Kalispell, MT (GPI)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1630 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Glacier Park Intl Airport (GPI)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2977 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
02
IFR Approach:
ILS; Practice; Visual
Runway Length/Width:
9007 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
48.310556, -114.255000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas M Little
Adopted Date:
04/25/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Len Wheeler; Federal Aviation Administration; Helena, MT
Bob Speicher; Federal Aviation Administration; Helena, MT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA07LA002
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
