Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Valley Falls, KS
Accident Number:
CEN12LA267
Date & Time:
05/02/2012, 0920 CDT 
Registration:
N85RB
Aircraft:
BELL 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of tail rotor effectiveness
Injuries:
3 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
The helicopter, with the pilot and two passengers aboard, was hovering about 100 to 150 feet 
above ground level with a quartering tailwind. As the pilot turned the helicopter to the right, 
the helicopter started to spin, as reported by the pilot and several witnesses. He applied full left 
pedal and left forward cyclic, and slightly reduced power to stop the rotation. The pilot added 
that he sensed the loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE) and continued with the control inputs to 
fly out of the LTE. The pilot was unable to regain control of the helicopter before it impacted 
the ground. The pilot reported no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the 
helicopter that would have precluded normal operation. Based on the flight conditions at the 
time, the accident sequence is consistent with the helicopter encountering a LTE event.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s inadequate compensation for the wind conditions during a hover maneuver, which 
resulted in a loss of tail rotor effectiveness. 
Findings
Aircraft
Prop/rotor parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Tailwind - Not specified
Page 2 of 5CEN12LA267
Factual Information
On May 2, 2012, about 0920 central daylight time, a Bell 206B Helicopter, N85RB, impacted 
terrain following a loss of control, near Valley Falls, Kansas. The commercial rated pilot and 
two passengers received minor injuries.  The helicopter sustained substantial damage. The 
helicopter was registered to a private individual and operated by Hawkeye Helicopters, Ottawa, 
KS.  Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 aerial observation flight.
 
Several witnesses reported the helicopter ﬁspinningﬂ before the crash.  The helicopter impacted 
the ground near a footpath, with trees on either side of the path.  The helicopter came to rest 
on its left side, with the tailboom and left skid separated from the fuselage. The pilot stated that 
the engine continued to run for a brief time after the accident.
The pilot reported that during a 100-150 agl (above ground level) hover, the helicopter started 
an uncommanded right turn. He applied left full pedal, left-forward cyclic, and a slight 
reduction of power, to stop the rotation.  The pilot added that he sensed the loss of tailrotor 
effectiveness (LTE), and continued with the control inputs to fly out of the LTE. Unable to get 
the helicopter to stop rotating, the pilot elected to enter an autorotation aiming for an open 
area, between a row of trees.
  
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector stated that the pilot reported 
that during an out-of-ground hover, the helicopter had a quartering tailwind.  The pilot 
initiated a right turn and the helicopter started to spin.  The inspector added that the accident 
pilot had recently received his rotorcraft-helicopter rating based on prior military experience; 
however, the pilot did not have much recent helicopter experience.  On the NTSB 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report, 6120.1 form, the pilot reported a total of 
2,398 flight hours in rotorcraft, with 2.1 hours in the accident make/model of helicopter.
FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 90-95, Unanticipated Right Yaw in Helicopters, dated February 
26, 1995 states that the loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE) is a critical, low-speed 
aerodynamic flight characteristic which could result in an uncommanded rapid yaw rate which 
does not subside of its own accord and, if not corrected, could result in the loss of aircraft 
control. It also states, "LTE is not related to a maintenance malfunction and may occur in 
varying degrees in all single main rotor helicopters at airspeeds less than 30 knots."
Paragraph 6 of the AC covered conditions under which LTE may occur. It states:
"Any maneuver which requires the pilot to operate in a high-power, low-airspeed environment 
with a left crosswind or tailwind creates an environment where unanticipated right yaw may 
occur."
Paragraph 9 of the AC states: "When maneuvering between hover and 30 knots: (1) Avoid 
tailwinds. If loss of translational lift occurs, it will result in an increased high power demand 
and an additional anti-torque requirement. (2) Avoid out of ground effect (OGE) hover and 
high power demand situations, such as low-speed downwind turns. (3) Be especially aware of 
wind direction and velocity when hovering in winds of about 8-12 knots (especially OGE). 
There are no strong indicators to the pilot of a reduction of translation lift. (4) Be aware that if 
Page 3 of 5CEN12LA267
considerable amount of left pedal is being maintained a sufficient amount of left pedal may not 
be available to counteract an unanticipated right yaw. (5) Be alert to changing aircraft flight 
and wind conditions which may be experienced when flying along ridge lines and around 
buildings. (6) Stay vigilant to power and wind conditions."
History of Flight
Maneuvering-hover
Loss of tail rotor effectiveness (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of control in flight
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/16/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/02/2012
Flight Time:
8459 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2 hours (Total, this make and model), 5659 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N85RB
Model/Series:
206B 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
831
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/31/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
17038 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ROLLS-ROYC
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20
Registered Owner:
SCOTT JOHN D
Rated Power:
400 hp
Operator:
Hawkeye Helicopter
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN12LA267
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KTOP
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
210°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Overcast / 2400 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2400 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 21 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
200°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.76 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Lawrence, KS (KLWC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Lawrence, KS (KLWC)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Craig Hatch
Adopted Date:
08/29/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Jeff Smith; FAA FSDO; Wichita, KS
Steve Sparks; FAA FSDO; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
08/29/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=83546
Page 5 of 5CEN12LA267
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
