The private pilot, with one passenger, was conducing a Title 14, CFR Part 91 personal flight in 
an experimental, homebuilt airplane.  As a result of the accident, the pilot sustained serious 
injuries, and was unable to recall any details about the accident.  According to rescue personnel 
that responded to the accident site, the pilot reported a loss of engine power during cruise 
flight, and the accident happened as he was attempting a forced landing in an open field.  
Witnesses reported seeing the accident airplane fly over the open field, followed by a series of 
descending, spiral turns over the intended landing site. As the airplane continued the series of 
turns, it abruptly nosed down, and struck the ground nose first.  The airplane sustained 
substantial damage to the wings, fuselage, and empennage.  An FAA airworthiness inspector 
inspected the airplane wreckage after its recovery.  The inspector said that the right fuel tank 
contained about 4 gallons of fuel, and the left fuel tank was empty.  He also reported that he 
did not discover any preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane or the engine.           
 
The loss of engine power during cruise flight for an undetermined reason, and the pilot's 
failure to maintain adequate airspeed during an emergency descent, which resulted in an 
inadvertent stall and in-flight collision with terrain.  A factor associated with the accident was 
the inadvertent stall.   
 
On April 1, 2007, about 1454 Eastern daylight time, an experimental Carris Avid Flyer, 
N9174D, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power and subsequent forced 
landing near Delray Beach, Florida. The private pilot/owner and the one passenger both 
sustained serious injuries. The local 14 CFR Part 91 flight operated in visual meteorological 
conditions.  The flight originated at the Antiquers Aerodrome, a private fly in community, 
located in Delray Beach, about 1430. 
According to rescue personnel that responded to the accident site, the pilot reported a loss of 
engine power during cruise flight, and the accident happened as he was attempting a forced 
landing in an open field.  Witnesses reported seeing the accident airplane fly over the open 
field, followed by a series of descending, spiral turns over the intended landing site.  The 
witnesses said that as the airplane continued the series of turns, it abruptly nosed down, and 
struck the ground nose first.  The airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings, fuselage, 
and empennage.   
The accident airplane was equipped with a Rotax engine, model 582UL.       
According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) 
submitted by the pilot, he has no memory of the accident due to retrograde amnesia.  He said 
that his passenger, who remained conscious following the accident, reported that the engine 
quit running, and the accident happened while he was attempting a forced landing in an open 
field.     
An FAA airworthiness inspector from the Fort Lauderdale Flight Standards District Office 
inspected the airplane wreckage after it was recovered from the accident site. The inspector 
reported that the right fuel tank contained about 4 gallons of fuel, and the left fuel tank was 
empty.  He also reported that he did not discover any preaccident mechanical anomalies with 
the airplane.          
