According to witnesses, the airplane was observed coming down out of the "clouds" and then 
climbing back up into the clouds. The second time they saw it come down out of the "clouds it 
was on its side" and then went out of site and they heard a loud crash. Examination of the 
airframe, flight controls, and engine did not reveal any mechanical anomalies that would have 
contributed to the accident. The pilot had accumulated less than 200 total hours, and was not 
instrument rated. He elected to continue his flight into instrument meteorological conditions 
and lost control.
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control. Contributing to the accident was the non-
instrument rated pilot's continued flight from visual meteorological conditions into instrument 
meteorological conditions, and a low cloud ceiling.
On April 2, 2007, at 0830 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-181, N30465, lost control in-
flight over New Tazewell, Tennessee. The airplane was substantially damaged, and the 
certificated private pilot was killed. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at altitude, 
and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight that departed Armstrong Airport (AXV), 
Wapakoneta, Ohio, destined for the Gatlinburg-Pigeon Forge Airport (GKT), Sevierville, 
Tennessee. The flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Part 91.
Personnel at the Dayton Federal Contract Facility (FCF) Automated Flight Service Station 
reported that on the afternoon of April 1, 2007, at 1325, the pilot contacted them to request 
predicted flight weather conditions for a VFR flight from AXV to GKT on April 2, 2007. 
However, due to a malfunction at the flight briefer position, neither a transcript or voice 
recording could be provided. Additionally, the specialist who provided the services to the pilot 
was no longer employed with Lockheed Martin Flight Services, and therefore they were unable 
to obtain an official personnel statement from the specialist.
According to witnesses, the airplane was observed coming down out of the "clouds" and then 
climbing back up into the clouds. The second time they saw it come down out of the "clouds it 
was on its side" and then went out of site and they heard a loud crash. The witnesses called 911 
and reported the accident.
The pilot, age 58, held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land. His 
certificate was issued on January 18, 2005. He held a third-class medical certificate issued on 
August 15, 2005, with limitations for corrective lenses. The pilot's most recent medical 
certificate showed that he had accumulated 100 hours of flight time. The pilot's logbook was 
not recovered for review.
The nearest weather reporting facility was Knoxville, Tennessee. On the day of the accident at 
0853, winds were 230 degrees at 6 knots, visibility was 7 statute miles, clouds scattered at 
3300 feet, clouds scattered at 4000 feet, altimeter-setting 30.12 inches of mercury.
On-scene examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, found 
that it had impacted into a densely wooded area contacting several trees during the impact 
sequence. The engine had separated from the airframe, and the airframe was fragmented. The 
airplane was recovered from the site, and examined on April 17, 2007. Examination found that 
the fuselage was destroyed and the cabin area was crushed. The instrument panel and throttle 
quadrant received impact damage. The throttle lever and mixture lever were found in the mid 
position. The flap handle remained in the 00-degree flap position. The fuel selector valve was 
found over extended from the right tank position, and fuel was found in the fuel selector valve. 
The valve was field tested by applying low-pressure air through its ports. All ports were free 
from blockage. Flight control continuity was established to all flight controls, except for impact 
and recovery related separations.
The left wing was separated at the wing root. The wing was destroyed and fragmented. The 
right wing was destroyed and separated at the wing root. The empennage was separated from 
the fuselage. The left side of the stabilator had impact damage and was separated. The leading 
edge of this section was crushed aft. The left outboard 2-foot section was separated. The right 
side was damaged and remained attached. The rudder was damaged and remained attached. 
The vertical fin was cut and separated from the fuselage. No preimpact airframe anomalies 
were noted during the examination.
Examination of the engine found it displaced to the left and remained partially attached to the 
airframe by the engine mounts. The exhaust muffler was impact separated and the exhaust and 
intake tubes were impact damaged. The starter remained attached to the engine and no 
damage was noted. The alternator was destroyed. The carburetor was fractured across the 
throttle bore and separated from the engine. The engine driven fuel pump mounting flange was 
fractured.
The engine was suspended from a lift and partially disassembled to facilitate the examination. 
The vacuum pump, carburetor, engine driven fuel pump, magnetos, sparkplugs, oil cooler, oil 
filter and oil suction screen were removed.
The vacuum pump was rotated by hand producing air pressure at the outlet port. When the 
pump was disassembled, the carbon rotor and carbon vanes were found intact.
The carburetor fuel inlet screen was removed and no contaminants were noted. The carburetor 
bowl halves were separated and no fuel was found in the float bow. No obstruction was noted 
in the main fuel nozzle. The engine driven fuel pump was removed and a small amount of a 
liquid with an odor consistent with aviation gasoline drained from the pump when it was tilted 
on its side. The pump mounting flange was fractured and the pump could not be actuated.
The magnetos were removed and rotated by hand. Both magnetos produced spark from all four 
towers. The sparkplugs were removed and exhibited gray coloration and normal wear patterns. 
The oil filter was removed and cut open. No contaminants were noted when the oil filter media 
was examined. The oil suction screen was removed and no contaminants were noted. 
The engine was rotated by means of a tool inserted in the vacuum pump drive pad. 
Compression and suction were observed at all four cylinders as the engine was rotated. 
Continuity of the crankshaft to the rear gears and to the valve train was confirmed. There was 
no indication of pre-impact damage to or failure of the engine as observed.
The propeller remained attached to the crankshaft flange. One propeller blade was curled aft 
approximately 90 degrees about 18 inches outboard of the propeller hub. This blade exhibited 
"S" bending of the trailing edge, cord wise scarring of the cambered face and leading edge 
nicks. The other blade was also curled aft approximately 90 degrees about 18 inches outboard 
of the hub. That blade exhibited cord wise scarring and forward bending of the propeller tip.
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on April 4, 2007, by the University of Pathologists, 
Knoxville, Tennessee. The cause of death was reported as multiple blunt force injuries. 
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the Federal Aviation 
Administration Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. 
The toxicology report stated no carbon monoxide, or cyanide was detected in blood and no 
ethanol was detected in vitreous. 
Ranitidine was present in blood and urine.
Acetaminophen was detected in urine.
