The pilot reported that within minutes following takeoff on each of the two flights that 
preceded the accident flight, he had experienced smoke in the cockpit and promptly landed. 
The accident occurred following the pilot's attempted repairs to his airplane and during the 
third attempted flight. The pilot reported that within minutes after takeoff, he observed smoke 
in the cabin and saw flames near his feet. With diminishing visibility due to smoke filling the 
cockpit, the pilot returned to the airport and landed. The passenger exited the airplane before it 
rolled to a stop, and the pilot followed shortly thereafter. The airplane was consumed by the 
fire. The pilot had attempted to investigate the first and second smoke in the cockpit events, 
with the assistance of personnel from a local fixed base operator, and found a loose hose. The 
pilot opted to purchase a hose attachment clamp from a neighborhood consumer supply store, 
and thereafter proceeded with its installation. No maintenance entry was accomplished for the 
work. The subsequent investigation revealed that the precipitating smoke event was not related 
to the hose, but rather was due to a burn through of the airplane's exhaust muffler.  FAA 
inspectors examined the airplane and found that the engine exhaust muffler had burned 
through at the bottom left end and the hole permitted engine exhaust gasses and flames to be 
directed into the engine compartment and toward the firewall. The exhaust heat had also 
ruptured an aluminum hydraulic brake line, mounted on the firewall, which added to the fire.  
An examination of the airplane's maintenance records revealed that an annual inspection had 
been performed on July 6, 2007, 2.5 operating hours prior to the accident. The airplane's listed 
time in service was 3,104.3 hours. The logbook signoff included the statement that the airplane 
was found to be in an airworthy condition, and airworthiness directive 68-05-01 (exhaust 
inspection) had been complied with. Airworthiness Directive 68-05-01 became effective in 
1968, and it requires inspections of exhaust mufflers installed in specific models of airplanes, 
including the accident airplane. The inspection directs that muffler assemblies (with over 950 
hours in service) be examined for signs of cracks, corrosion, burn-throughs, heat damage, 
collapsed stack, or weld separations.  According to Piper Service Letter number 324C, which 
was incorporated in the airworthiness directive, an exhaust and heat exchange system, which 
has been permitted to deteriorate due to age, poor inspection and maintenance, can 
conceivably cause "engine compartment originated fires in flight."
Page 2 of 7LAX07LA263
The failure of the airplane's exhaust muffler during takeoff that was due to an inadequate 
annual inspection.  Contributing to the accident were the pilot's inadequate inspection to 
isolate the smoke source, and the pilot's decision to continue flight with an unresolved 
maintenance problem.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 2007, about 1748 Pacific daylight time, a Piper PA-22-150, N13WA, was 
consumed by fire and destroyed after landing at the Modesto City Airport, Modesto, California.  
The airplane was owned and operated by the pilot. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the time of the personal flight, and no flight plan had been filed. The private pilot received 
minor injuries, and the passenger received serious injuries. The flight was performed under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, and it originated from Modesto about 
1745.
The pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that earlier during 
the day he refueled his airplane at the Modesto Airport in preparation for a return flight to 
Livermore, California. Then, the pilot and passenger boarded the airplane. In preparation for 
takeoff, the pilot performed an engine run-up.  During the run-up the engine backfired. The 
pretakeoff checks were concluded, and the pilot took off.
The pilot stated a few minutes after departure that he smelled smoke in the cockpit. The pilot 
stated he advised the air traffic controller of his situation and requested to immediately land. 
The pilot's landing was uneventful, and he parked his airplane.
Airport based fire department personnel responded to the event, but no fire suppression 
activities were undertaken. There was no externally visible evidence of fire, and the firemen 
returned to their station. 
The pilot reported that he looked under the engine's cowling to see if he could locate the source 
of the problem. The pilot stated to the Safety Board investigator that he observed an orange 
colored hose (SCAT tubing) had become detached from the muffler, and a clamp was missing. 
The pilot stated to the Safety Board investigator that he believed the hose had routed air 
between the air intake and the exhaust, but he was not certain. He stated that he then acquired 
assistance from an unidentified person who was on the tarmac.
The person on the ramp possessed a Leatherman tool. The person cut a wire in the engine 
compartment. The pilot stated he did not know if the person who was assisting was an FAA 
certified airplane mechanic. After working on the airplane the person went into an "employee 
only" area of the nearby fixed base operator's (FBO) establishment. The FBO did not have a 
clamp to secure the hose.
The pilot borrowed a motor vehicle, drove to a nearby Wal-Mart, purchased a clamp, and 
returned to the airport. According to the pilot, the FBO's personnel assisted in attaching the 
hose and the newly purchased clamp that he had acquired. Upon completion of the attachment 
project, no logbook maintenance entries were made, and no work order for the maintenance 
was generated. The pilot and passenger then attempted to fly back to Livermore. 
Minutes after take off, during initial climb out, the pilot noticed that the engine was smoking 
again. The pilot advised the air traffic controller of his situation, and he landed.
Fire department personnel responded to the event, but no fire suppression activities were 
undertaken. There was no externally visible evidence of fire. 
The pilot stated he again looked beneath the engine cowling. At this time he observed that the 
same hose had partially unraveled and was detached at one end. The pilot opined that he had 
observed the source of the fumes. Upon consulting with an employee of the FBO, the pilot 
acquired another hose that was a "bit longer." The reconnection project was completed, and the 
pilot indicated to the Safety Board investigator his belief that the problem had been solved. 
Again, no logbook maintenance entry or work order was generated.
According to the pilot, he performed another run-up and, finding everything in order, he took 
off. During initial climb a "small amount of exhaust appeared." The pilot turned the airplane 
onto the downwind leg and advised the air traffic controller that he would be returning for 
landing. By the time the airplane progressed to midfield, the conditions had deteriorated and a 
small visible flame appeared forward of his left foot. The pilot reportedly immediately aimed 
for the runway, turned final, and landed as smoke was filling the cockpit.
The pilot stated that on approach it became difficult to see, and during the landing rollout he 
could see only inches ahead. So, he opened a window to look outside. The airplane's brakes 
became totally dysfunctional. As the smoke intensity further increased and the fire spread, the 
passenger exited the rolling airplane via the right cabin door. The pilot followed the passenger's 
exit from the airplane. The airplane came to rest and was consumed by fire.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot holds a private pilot certificate, with an airplane single engine land rating. He does 
not possess any mechanic certificates.
WRECKAGE AND RECORDS EXAMINATION
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) personnel examined the airplane. According to the 
FAA, it found that the engine exhaust muffler had failed in a manner that permitted engine 
exhaust (flame) to be directed into the engine compartment and toward the firewall. An 
approximate 2-inch diameter hole was observed burned through the muffler at its bottom left 
end. The FAA personnel opined that after repeated departures the exhaust heat also ruptured 
an aluminum hydraulic brake line, mounted on the firewall, which added "fuel to the fire."
An examination of the airplane's maintenance records revealed that an annual inspection had 
been performed on July 6, 2007. The airplane's listed time in service was 3,104.3 hours. The 
logbook signoff included the statement that the airplane was found to be in an airworthy 
condition, and airworthiness directive 68-05-01 (exhaust inspection) had been complied with.
The FAA further reported that the pilot-owner's logbook and interviews evidenced the fact that 
the airplane had been operated about 2.5 hours since the annual inspection. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Airworthiness Directive 68-05-01 became effective in 1968. In pertinent part, it requires 
inspections of exhaust mufflers installed in specific models of airplanes, including the accident 
airplane. The inspection directs that muffler assemblies (with over 950 hours in service) be 
examined for signs of cracks, corrosion, burn-throughs, heat damage, collapsed stack, or weld 
separations.  
According to Piper Service Letter number 324C, which was incorporated in the airworthiness 
directive, an exhaust and heat exchange system which has been permitted to deteriorate due to 
age, poor inspection and maintenance, can conceivably cause "engine compartment originated 
fires in flight."
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Modesto City Fire Department records and FAA interviews with a responding fireman indicate 
that the first alert call occurred at 1447. The call was for smoke/fumes in the cabin, and the fire 
department responded to the airplane. 
At 1644, the second alert call was received, and the responding fireman noted it involved the 
same airplane, for the same reason. A fireman approached the pilot and, according to the 
fireman's report, advised the pilot that "he should not fly anymore today the way his luck was 
going." The fireman's report further states that the pilot "just laughed" and walked back to his 
airplane. The pilot had also stated to the fireman that he did not need any help from the fire 
department.  During a subsequent interview with FAA personnel, the fireman recalled that he 
also had informed the pilot that "...this isn't a good day to be flying. You need to come up with a 
new plan to get home." 
At 1748, the third alert call was received. The same fireman returned to the runway, attended 
to the injured occupants of the airplane, and commenced extinguishing the flames.
