Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Jeffersonville, IN
Accident Number:
CHI03LA032
Date & Time:
12/01/2002, 1138 EST 
Registration:
N15723
Aircraft:
Piper PA-34-200
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The main landing gear collapsed during landing rollout.  The pilot reported that when he 
selected 'gear down' the in-transit light illuminated and when the landing gear had extended 
the three landing gear position lights illuminated.  The pilot reported the in-transit light did 
not remain illuminated after the landing gear had extended.  The pilot stated there was "no 
gear warning indication or horn sounding."  The pilot reported a normal landing was made and 
prior to the first taxiway both main landing gear collapsed.  The pilot stated when the main 
landing gear collapsed the in-transit light illuminated and landing gear warning horn sounded.  
The pilot reported the three landing gear position lights remained illuminated after the aircraft 
came to rest.  The airplane was elevated for an operational test of the landing gear.  During 
normal gear extension the nose and right main landing gear extended as designed.  The left 
main landing gear extended approximately 3/4 down before becoming mechanically bound.  
The nose and right main landing gear position lights illuminated.  The left main landing gear 
position light did not illuminate.  The left main landing gear could be forced into the down-
and-locked position and the gear position light would illuminate.  The linkage between the left 
oleo strut assembly and the gear was corroded and dirt was present on the landing gear 
position switches.  The linkage was disconnected and the left main landing gear moved freely.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The mechanical binding of the left main landing gear, which resulted in the left main landing 
gear not fully extending to the down-and-locked position.  Factors to the accident were the 
oleo-strut linkage being corroded and the contamination of the gear position switches.
Page 2 of 5CHI03LA032
Findings
Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - COLLAPSED
2. (C) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL RETRACTION/EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - BINDING(MECHANICAL)
3. (F) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL RETRACTION/EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - CORRODED
4. (F) LANDING GEAR,GEAR INDICATING SYSTEM - CONTAMINATION
Page 3 of 5CHI03LA032
Factual Information
On December 1, 2002, at 1138 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-34-200, N15723, piloted by a 
commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when the landing gear collapsed while landing 
on runway 18 (5,500 feet by 100 feet, dry/asphalt) at the Clark County Airport (JVY), 
Jeffersonville, Indiana.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  
The flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.  The 
flight departed the Bowman Field Airport (LOU), Louisville, Kentucky, at 1045.
According to the pilot's written statement, when he selected 'gear down' the in-transit light 
illuminated and when the landing gear had extended the three landing gear position lights 
illuminated.  The pilot reported the in-transit light did not remain illuminated after the landing 
gear had extended.  The pilot stated there was "no gear warning indication or horn sounding."  
The pilot reported a normal landing was made and prior to the first taxiway both main landing 
gear collapsed.  The pilot stated when the main landing gear collapsed the in-transit light 
illuminated and landing gear warning horn sounded.  The aircraft came to rest at the 
intersection of runways 18 and 32.  The pilot reported the three landing gear position lights 
remained illuminated after the aircraft came to rest.
The airplane was elevated for an operational test of the landing gear.  During normal gear 
extension the nose and right main landing gear extended as designed.  The left main landing 
gear extended approximately 3/4 down before becoming mechanically bound.  The nose and 
right main landing gear position lights illuminated.  The left main landing gear position light 
did not illuminate.  The left main landing gear could be forced into the down-and-locked 
position and the gear position light would illuminate.  The linkage between the left oleo strut 
assembly and the gear was corroded and dirt was present on the landing gear position 
switches.  The linkage was disconnected and the left main landing gear moved freely.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
34, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/20/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/23/2001
Flight Time:
834 hours (Total, all aircraft), 515 hours (Total, this make and model), 743 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5CHI03LA032
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N15723
Model/Series:
PA-34-200 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
34-7350136
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/24/2002, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
60 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7177 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-C1E6
Registered Owner:
Russell Edward Sloan
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
Russell Edward Sloan
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LOU, 546 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
9 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
157°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.24 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-2°C / -12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Louisville, KY (LOU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Jeffersonville, IN (JVY)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1045 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Clark County Airport (JVY)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
474 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5500 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Page 5 of 5CHI03LA032
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
38.365000, -85.738333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
09/30/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Joe P Fisher; FAA - Indianapolis FSDO; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
