The commercial pilot reported that he entered the downwind leg of the airport traffic pattern 
higher than pattern altitude to avoid a traffic conflict. While on downwind, he switched the fuel 
selector and turned on the electric fuel pump. As he turned from downwind onto the base leg of 
the traffic pattern, he reduced engine power to idle and initiated a glide toward the runway. On 
final approach, the pilot realized that the airplane was too low; he added engine power, but the 
engine "failed to respond." He cycled the fuel pump, the engine surged, and the airplane 
impacted treetops and landed short of the runway. The pilot further reported that, after 
landing, he taxied the airplane to the ramp, thus it is unlikely there was a fuel issue.
A postaccident engine examination and test run revealed no anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation. 
The pilot's failure to attain a proper glidepath on approach for landing, which resulted in 
impact with trees. Contributing to the accident was a partial, temporary loss of engine power 
for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident examination did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. 
On November 5, 2016, about 1500 central standard time, a Piper Arrow II airplane, N300KP, 
had an engine hesitation when the pilot added power during short final approach to Watertown 
Municipal Airport (RYV), Watertown, Wisconsin. The airplane subsequently landed short of 
the runway. The airplane was registered to and operated by Wisconsin Aviation, Watertown, 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal local flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed. The commercial pilot was not injured. The airplane 
departed RYV about 1400 and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that upon returning to the airport, after a local flight, he heard another 
aircraft in the left traffic pattern; he remained high when he entered the downwind leg, because 
he had lost sight of the other aircraft. He switched the fuel selector to the left fuel tank and 
turned the electric auxiliary fuel pump on. He reported that to help locate the other aircraft, he 
"slipped" the airplane for "a while" by applying "left rudder only," but then realized that he was 
still too high. He reduced the power to idle and glided from the downwind position to final. On 
final, he saw the airplane was going to be too low so he added power, but the engine "failed to 
respond." The pilot cycled the fuel pump switch off then back on and the "engine surged". The 
airplane struck treetops, the engine "sputtered", and the airplane landed short of the runway. 
The pilot reported that after landing, the propeller continued to rotate and he switched the fuel 
selector to the right fuel tank. He reported that he taxied the airplane to the tarmac without 
further incident. 
The pilot reported that during his preflight inspection, he drained fuel from all the fuel drains 
and did not observe any contaminants or debris in the fuel samples. He also reported that both 
fuel tanks were nearly full when he departed.
The accident was not reported to the NTSB until 30 days after the accident, and the fuel 
quantity could not be verified.
During a postaccident engine and airframe examination at an aircraft maintenance facility, the 
engine was run and all systems operated normally. The engine ran on both the right and the 
left fuel tanks. A visual inspection of the engine and its systems showed no defects. 
In the Operating Tips section of the Piper Arrow II Pilot's Operating Manual, it states in part:
The shape of the wing fuel tanks is such that in certain maneuvers the fuel may move away 
from the tank outlet. If the outlet is uncovered, the fuel will be interrupted and a temporary 
loss of power may result. Pilots can prevent inadvertent uncovering of the outlet by avoiding 
maneuvers which could result in uncovering the outlet.
Extreme running turning takeoffs should be avoided as fuel flow interruption may occur.
Prolonged slips or skids which result in excess of 2000 feet of altitude loss, or other radical or 
extreme maneuvers which could cause uncovering of the fuel outlet must be avoided as fuel 
flow interruption may occur when tank being used is not full.
The Federal Aviation Administration published the Advisory Circular (AC) 90-66A. This AC 
discusses recommended traffic pattern practices at airports without operating control towers 
and states in part:
Arriving aircraft should be at the appropriate traffic pattern altitude before entering the traffic 
pattern. Entry to the downwind leg should be at a 45-degree angle abeam the midpoint of the 
runway.
It is recommended that airplanes observe a 1000-foot above ground level (agl) traffic pattern 
altitude. 
