Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Plymouth, NC
Accident Number:
ERA09LA033A
Date & Time:
11/01/2008, 0935 EDT 
Registration:
N3568W
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-32-260
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Midair collision
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot of a Piper Cherokee (PA-32-260) was practicing a global-positioning-system (GPS) 
instrument approach in visual meteorological conditions without a safety observer onboard. 
Another pilot, in a Piper Dakota (PA-28-236), was also navigating inbound to the airport via 
GPS. Both pilots stated that they made inbound radio calls, during which they didn't hear each 
other, but heard a response from an airplane on the ground. The Dakota subsequently overtook 
the Cherokee and impacted its right side, peeling back the roof. The Dakota then descended, 
coming to rest inverted in trees, while the Cherokee entered a spin until a low-level recovery, 
followed by a descent into a river.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The Piper Dakota (PA-28-236) pilot's failure to see and avoid the Piper Cherokee (PA-32-260).
Findings
Personnel issues
Monitoring other aircraft - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA09LA033A
Factual Information
On November 1, 2008, about 0935 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-32-260 (Cherokee Six), 
N3568W, and a Piper PA-28-236 (Dakota), N2139N, were substantially damaged when they 
collided in mid-air about 5 nautical miles north of Plymouth Municipal Airport (PMZ), 
Plymouth, North Carolina. The certificated private pilot onboard the Cherokee and the 
certificated private pilot onboard the Dakota incurred minor injuries. Neither pilot had filed a 
flight plan, and both airplanes were operating in visual meteorological conditions. The 
Cherokee had departed Plymouth on a local flight, and the Dakota had departed Warren Field 
(OCW), Washington, North Carolina, with Plymouth as the destination. The personal flights 
were conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the pilot of the Cherokee, he was practicing the global positioning system (GPS) 
runway 21 wide area augmentation system (WAAS) approach, utilizing the autopilot. He 
proceeded to BERTI intersection, and subsequently, 10 miles from the airport, he announced 
his position on the airport common traffic advisory frequency. When he reached 7 miles, the 
pilot of an airplane back-taxiing to runway 21 announced his intention to depart to the 
southeast. The Cherokee pilot restated his position, and advised him that he should not be a 
factor. The Cherokee pilot subsequently descended the airplane, and maintained 1,600 feet 
until reaching the final approach fix, ZUHAX intersection. At that point, the autopilot 
intercepted the glideslope, and the airplane began to descend. The pilot of the Cherokee made 
another call to ensure the runway was clear, and "almost instantly," there was a loud bang on 
the right side of the airplane. The windshield and part of the cabin roof separated from the 
airplane, and the airplane entered a right spin, "going straight down." The pilot recovered from 
the spin about 150 feet above a river, and with trees on his right side, all he could do was pull 
the yoke back and land in the river. After landing, the pilot put on his life preserver, and went 
out on the left wing. The airplane subsequently sank, and the pilot was recovered by two 
fishermen.
The pilot also noted that he was initially unaware that another airplane was involved, and 
further noted that he never heard the other pilot on the frequency or saw the other airplane.
According to the pilot of the Dakota, he was inbound to Plymouth and navigating by GPS. 
About 7 miles from the airport, and 2,000 feet, he announced his position. Another pilot 
responded that he was performing an engine run-up on runway 21. The Dakota pilot then 
advised the pilot on the ground that his airplane wouldn't be a problem, and that he was 4 
miles from the airport. Shortly thereafter, the, pilot heard a "Bamm," and the airplane began a 
descent. The pilot made an emergency call on the radio and applied maximum power; however, 
the airplane descended into a tree, spun around, and came to rest in another tree, inverted, 
about 8 feet off the ground. 
The pilot also noted that he did not initially know there was another airplane involved; he 
thought he had hit a bird.
According to a witness on the ground, it appeared that the airplane that landed in the tree was 
"chasing" the other airplane. He remarked to his brother that he thought they would collide, 
which they did. After the collision, one airplane veered off to the left, and the other veered off 
to the right.
A third pilot was in his airplane at Plymouth, back taxiing down runway 21. As he was doing so, 
Page 3 of 5ERA09LA033A
he heard a pilot report his approach to the airport. After the third pilot stated his intentions, 
the airborne pilot advised him that the third pilot's airplane would not be a factor. After the 
accident, and upon further recollection, the third pilot thought he may have heard two inbound 
calls, but was unsure, and both were made from a distance. After departing Plymouth, the third 
pilot heard another pilot report that he had hit a bird.
The Cherokee pilot, age 68, held a private pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land and 
instrument airplane ratings. The pilot reported 1,050 hours of total flight time, and his latest 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class medical certificate was issued in December 
2007. The Dakota pilot, age 71, held a private pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land, 
airplane multiengine land, and instrument airplane ratings. The pilot reported 1,049 hours of 
total flight time, and his latest FAA third class medical certificate was issued in November 
2007. 
Photographs of the Cherokee being recovered from the river revealed impact marks and 
missing cabin roof skin, beginning in the vicinity of the right side, cabin door. 
Weather, recorded at an airport 14 nautical miles to the northeast, at 1142, included clear skies 
and visibility 10 statute miles.
According to Federal Aviation Regulation Part 91.109 (b), "No person may operate a civil 
aircraft in simulated instrument flight unless–the other control seat is occupied by a safety 
pilot who possesses at least a private pilot certificate with category and class ratings 
appropriate to the aircraft being flown."
History of Flight
Approach
Midair collision (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
68, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/30/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/28/2007
Flight Time:
1050 hours (Total, all aircraft), 950 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ERA09LA033A
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N3568W
Model/Series:
PA-32-260 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32-459
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/19/2008, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
35 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3142 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-540 SERIES
Registered Owner:
THOMPSON BILLY T
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
THOMPSON BILLY T
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
EDE, 39 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
14 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1142 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
40°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.33 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Plymouth, NC (PMZ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Plymouth, NC (PMZ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Plymouth Municipal (PMZ)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
39 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
Global Positioning System; 
Practice
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Straight-in
Page 5 of 5ERA09LA033A
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
35.808611, -76.759167 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
11/09/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Douglas Nielson; FAA/FSDO; Greensboro, NC
Publish Date:
09/10/2015
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
