Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
McCall, ID
Accident Number:
SEA08FA116A
Date & Time:
05/02/2008, 1950 MDT 
Registration:
N75856
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172N
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Midair collision
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The Cessna 172N and a Cessna 172 collided in flight over the approach end of the intended 
runway during day, visual meteorological conditions. The airplanes were destroyed during the 
collision and postcrash fire. The pilot of the 172N reported that he entered the airport traffic 
pattern from the northwest and positioned the airplane on the downwind leg of the traffic 
pattern for the landing runway. After transmitting position reports for each segment of the 
pattern on the common traffic radio frequency, the pilot turned the airplane onto final 
approach and proceeded to land. Approximately 30 feet above ground level, prior to 
touchdown, he maneuvered the airplane into a flare which was immediately followed by the 
collision. The pilot reported that he was not aware of the other airplane prior to and during the 
collision sequence. A witness on the ground reported that both airplanes appeared to be on 
final approach, one above the other. The witness lost sight of the airplanes and shortly 
thereafter observed a cloud of black smoke near the approach end of the runway. Recorded 
radar data revealed that the 172N's flight path descended towards the airport from the 
northwest and turned to adjoin the downwind leg for the landing runway. The airplane then 
turned onto a base leg for the landing runway, followed by a turn onto the final approach path 
for the runway. The flight path continued northbound and descended toward the runway. The 
radar data disclosed that the 172's flight path descended toward the runway from the south 
consistent with a straight-in approach. The data further indicated that when the 172N was 
turning onto final approach at 5,600 feet msl, the 172 was at 5,300 msl. The flight path 
continued northbound and descended toward the runway. Federal Aviation Regulations state 
that vigilance shall be maintained by each person operating an aircraft so as to see and avoid 
other aircraft. Postaccident examination disclosed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical 
anomalies with either airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the pilot to maintain adequate visual lookout and clearance from another 
airplane while attempting to land on the same runway.  Contributing to the accident was the 
non-standard pattern entry by the pilot of the other airplane.
Page 2 of 10SEA08FA116A
Findings
Personnel issues
Lack of action - Pilot (Cause)
Monitoring other aircraft - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Traffic pattern procedure - Decision related to condition (Factor)
Page 3 of 10SEA08FA116A
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT  
On May 2, 2008, about 1950 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 172N, N75856, and a Cessna 
172, N4008F, collided in-flight over the approach end of runway 34 at the McCall Municipal 
Airport (uncontrolled), McCall, Idaho. Both airplanes were destroyed during the collision 
sequence and postcrash fire that ensued. N75856's commercial pilot received serious injuries; 
the passenger sustained minor injuries. Of the four occupants aboard N4008F, the private 
pilot and two passengers were killed; the third passenger received serious injuries. N75856 was 
operated by Felts Field Aviation under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulation 
(CFR) Part 91. The visual flight rules (VFR) personal cross-country flight originated from Felts 
Field Airport in Spokane, Washington, approximately 1 hour and 30 minutes prior to the 
accident. A VFR flight plan was in effect. N4008F was operated by the owner/pilot under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91. The VFR personal cross-country flight originated from 
Caldwell Industrial Airport, Caldwell, Idaho, approximately 45 minutes prior to the accident 
and was returning to McCall where the airplane was based. No flight plan was filed. Day visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
 
In a written statement, the pilot of N75856 (172N) reported that he entered the downwind leg 
of the traffic pattern for runway 34 from a 45-degree angle at 6,500 feet mean sea level (msl). 
He made a radio traffic call as he adjoined the downwind leg, and reduced engine power when 
the airplane was abeam the runway identifier numbers. He configured the airplane with 10 
degrees of flaps prior to turning onto the base leg and again, transmitted his position over the 
radio. The pilot turned the airplane onto final approach and conveyed his intention to "land 
long" over the radio. He further stated that while the airplane was approximately 30 feet above 
the runway surface he maneuvered the airplane into a flare. Immediately thereafter the 
collision occurred. The pilot reported that he was not aware of his position relative to the other 
airplane prior to, and during the collision sequence.
During an interview with a Safety Board investigator, a witness on the ground reported that 
both airplanes appeared to be on final approach for runway 34, with one above the other; he 
lost sight of them prior to the collision. The witness added that shortly after loosing sight of the 
airplanes he observed a cloud of black smoke near the approach end of the runway.
The airplanes came to rest on the west shoulder of runway 34 about 1,737 feet north of the 
landing threshold. The airplanes sustained extensive fire and impact related damage.
RADAR INFORMATION 
Recorded radar data was obtained from the Salt Lake City Air Route Traffic Control Center 
(ARTCC) using data from the Fossil, Oregon, air route surveillance radar (ARSR) and the 
Cascade/Boise, Idaho ARSR. Based on the information obtained from both facilities, two radar 
tracks were indentified and consistent with the anticipated flight paths of the accident 
airplanes.
A review of the data disclosed that a primary track (transponder code 1200), consistent with 
that anticipated for N75856, descended towards the airport from the northwest. The radar 
return then displayed a turn to the south consistent with adjoining onto the downwind leg for 
Page 4 of 10SEA08FA116A
runway 34. At 1949:20 the radar return was approximately midfield, southbound, at 5,800 feet 
mean sea level (msl). At 1949:58 the radar return tracked east, consistent with a base leg for 
runway 34, and at 1950:08 the radar return associated with the airplane turned north, 
consistent with a final approach leg for runway 34, at 5,600 feet msl. The radar return 
continued in a northbound descent toward the runway.
A review of the data disclosed that a primary track (transponder code 1200), consistent with 
that anticipated for N4008F, descended towards the airport from the south consistent with a 
straight-in approach for runway 34. At 1949:58 the radar return was at 5,400 feet msl and 
continued northbound, consistent with a final approach leg for runway 34. At 1950:08 the 
radar return was at 5,300 msl. The flight path continued northbound and descended toward 
the runway.
PILOT INFORMATION 
Pilot of N75856
The pilot of N75856, age 30, held a commercial pilot certificate for single-engine land, multi-
engine land and instrument airplanes. The pilot held a certified flight instructor certificate 
(CFI) for single-engine and multi-engine airplanes, and instrument (CFII). The most recent 
FAA first-class medical certificate was issued to the pilot on July 10, 2007, and contained the 
limitation that he wear corrective lenses.  
The pilot reported that his total aeronautical experience consisted of 478 flight hours; 351 flight 
hours were accrued in the capacity of pilot- in-command (PIC) and 143 flight hours were 
obtained in the same make and model as the accident airplane. Approximately 49 hours were 
accrued during the previous 90 days. The pilot completed a flight review on October 15, 2007.
Pilot of N4008F
The pilot of N4008F, age 52, held a private pilot certificate for single-engine land airplanes. 
The most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued to the pilot on August 29, 2007, 
and contained the limitation that he must have glasses available for near vision. 
No personal flight time records (log books) were located by the Safety Board for the pilot. On 
an insurance application dated January 28, 2008, the pilot indicated that his total aeronautical 
experience consisted of 808 flight hours, of which 386 were accrued in the same make and 
model as the accident airplane. On the application, the pilot indicated that he completed a 
flight review on February 18, 2008.  
 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
N75856
The Cessna 172N was manufactured in 1977. The high-wing single-engine airplane was 
equipped with a Lycoming engine, model O-360. The airplane was predominately white with 
orange and brown accent stripes on each side. According to the pilot, the fuel tanks were filled 
full prior to the departure from Spokane.     
N4008F
The Cessna 172 was manufactured in 1958. The high-wing, single-engine airplane was 
equipped with a Continental engine, model O-300. The airplane was white with a red and blue 
Page 5 of 10SEA08FA116A
stripe on the wing tips and a solid blue color undercarriage. According to family members of 
the pilot, the fuel tanks were filled full prior to the departure from Caldwell. 
Neither airplane was equipped with collision avoidance equipment, nor is such equipment 
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Both airplanes were equipped with two-way radios. The preaccident frequency selection of the 
radios could not be determined due to thermal and impact related damage. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest weather observation was recorded at McCall at the time of the accident. The 
following conditions were reported: winds from 180 degrees at 3 knots, visibility 10 miles, sky 
condition clear, temperature 41 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 21 degrees Fahrenheit, altimeter 
setting 30.08 inches of mercury.
According to U.S. Naval Observatory data, sunset occurred at 2052, and the end of civil twilight 
was at 2124.
AIRPORT INFORMATION 
McCall Municipal Airport is located in a valley at an elevation of 5,024 feet and is surrounded 
by rising mountainous terrain.  The airport has a hard-surfaced asphalt runway, which 
constitutes runways 16 and 34 magnetic. Runway 34 is 6,108 feet long, 75 feet wide and is 
equipped with visual approach slope indicator (VASI).
The Airport/Facility Directory (AFD) contained the following entry in the "Airport Remarks" 
section for the McCall Airport: "RWY [runway] 16-34 straight in VFR landings prohibited..." 
The terrain surrounding the airport was covered by snow, however, the asphalt runway was dry 
at the time of the accident.  
The airport was not serviced by an air traffic control tower at the time of the accident. The 
common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) for the airport is 122.8.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The airplanes came to rest entangled on the west side of runway 34, about 1,737 feet north of 
the landing threshold. Both sustained extensive impact and fire related damage. The first 
identified wreckage debris was located on the runway (near the centerline) approximately 
1,000 feet north of the landing threshold. The debris consisted of blue colored paint chips and 
small pieces of aircraft structure.
N75856: 
The wreckage came to rest, upright, on the west side of the runway. Extensive thermal damage 
was noted to the cockpit, cockpit controls, instrumentation and cabin area. The engine 
assembly and associated cowling were located adjacent to the main wreckage; the two-bladed 
propeller (Sensenich) and spinner remained attached to the engine. Leading edge damage and 
chord wise scratches were noted on both propeller blades. A section of blade tip, measuring 
approximately 3-inches in length, was separated from one of the propeller blades.
The main landing gear (left and right) was located with the main wreckage and thermal type 
damage was noted. The nose landing gear was separated from the airframe and located 
approximately 75 feet south of the main wreckage. Investigators found blue paint transfer and 
Page 6 of 10SEA08FA116A
scuffing on the left lower sidewall of the nose wheel tire. 
The wings were located amid the main wreckage. Thermal damage was noted to the inboard 
section, which extended the entire thickness. The right and left lift struts were intact and 
remained attached to their respective wing assembly. The right wing flap and aileron were 
attached to the wing structure and nominal damage was noted. Thermal damage was noted to 
the upper wing skin of the left wing. The outboard section, approximately mid span, of the 
wing was bent and rolled upward. The left wing flap and aileron were attached to the wing 
structure. The aileron was bent and deflected upward. Nominal damage was noted to the 
inboard section of the left flap. Extensive thermal damage was observed to the outboard 
section of the flap. Flight control cable continuity was established for all flight controls. 
According to a representative from Cessna, the flap actuator measurements indicated the flaps 
were extended approximately 5-degrees. 
The tail assembly sustained thermal related damage. The empennage was separated from the 
tail and came to rest, inverted, within the main wreckage. The vertical stabilizer and associated 
rudder remained attached. The assembly was bent to the right, nearly parallel to the horizontal 
stabilizer. The right side horizontal stabilizer was attached to the assembly and the associated 
elevator and trim tab were intact. The left side horizontal stabilizer was attached to the 
assembly and the associated elevator remained affixed. Thermal damage was noted to the 
outboard end of the stabilizer. 
 
N4008F:
The wreckage came to rest, inverted, on the west side of the runway. Extensive thermal damage 
was noted to the cockpit, cockpit controls, instrumentation and cabin area. The engine 
assembly and associated cowling were located adjacent to the main wreckage. The two-bladed 
propeller (McCauley) and spinner were intact and remained attached to the engine. Leading 
edge damage, aft bending and chord wise scratches were observed to one of the propeller 
blades. Chord wise scratches and leading edge damage was located on the other blade; the 
blade was bent forward and curled from mid span to the tip.
Thermal damage was noted to both left and right main landing gear and associated wheel 
assemblies. The nose landing gear and strut assembly remained attached to the airframe 
firewall.
The wings were located with the main wreckage. Thermal damage was observed to the inboard 
sections of the wings, extending through the entire section. Extensive thermal damage was 
noted to the top center wing carry-through (center section). Multiple parallel slash type gouges 
were noted to the top of the wing carry through. The slash marks varied in lengths between 8 
and 17-inches. The slash marks were perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the airplane and 
were dimensionally consistent with a propeller blade tip. Nominal damage was noted to the 
right aileron. The aileron remained attached to the wing structure. Extensive thermal damage 
was noted to the right flap. The left wing flap and aileron were attached to the wing structure. 
The outboard section of the left wing and associated aileron was bent and deflected upward.  
Thermal damage was observed on the inboard section of the flap. 
The empennage was separated from the tailcone, approximately mid span, and came to rest 
with the main wreckage. Extensive aft crushing and tearing was noted to the vertical stabilizer. 
The rudder remained attached to the assembly. Both left and right horizontal stabilizers, 
Page 7 of 10SEA08FA116A
associated elevators and trim tab, were in place and remained attached to the empennage 
assembly. Aft crushing and bending was observed on the stabilizers.
Flight control cable continuity was established for all flight controls. The preimpact position of 
the wing flaps could not be determined.
Postaccident examination disclosed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical anomalies with 
either airplane.     
  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An autopsy was performed on the pilot of N4008F on May 5, 2008, as authorized by the Valley 
County Coroner. The postmortem report attributed the cause of death to thermal injuries and 
blunt force trauma.
The FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute performed forensics toxicology testing on 
specimens from the pilot and no drugs of abuse were detected.   
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION 
FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 90-48C, titled Pilots' Role in Collision Avoidance, states, in part:
"The flight rules prescribed in Part 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) set forth the 
concept of 'See and Avoid.' This concept requires that vigilance shall be maintained at all times, 
by each person operating an aircraft, regardless of whether the operation is conducted under 
Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) or Visual Flight Rules (VFR). 
Pilots should also keep in mind their responsibility for continuously maintaining a vigilant 
lookout regardless of the type of aircraft being flown. Remember that most MAC [mid-air 
collision] accidents and NMAC [near mid-air collisions] occur during good VFR weather 
conditions and during the hours of daylight."
The AC further states, with respect to airport traffic patterns, pilots should: 
"When entering a known traffic pattern at a non tower airport, keep a sharp lookout for other 
aircraft in the traffic pattern. Enter the pattern in level flight and allow plenty of spacing to 
avoid overtaking or cutting any aircraft out of the pattern."
"When approaching an unfamiliar airport fly over or circle the airport at least 500 feet above 
the traffic pattern altitude (usually at 2,000 feet or more above the surface) to observe the 
airport layout, any local traffic in the area, and the wind and traffic direction indicators. Never 
descend into the traffic pattern from directly above the airport."
It further states that pilots must "be particularly alert before turning to the base leg, final 
approach course, and during the final approach to landing. At non tower airports, avoid 
entering the traffic pattern on the base leg or from a straight-in approach to the landing 
runway."
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Midair collision (Defining event)
Page 8 of 10SEA08FA116A
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
30, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/10/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/10/2007
Flight Time:
478 hours (Total, all aircraft), 413 hours (Total, this make and model), 351 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 49 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N75856
Model/Series:
172N 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17268003
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/18/2008, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4402 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360 SERIES
Registered Owner:
FELTS FIELD AVIATION INC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Felts Field Aviation
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 9 of 10SEA08FA116A
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KMYL, 5024 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1950 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
5°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
SPOKANE, WA (SFF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
McCall, ID (MYL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1620 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
McCall Municipal Airport (KMYL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
5024 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6108 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
44.888611, -116.101667
Page 10 of 10
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis J Hogenson
Adopted Date:
04/15/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Douglas Dymock; FAA FSDO; Boise, ID
Max Green; NTSB; Washington, DC
Seth Buttner; Cessna Aircraft; Wichita, KS
Patsy D Rabdau; McCall Police; McCall, ID
Sandy Rowlett; NTSB; Washington, DC
Publish Date:
04/16/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
