The helicopter was being operated as a visual flight rules on-demand passenger flight under 
Title 14, CFR Part 135.  The purpose of the flight was to tranquilize moose for capture and 
collaring.  The company's chief pilot said a moose was shot with a tranquilizer dart from the 
helicopter, and that the helicopter was used to block the moose from moving into a hazardous 
area.  The pilot of an airplane orbiting above said the moose charged the helicopter, and that as 
the helicopter attempted to evade the moose, the moose reared, or jumped, contacting the 
helicopter's tail rotor.  The helicopter pilot reported a loss of directional control, and made a 
hovering autorotation to the ground.  The flex coupling between the drive shaft and the tail 
rotor gearbox failed, and the spinning drive shaft cut the tail boom and separated the tail from 
the rest of the airframe.  According to the chief pilot, the company's practice had been for the 
helicopter to hover/maneuver about 10 feet above the ground, and no closer to the darted 
animal than 10 feet horizontally.  He said the pilot and scientist aboard felt the distances were 
appropriate.  He said this was the first incident of extreme, erratic, behavior on the part of a 
darted animal, and that due to this incident, the company has revised its procedure, and now 
requires the pilot to maintain 30 feet of altitude above the ground and 30 feet horizontally 
from a darted animal.
The inadequate clearance from a tranquilized moose while hovering in ground effect, and the 
operator's inadequate procedures for such operations, which resulted in an in-flight collision 
with the moose.  Factors associated with the accident were the moose, a sheared tail rotor drive 
shaft, and the resultant lack of tail rotor anti-torque control.
On March 3, 2007, about 1610 Alaska standard time, a Hughes 369D helicopter, N5134V, 
sustained substantial damage while hovering in ground-effect, when its tail rotor was struck by 
a moose during a game management operation, about 1 mile southwest of the Gustavus 
Airport, Gustavus, Alaska.  The helicopter was being operated by Temsco Helicopters Inc., 
Ketchikan, Alaska, as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, 
CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The commercial certificated pilot and sole 
passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company flight 
following procedures were in effect.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 5, the chief pilot for the operator said the helicopter was 
involved in a moose tagging operation for the Alaska State Department of Fish and Game.  He 
said the moose was shot with a tranquilizer dart from the helicopter, and that the helicopter is 
used to block the moose's path to prevent them from running into water and drowning, or 
running into an area where the tranquilized animals cannot be handled safely.  He said the 
helicopter was hovering, waiting for the animal to "go down."  The chief pilot said that the pilot 
of an airplane was orbiting above, and saw the moose charge the helicopter.  According to the 
chief pilot, the airplane pilot stated that as the helicopter attempted to evade the moose, the 
moose reared, or jumped, contacting the helicopter's tail rotor.  The airplane pilot said that the 
helicopter made three complete 360 degree rotations before it landed.
The helicopter pilot reported that he was not aware that the moose contacted the tail rotor.  He 
indicated he had a loss of directional control, and said that he made a hovering autorotation to 
the ground.  According to the chief pilot, the flex coupling between the drive shaft and the tail 
rotor gearbox failed.  He said the spinning drive shaft cut through the tail boom adjacent to the 
gearbox, and separated the tail from the rest of the airframe.
On April 2, the chief pilot told the IIC that their past practice had been for the helicopter to 
hover/maneuver about 10 feet above the ground, and no closer to the darted animal than 10 
feet horizontally.  He said this past practice had served them well, and the pilot and scientist 
aboard the helicopter felt the distances were appropriate.  He said this was the first incidence 
of extreme, erratic, behavior on the part of a darted animal.  In a written statement to the 
NTSB dated March 14, the chief pilot reported that due to this incident, the company had 
revised its procedure, and now requires the pilot to maintain 30 feet of altitude above the 
ground, and 30 feet horizontally from a darted animal.
