The pilot reported that during landing roll, the tailwheel-equipped airplane abruptly veered to 
the left and departed the runway.  The pilot regained directional control after the airplane had 
swerved about 60 degrees from the runway.  In the process of returning to the runway, the 
right main landing gear struck an earthen berm about 16 inches high, and the airplane nosed 
over.  Examination of the airplane revealed that the tail wheel side spring, between the rudder 
horn and tailwheel, on the right side of the tail wheel assembly, was disconnected, and the clip 
which held the spring in place was missing.
The loss of a clip and subsequent loss of the spring on the right side of the tail wheel assembly, 
for undetermined reasons, which led to a loss of directional control.  A factor was the berm.
On July 1, 2002, about 1200 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-16, N5921H, was substantially 
damaged while landing at Smith Mountain Lake Airport (W91), Moneta, Virginia.  The 
certificated private pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
personal flight, which originated at Culpeper Regional Airport (CJR), Culpeper, Virginia.  No 
flight plan had been filed for the flight that was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot stated:
"...Approach to Smith Mountain Lake was normal.  On roll-out aircraft started left hand turn 
and exited hard surface.  Regained control, [airplane] pointed about 60 degrees from 
centerline.  Started turn back to runway when right wheel struck a mount of dirt about 16 
inches high.  Aircraft went over onto it back.  Found right hand link from tailwheel to rudder 
horn missing."
In a follow-up telephone interview, the pilot described the left turn as abrupt, with no 
indication of a problem prior to the turn.
According to an inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), examination of the 
airplane revealed that the clip which held the tail wheel spring to the tail wheel on the right 
side of the tail wheel assembly, was missing, and the spring was disconnected.  A search of the 
runway failed to find the clip.  The FAA inspector also reported that the vertical stabilizer and 
rudder were bent.  The right wing was bent at the fuselage attach point, and the right wing strut 
was bent.
Runway 05 was 3,050 feet long, 50 feet wide, and had an asphalt surface.
The closest recorded weather was Roanoke Regional/Woodrum Field Airport (ROA), Roanoke, 
Virginia, located 23 nautical miles northwest of the accident site.  The reported winds at 1154, 
were variable at 3 knots.
