The private certificated pilot was searching for a lost hiker along a river drainage in a float-
equipped airplane.  The pilot said he was maneuvering between 500 to 1,000 feet above the 
ground and had encountered turbulence that was being produced in the canyons along the 
river.  Just before the accident, the pilot said a strong gust of wind yawed the airplane 
sideways, and lifted the left wing.  The airplane descended toward the ground.  The pilot 
leveled the airplane just before the float assembly collided with alder bushes along the bank of 
the river.  The airplane then did a cartwheel and came to rest facing opposite the initial 
direction of travel.  The airplane received damage to the float assembly, fuselage, and wings.
The pilot's inadequate weather evaluation, which resulted in a turbulence encounter and 
subsequent collision with a river embankment during maneuvering flight.  A contributing 
factor was the presence of terrain induced turbulence.
On July 2, 2002, about 1400 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Piper PA-18 airplane, 
N1129A, sustained substantial damage when it collided with an embankment after 
encountering turbulence while maneuvering along a river, about 15 miles northeast of 
Talkeetna, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR,) local-area 
personal flight, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was operated by the pilot.  The 
private certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.  The flight originated from Talkeetna about 1215.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on July 2, the pilot reported that he departed Christensen Lake, 
Talkeetna, and was searching for a lost hiker along the Sheep River, east of Talkeetna.  The 
pilot said he was flying between 500 to 1,000 feet above the ground, and was returning to 
Talkeetna.  During the flight, the pilot said he encountered moderate turbulence that was being 
produced in the canyons along the river.  Just before the accident, the pilot said a strong gust of 
wind yawed the airplane sideways, and lifted the left wing.  The airplane descended toward the 
ground.  The pilot leveled the airplane just before the float assembly collided with alder bushes 
along the bank of the river.  The airplane then did a cartwheel and came to rest facing opposite 
the initial direction of travel.  The airplane received damage to the float assembly, fuselage, and 
wings.
At 1353, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Talkeetna was reporting in part:  
Wind, 200 degrees (true) at 10 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, 
2,300 feet broken, 2,800 feet overcast; temperature, 61 degrees F; dew point, 48 degrees F; 
altimeter, 30.03 inHg.
