According to the pilot, the aircraft lost oil pressure shortly after takeoff.  During the landing 
attempt at a nearby airport, the aircraft overran the end of the runway and collided with a tree.  
A post-accident engine run and wreckage examination revealed that the aircraft's engine 
developed an extensive engine oil leak during the accident flight, and during a post-accident 
engine run.  According to the FAA Inspector, and the operator of the aircraft, the leak 
originated from the engine accessory area where the oil temperature bulb attaches to the oil 
screen assembly.  The operator reported that the oil temperature bulb appeared to have been 
improperly installed during an oil change that occurred approximately 15 minutes prior to the 
accident flight.  The pilot of the accident aircraft, a certified mechanic, supervised the oil 
change that was performed by a non-certified mechanic who was employed by the pilot.       
Improper maintenance procedures by maintenance personnel, which resulted in an  engine oil 
leak while in flight.  A factor was the pilot's misjudgment of distance during the precautionary 
landing which led to a runway overrun.
On July 1, 2002, approximately 1915 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 172E, N37065, collided 
with a tree while on the landing rollout at Cedars North Airport (W58), Battle Ground, 
Washington. The commercial pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured; however, 
the aircraft received substantial damage to the right wing and its associated lift strut. The 
airplane is owned by a private party and was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) 
personal/pleasure flight under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident 
occurred. The flight departed from Grove Airport, Camas, Washington, approximately 15 
minutes prior to the accident. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan 
had been filed for the local flight. 
According to the pilot, the aircraft lost oil pressure shortly after takeoff from Grove Airport. 
During his attempt to land at a nearby airport, the aircraft overran the end of the runway and 
collided with a tree.
A post-accident engine run and wreckage examination by personnel from the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), Hillsboro, Oregon, revealed 
that the aircraft's engine developed an extensive engine oil leak during the accident flight, and 
during the post-accident engine run.  According to the FAA inspector, and the operator of the 
aircraft, the leak originated from the engine accessory area where the oil temperature bulb 
attaches to the oil screen assembly.  The operator reported that the oil temperature bulb 
appeared to have been improperly installed during an oil change that occurred approximately 
15 minutes prior to the accident flight.  The pilot of the accident aircraft, a certified mechanic, 
supervised the oil change that was performed by a non-certified mechanic who was employed 
by the pilot.       
