The pilot had just completed his fourth spray load of the morning and was returning for the 
next load when the engine began running rough and started to backfire.  He checked the 
magnetos, propeller, and throttle lever, and found everything to be "normal."  The engine 
continued to backfire, and not being able to maintain altitude, the pilot elected to make a 
forced landing in a rice field.  After touchdown, the airplane nosed over and came to rest 
inverted.  An examination by a certified mechanic revealed no anomalies which would have 
prevented normal engine operation.  The reason for the partial loss of engine power was 
undetermined.
the loss of engine power as a result of fuel starvation.  A contributing factor was the lack of 
suitable terrain for the forced landing.
On July 1, 2002, approximately 0750 central daylight time, a Grumman-Schweizer G-164A 
agricultural airplane, N8917H, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing following 
a partial loss of engine power while maneuvering near Basile, Louisiana.  The commercial pilot, 
sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  The airplane was registered to B & S Flyers Inc. 
of Gueydan, Louisiana, and operated by Kib Aviation of Basile, Louisiana, under 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 137.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the aerial 
application flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The airplane departed from a private airstrip 
near Basile, at 0730.
In a telephone interview with the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the pilot reported that he had 
just completed his fourth spray load of the morning and was returning for the next load when 
the engine began running rough and started to backfire.  The pilot stated "I checked the mags, 
propeller, and throttle lever, and found everything to be normal, but the engine continued to 
backfire."  Not being able to maintain altitude, the pilot elected to make a forced landing in a 
rice field.  After touchdown, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.  The pilot 
reported damage to the airplane included the vertical stabilizer, horizontal stabilizer, and 
rudder were destroyed, both propeller blades were bent, and the empennage was twisted and 
bent.  
During an engine examination by a certified mechanic, no mechanical failures or malfunctions 
were noted that would have prevented normal engine operation.  The reason for the partial loss 
of engine power was undetermined.
