The airplane taxied onto the runway, engine noise increased to "full throttle," and the airplane 
began to accelerate.  Prior to rotation, the airplane began to drift right.  The right tire rolled off 
the runway, and the left tire became airborne.  The right tire then lifted off, and the airplane 
immediately entered a right turn.  The bank angle continued to increase until the right wing 
contacted the ground.  Winds at the time of the accident were 7 knots.  The pilot had 
approximately 62 hours in the accident airplane make and model in the previous 2 months.  No 
preimpact failures or malfunctions were identified with either the airframe or engine during 
the course of the investigation.
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during takeoff.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 1, 2002, about 1145 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-18-150, N2414P, was destroyed 
when it impacted terrain during takeoff from runway 32R at the Allaire Airport (BLM), 
Farmingdale, New Jersey.  The certificated commercial pilot was fatally injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local commercial banner flight.  No flight plan was 
filed, and the flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to a witness who was waiting to depart from runway 32R, he observed the accident 
airplane taxied onto the runway with the pilot in the front seat.  The engine noise increased to 
"full throttle," and the airplane began to accelerate down the runway.  Prior to rotation, the 
airplane began to drift right.  The right tire rolled off the runway, and the left tire became 
airborne.  The right tire then lifted off, and the airplane immediately entered a right turn.  The 
bank angle continued to increase until the right wing contacted the ground, which marked the 
start of the impact sequence.  The airplane came to a stop, and caught fire.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight.  The wreckage was located to the east of 
runway 32R at 40 degrees, 11.667 minutes north latitude, 74 degrees, 07.692 minutes west 
longitude, and an elevation of 160 feet.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Examination of the airframe logbooks revealed that an annual inspection was performed on 
April 8, 2002.  At the time of the inspection, the airplane had accrued 3,159.0 hours of flight 
time.  On June 4, 2002, the airplane was equipped with new aileron cables.  At that time, the 
airplane had accrued 3,210.9 hours of flight time.  After June 4, 2002, there were no other 
entries in the logbook.  According to the operator, at the time of the accident, the airplane had 
accrued approximately 3,286.0 hours of flight time.  None of the pilots that flew the airplane 
since the aileron cables were replaced, mentioned any problems with the flight characteristics 
of the airplane.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine-land, airplane 
multi-engine land, and instrument airplane rating.  His last FAA first-class medical certificate 
was dated April 1, 2002.  According to the operator, the pilot had approximately 1,100 hours of 
total flight experience, 400 hours of banner experience, and approximately 61 hours in the 
accident airplane during the previous 2 months.  The pilot's logbook was not located at the 
accident site, and follow-on attempts to acquire it were unsuccessful.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A weather observation taken at the airport about 10 minutes after the accident recorded the 
wind as 260 degrees at 7 knots, visibility 10 miles, few clouds at 3,400 feet and 5,000 feet, 
temperature 84 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 63 degrees Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting 
of 30.16 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The debris path started 180 feet east of runway 32R, and was comprised of two sets of ground 
scars, along with the main wreckage.  The first ground scar was oriented on a magnetic heading 
of 360 degrees, and contained structure from the right wing.  The second ground scar started 
approximately 20 feet past the end of the first, and was oriented on a magnetic heading of 065 
degrees.  Approximately 15 feet further were four cuts in the ground.  The field was covered 
with grass, and each cut could be folded back for examination.  All four cuts were parallel to 
one another, and approximately the same length as one of the propeller blades from the 
airplane.  The cut marks entered the ground on approximately a 45-degree angle.  As each cut 
progressed, the angle reduced, until it was parallel to the surface, and approximately 8 inches 
below it.  The main wreckage came to rest 120 feet past the start of the debris path on a 
magnetic heading of 290 degrees.
Examination of the wreckage revealed that the majority of impact damage was to the front of 
the airplane, and to the right wing.  In addition, most of the fabric covering the airplane was 
consumed in the postcrash fire.  On the left wing, approximately 10 percent of the structure 
was consumed in the postcrash fire, and approximately 80 percent of the fabric.  The left wing 
struts were intact, and connected at both ends.  The left aileron bellcrank was attached to the 
left aileron.  The left aileron cable and the left aileron balance cable were attached to the 
bellcrank.  The left aileron stops were in place, and continuity of the left aileron cable was 
verified from the bellcrank to the pilot controls.  Continuity of the balance cable was verified 
from the left aileron bellcrank to the right aileron bellcrank.  The left flap was attached to the 
wing, and intact.  The push pull rod that connected the left flap to the left flap bellcrank was in 
place.  The bellcrank was attached to the wing, and the associated flap retraction spring was in 
place.  The left flap control cable was attached to the bellcrank, and continuity was verified to 
the flap handle.
Approximately 85 percent of the structure for the right wing, and 95 percent of the fabric was 
consumed in the postcrash fire.  The right wing struts were intact and connected to the wing 
and airframe mounts.  The right aileron was destroyed.  The right aileron bellcrank, along with 
the right aileron stops, displayed fire and impact damage.  The right aileron cable was attached 
to the right aileron bellcrank.  Continuity of the right aileron cable was verified from the 
bellcrank to the pilot controls.  The right flap was destroyed.  The right flap bellcrank displayed 
impact and fire damage, and had separated from the right wing.  The push pull rod that 
connected the right flap to the right flap bellcrank had separated from the flap consistent with 
impact and fire damage.  The right flap retraction spring was elongated, and had separated 
from the right flap bellcrank.  The right flap control cable, along with a section of the right flap 
bellcrank had separated from the bellcrank.  The fracture surface on the section of bellcrank 
that was still attached to the cable was grayish in color, and partially melted.  The fracture 
surface on the bellcrank was melted.  Continuity of the right flap control cable was verified 
from the end of the cable to the flap handle.  Damage to the empennage varied, with the 
majority of the damage being towards the front.  Only fire damage was observed on the aft part 
of the empennage.  Almost 100 percent of the fabric covering the empennage and tail section 
was consumed in the postcrash fire.  The vertical and horizontal stabilizer were intact, along 
with the elevator and rudder.  The only impact damage observed on the tail section was to the 
outboard part of the right elevator, which was bent up approximately 10 degrees.  The rudder 
bellcrank was attached to the rudder, and both rudder cables were attached to the rudder horn.  
Rudder cable continuity was verified to both sets of rudder pedals.  The elevator bellcrank was 
attached to the elevator, and both elevator cables were attached.  Elevator cable continuity was 
verified to the pilot controls, and continuity of the stabilizer trim was confirmed.  
Approximately three threads were showing on the stabilizer trim jackscrew, which was 
consistent with a nose up trim setting.
The airplane had a front and rear cockpit, and both displayed severe impact and fire damage.  
The seat in the front cockpit was adjustable.  The seat was set to the third position aft, and the 
lock was engaged.  All the system instruments were destroyed.  The altimeter displayed 43,860 
feet msl, and was set to 30.05 inches of mercury.  The engine tachometer read zero, and the 
time display was destroyed.  The throttle in the forward cockpit was in the closed position, and 
in the aft cockpit, it was partially open.  The mixture control was full rich, and the carburetor 
heat control was "OFF."  The flap handle was between the first and second notch.  The airplane 
was not equipped with a mixture control, carburetor heat control, or flap handle in the aft 
cockpit.  The control stick in the front cockpit was bent aft.  The shaft for the control stick in 
the rear cockpit had separated about 2 inches above the aileron and elevator mixing lever.    
The engine displayed impact and fire damage, and was removed from the airframe to facilitate 
an examination.  The propeller was attached to the engine crankshaft.  The No. 1 propeller 
blade displayed fire damage, and the outboard half of the blade was consumed in the postcrash 
fire.  The No. 2 propeller blade displayed "S" bends, leading edge gouges, and chordwise 
scratches.
The top sparkplugs were removed from each of the cylinders.  In addition, the No. 3 bottom 
sparkplug was removed to drain some oil from the cylinder.  The No. 1 sparkplug electrode was 
dark gray in color, and had a light coat of oil on it.  The No. 2 sparkplug electrode was dark gray 
in color, and absent of oil.  The No. 3 sparkplug electrode was dark gray in color, and had a 
heavy coat of oil on it.  The No. 4 sparkplug electrode was dark gray in color, and absent of oil.  
A rotational force was applied to the engine crankshaft.  All four pistons and eight valves 
articulated, and compression was obtained on the No. 1, No. 3, and No. 4 cylinders.  
Compression was not obtained on the No. 2 cylinder.  In addition, compression on the No. 1 
cylinder was approximately 10 percent that of No. 3 and No. 4.
Both magnetos displayed impact and fire damage.  The ignition lead covers were removed.  
When a rotational force was applied to the engine crankshaft, the magneto rotors turned, and 
the left impulse coupling activated.  Spark was not obtained on any of the ignition towers.  All 
eight ignition leads displayed impact and fire damage, and continuity could not be established.  
The engine oil suction and pressure screens were removed, and found covered with carbon 
deposits.
The fuel selector was set to the left tank, and the gascolator was attached to the firewall.  The 
gascolator bowl had separated from the gascolator and was located in the debris path.  No 
contaminates were observed in the bowl.  The carburetor had separated from its mount, and 
displayed impact and fire damage.  The throttle plate was open.  The throttle arm was in the 
close position, and the throttle cable had separated consistent with overload.  The mixture arm 
was in the full rich position, and the mixture control cable had separated consistent with 
overload.  The carburetor bowl was removed from the carburetor.  The right float was intact 
and attached to the float assembly.  The left float was intact, but had separated from the float 
assembly.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Medical Examiners Office in Freehold, New 
Jersey, on July 2, 2002.
The FAA Toxicology and Accident Research Laboratory in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed a toxicological test on the pilot on September 30, 2002.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Before the flight, the airplane was serviced with 26.1 gallons of fuel from a 1,000-gallon tank.  
No other airplanes were serviced from that tank on the day of the accident.  After the accident, 
a fuel sample was taken from the tank by an FAA inspector.  The sample was bluish in color 
and no contaminates were identified.
The airplane was released to the owner's representative on July 2, 2002, minus a section of the 
right flap control cable and a section of the right bellcrank.  The retained items were returned 
to the owner's representative on December 9, 2002.
