The student pilot/owner of the accident airplane said he possesses a solo endorsement to 
operate the airplane, and that there was a flight instructor with him in the airplane who had 
not yet received a tail wheel endorsement to operate the airplane. He said the touch-and-go 
landing had been uneventful, but during takeoff the airplane began to "weather vane", so he 
retarded the throttle control to idle and applied left rudder control input in an attempt to 
maintain control, but the airplane veered off the runway, hitting a runway light, and then 
swung around incurring substantial damage. The flight instructor seated next to pilot/owner 
stated that when the airplane started to veer off the runway he also applied rudder control 
input but the airplane continued toward the right edge of the runway and within 5 to 8 seconds 
swung  through an arc of 180 degrees and he was unable to maintain directional control. Both 
occupants of the airplane said that prior to the accident there had been no failure or 
malfunction to the airplane or any of its systems.
The failure of the solo student/owner to maintain directional control of the airplane during 
takeoff in a crosswind, which resulted in the airplane veering off the runway, a collision with a 
runway light, and a ground loop.
On July 1, 2002, about 1120, eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-22-20, N1693A, registered to 
and operated by a private individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 training flight, crashed during 
takeoff at Cecil Field, Jacksonville, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan was filed. The airplane incurred substantial damage, and the student-rated pilot and 
a commercial-rated flight instructor received no injuries. The flight originated from Herlong 
Airport, Jacksonville, Florida, the same day, about 1114.
The student pilot/owner stated that he possesses a current solo endorsement to operate the 
accident airplane, and that a flight instructor who had never received a tail wheel endorsement 
was with him in the airplane when the accident occurred. He further stated that he had 
performed a touch-and-go landing which had been uneventful, and as he was taking off, the 
airplane initially tracked along the centerline of the runway, but as it accelerated to about 45 or 
50 knots it began to "weather vane"  toward the right edge of the runway. He said he retarded 
the throttle to idle and applied left rudder control input, but rudder effectiveness was reduced 
and the airplane continued to veer to the right, where it collided with a runway edge light, 
swung around, and incurred damage to the left wing, left elevator, and horizontal stabilizer.
The flight instructor said that he also tried to apply rudder control input when the airplane 
started to veer from the centerline of the runway, but that the aircraft turned through an arc of 
180 degrees within about 5 to 8 seconds, and his attempts to maintain directional control were 
unsuccessful. 
Both occupants of the accident airplane said that prior to the accident there had been no 
mechanical failure or malfunction to the airplane or to any of its systems.
