National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WAUNAKEE, WI
Accident Number: CHI99LA099
Date & Time: 03/01/1999, 1710 CST
Registration: N394GL
Aircraft: Calkins KITFOX 5
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis As the airplane was turning base to final the pilot, 'felt a bump and vibration in the control stick...' when he commanded a final nose-up trim adjustment.
The pilot reported that the remainder of the approach to the runway was uneventful.
The pilot stated that, 'When I went to flare for the landing I did not have any pitch control.'
The pilot reported that the airplane landed very hard and bounced back into the air in a nose high orientation.
The pilot reported that during the hard landing the seat broke from its mounts and fell onto the flaperon control tube, inhibiting flaperon actuation.
The pilot stated that the airplane then 'Stalled', landed tail first on the runway, ground looped, and came to rest with the right wingtip and the tail touching the ground.
Post accident examination of the aircraft showed that the trim actuator was fractured at its attachment point to the airframe.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the fracture of the trim actuator.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot-in-command and pilot-rated passenger reported no injuries.
The flight departed Waunakee Airport at 1630 CST for a local flight.
According to the pilot-in-command's written statement, as the airplane was turning base to final the pilot, "felt a bump and vibration in the control stick..." when he commanded a final nose-up trim adjustment.
The pilot reported that the remainder of the approach to the runway was uneventful.
The pilot stated that, "When I went to flare for the landing I did not have any pitch control."
The pilot reported that the airplane landed very hard and bounced back into the air in a nose high orientation.
The pilot reported that during the hard landing the seat broke from its mounts and fell onto the flaperon control tube, inhibiting flaperon actuation.
The pilot stated that the airplane then "Stalled", landed tail first on the runway, ground looped, and came to rest with the right wingtip and the tail touching the ground.
Post accident inspection of the aircraft showed that the trim actuator was fractured at its attachment point to the airframe.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
