National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SIMPSONVILLE, SC
Accident Number: MIA99LA093
Date & Time: 03/01/1999, 1530 EST
Registration: N1122V
Aircraft: Scott A. George Jr. FISHER
CELEBRITY
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the flight departed with full fuel and after takeoff, he orbited the airport about 10-15 minutes at 1,100 feet agl, then proceeded on course at the same altitude.
About 10- 15 minutes later, he noted that the CHT increased but the oil pressure and temperature indications were normal.
He verified the mixture control was in the full rich position and continued the flight, noting that the CHT continued to increase.
He applied throttle to maintain altitude but the CHT increased and at that time, the engine rpm began to decrease.
Unable to maintain altitude, he selected a site for a forced landing but was unable to land there due to a total loss of engine power.
While descending for a forced landing on a off-ramp of a highway, the right wing collided with a light pole.
The airplane then rolled inverted and impacted a fence.
Examination of the engine by an FAA Airworthiness Inspector revealed that a plastic 90-degree fitting located at the inlet of the carburetor was broken.
Additionally, all cylinder heads were found to be cracked between spark plug holes.
Impact damage to the right aft cylinder head was noted.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The unsuitable terrain encountered during the forced landing.
Contributing to the accident was the total loss of engine power due to the failure of a plastic 90-degree fitting at the inlet fitting of the carburetor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(F) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE FITTING - FAILURE,TOTAL ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
OBJECT - POLE 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the airline transport-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The flight originated about 30 minutes earlier from Flight World Airport, Greer, South Carolina.
The airplane was purchased on February 6, 1999, and the pilot stated that the purpose of the flight was to position the airplane to the new owners.
After takeoff with full fuel, he circled the departure airport at about 1,100 feet agl for about 10-15 minutes then proceeded on the flight.
About 10-15 minutes later, while flying at 1,100 feet agl, he first noted that the cylinder head temperature (CHT) increased but the oil pressure and oil temperature were indicating normally.
He verified that the mixture was in the full rich position, continued the flight, and noted that the CHT continued to increase.
He applied throttle to maintain altitude but the CHT increased and at that time, the engine rpm began to decrease.
Unable to maintain altitude, he selected a sight for the forced landing, but was unable to land there due to a total loss of engine power.
While descending for a forced landing on an off ramp for a highway, the right wing collided with a light pole.
The airplane then rolled inverted and collided with a highway security fence.
Fuel leakage was noted postcrash.
Examination of the accident site by an FAA airworthiness inspector revealed that the airplane was inverted against the perimeter fence for the on-ramp to the highway.
The right wing was damaged due to the contact with the light pole about 18 feet agl, and the left wing was damaged due to ground contact.
The right main and tailwheel were separated; the left main was attached.
The airplane was recovered and examination of the engine by an FAA airworthiness inspector revealed that after the top cowling was removed, the fuel line at the inlet of the carburetor was not connected.
A 90-degree fitting which was made of plastic and connected the fuel line to the carburetor inlet, was broken.
The electric fuel pump was operationally checked and found to operate normally.
Examination of each cylinder for compression was accomplished and all were normal except for the right aft cylinder which had no compression.
All cylinder heads were removed and a hole was found at the 6 o'clock position of the cylinder which had no compression.
The FAA inspector attributed the hole to impact damage.
All cylinder heads were noted to be cracked between the spark plug holes.
Examination of the valves, pistons, and connecting rods showed no signs of damage.
Registration: N1122V Model/Series: FISHER CELEBRITY FISHER CEL Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: Yes Airworthiness Certificate: Experimental Serial Number: AV1050 Landing Gear Type: Tailwheel Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 04/11/1998, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
