The glider was towed to 3,000 feet and released over a ridge where it was thermaled to 3,500 
feet.  After descending to 2,000 feet over the ridge to look for more thermals, the pilot decided 
to return to the airport.  During the return to the airport, the pilot encountered wind 
conditions that inhibited the glider from maintaining altitude.  The pilot positioned the glider 
to make an off airport landing in a field approximately 3 miles southeast of the airport.  The 
glider collided with trees bordering the field, then fell to the ground.  Winds were reported out 
of the north at 10 knots gusting to 16 knots.  The pilot reported a total time of 1,250 hours, of 
which 380 were in gliders and 10 hours in make and model.  The pilot also reported there were 
no mechanical deficiencies with the glider. 
the encountering of wind conditions in flight that inhibited the pilot from maintaining altitude. 
 On March 4, 2000, at 1352 Eastern Standard Time, a I.C.A. Brasov IS-28B2, a glider, N97VT, 
was destroyed after colliding with trees during an off airport landing near Blairstown, New 
Jersey.  The certificated commercial pilot was seriously injured and the passenger sustained 
minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local pleasure flight that 
originated at the Blairstown Airport (1N7), at 1300.  No flight plan was filed for the flight 
conducted under 14 CFR part 91.
According to the pilot's written statement, he stated:
"We departed 1N7 at about 1300 and was towed to 3,000 feet msl over the ridge.  We were 
released from the tow and thermaled to 3,500 feet msl.  We lost this thermal, then descended 
down the ridge to see if it was working.  The ridge was not working, so at 2,000 feet msl, we left 
the ridge and headed back to the airport.  We encountered a very heavy sink on the way back, 
and became too low to continue to the airport.  The only place to land was in a field to our 
right.  We turned towards the field and attempted to make it.  But, we hit trees in front of the 
field about five feet from the top.  The glider then fell into the field from about 30 feet up, 
hitting on the left wing and cockpit.  The nose was substantially damaged."  
The glider landed on private property approximately 3 miles southwest of the Blairstown 
Airport.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspectors examined the glider on-site.  The FAA 
Inspectors reported that the glider hit the tops of the trees, dropped approximately 70 feet to 
the ground, and hit flat on it's belly.  The cockpit was destroyed, both wings were bent 
upwards, and the base of the vertical stabilizer was wrinkled.  There were dents along the 
leading edge of the right and left wings. 
The aircraft was owned and operated by Aero Club Albatross.  According to the club's 
President, the glider was launched around 1300, for a local pleasure flight.  In a telephone 
interview, the club president reported there may have been a wind shift during the flight.  
Blairstown Airport did not have weather reporting capability.  At 1254, at Andover Airport 
(12N), Andover, New Jersey, approximately 12 miles east of 1N7, winds were variable at 6 
knots.  At 1354, winds were at 360 degrees, variable to 040 degrees, at 10 knots gusting to 16 
knots.  
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land and 
gliders.  He was also a certificated flight instructor in gliders.  The pilot reported a total flight 
time of approximately 1,250 hours, of which 380 hours were in gliders and 10 hours in make 
and model.
The pilot reported there were no mechanical deficiencies with the glider.
