The pilot of an experimental homebuilt single-engine airplane impacted the ground during a 
forced landing following a loss of engine power due to separation of a propeller blade.  The 
shank connecting the composite propeller to the hub was broken, and one of the three blades 
was missing from the hub.
The separation of one propeller blade while in cruise flight.  A factor contributing to the 
accident was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
On October 2, 2003, about 1109 central daylight time, a Bratton Swearingen SX300 
experimental homebuilt single-engine airplane, N301SX, was substantially damaged when it 
impacted the ground during a forced landing to an open field following a loss of engine power 
near Floresville, Texas.  The commercial pilot, who was the owner and operator of the airplane, 
and the passenger sustained serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a 
flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The 
airplane departed the Corpus Christi International Airport (CRP) near Corpus Christi, Texas.  
The flight's intended destination was the Gillespie County Airport (T82), near Fredericksburg, 
Texas.
The 4,000-hour pilot, who was the owner and builder of the airplane, reported to the Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector that the aircraft was powered by a 300-horsepower 
Lycoming IO-540 engine, which was driving a 3 bladed composite propeller.
According to information provided by the FAA inspector who responded to the accident site, 
one of the propeller blades came off while in cruise flight, and the pilot was able to shut the 
engine down.  
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that the shank connecting the 
composite propeller to the hub was broken, and one of the three blades was missing from the 
hub.
The pilot/operator failed to provide the Safety Board with a completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft 
Accident Report (NTSB 6120.1/2) form.
