According to the pilot during the approach to land the airplane touched down about 500 feet 
down runway 23 on the centerline. As the tail lost lift and the tail wheel made contact with the 
runway, the airplane veered left of the centerline. At 1900 feet, the airplane crossed from the 
south side of the runway over the centerline to the north side of the runway. The airplane 
veered again to the left and departed the runway on the south side about 2,000 feet from the 
approach end. The airplane came to rest perpendicular to the runway 2,144 feet from the 
approach end. Examination of the accident on-scene found that the airplane departed the 
runway edge and proceeded down a fifteen-foot embankment and made contact with several 
large rocks, separating both main landing gear. The airplane continued to rotate counter 
clockwise about 45-degrees and came to rest near trees. Winds at the time of the accident were 
100-degrees gusting to 15 knots. Examination of the auto-locking feature for the tail-wheel 
found that the mechanism operated properly. Tail wheel skid marks on the runway were clearly 
visible throughout the length of the loss-of-control sequence. Tail wheel scuff marks were in 
line with the main landing gear and exhibited side-load scuffing consistent with the tail wheel 
being in the forward, locked position. The scuffing was not consistent with a cocked tail wheel. 
In addition, no evidence was identified indicating tail wheel tire sidewall or tread damage 
consistent with a cocked tail wheel. No mechanical problem with the airplane was reported by 
the pilot.
The pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions that resulted in his failure to 
maintain directional control during landing roll. A factor was  gusting tailwinds.
On October 2, 2003 at 1530 eastern daylight time, a North American T6G, N2831D, registered 
to Bowlin & Associates Inc, and operated by the commercial pilot, ran off the side of runway 23 
and into an embankment at the Heavens Landing private airstrip in Clayton, Georgia. The 
personal flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight 
rules. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The pilot 
received minor injuries, and the passenger was not injured. The airplane sustained minor 
damage. The flight originated from a private airstrip in Griffin, Georgia, at 1430.
According to the pilot, he elected to land on runway 23 with a slight tail wind. He said the 
winds were light and variable with occasional gusts. The runway was a newly constructed 
concrete surface, which measured 5,000 feet by 50 feet. The south side of the runway drops off 
approximately 20 feet from the runway edge into a 15-foot deep embankment. The pilot stated 
that the airplane touched down about 500 feet down runway 23 on the centerline. As the tail 
lost lift and the tail wheel made contact with the runway, the airplane veered left off the 
centerline. At 1900 feet, the airplane crossed from the south side of the runway over the 
centerline to the north side of the runway. The airplane veered again to the left and departed 
the runway on the south side about 2,000 feet from the approach end. The airplane came to 
rest perpendicular to the runway 2,144 feet from the approach end. Winds at the time of the 
accident were100-degrees gusting to 15 knots.
Examination of the accident on-scene found that the airplane collided was an embankment and 
several large rocks. The examination also revealed that both main landing gear were separated 
from the airframe. Examination of the auto-locking feature for the tail-wheel found that the 
mechanism operated properly. Tail wheel skid marks on the runway were clearly visible 
throughout the length of the loss-of-control sequence. Tail wheel scuff marks were in line with 
the main landing gear and exhibited side-load scuffing consistent with the tail wheel being in 
the locked position. The scuffing was not consistent with a cocked tail wheel. In addition, no 
evidence was identified indicating tail wheel tire sidewall or tread damage consistent with a 
cocked tail wheel. No mechanical problem with the airplane was reported by the pilot. 
**This narrative was modified on August 9, 2007.**
