When the pilot took off from Roche Harbor, the ceiling was about 700 feet above the ground 
(AGL), and remained so along his route. When he got to Blakely Island, he found the area near 
the north end of the runway was covered with low-level stratus clouds. Although he desired to 
land on runway 19, since the clouds were near the north end of the runway, he elected to 
proceed to the south end of the airport and land to the north. While on short final for runway 
01, the aircraft encountered an area of downdrafts. Although the pilot added power and tried to 
adjust the sink rate, his remedial actions were insufficient to keep the aircraft from landing 
very hard just off the end of the paved surface. When the aircraft contacted the terrain, the 
landing gear collapsed, the wings were bent upwards, and the aircraft slid onto the paved 
runway surface and ultimately came to a stop. According to the pilot, there did not seem to be 
any problems with the aircraft's engines or flight control systems. The pilot further stated that 
because of the known turbulent air and downdrafts off the south end of the runway, of the 
"several hundred" landings he has made at Blakely Island, only a few have been on runway 01.
The pilot's inadequate compensation for downdrafts on final approach resulting in an excessive 
descent rate on short final. Factors include downdrafts off the approach end of the selected 
runway, and low clouds/fog.
On October 2, 2003, approximately 1600 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 340, N2695S, landed 
hard about 30 feet short of the approach end of runway 01 at Blakely Island, Washington. The 
private pilot and his passenger received minor injuries, and the aircraft, which is owned and 
operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage. The 14 CFR Part 91 personal pleasure 
flight, which departed Roche Harbor Airport, Roche Harbor, Washington, about 30 minutes 
earlier, was being operated in visual meteorological conditions in an area of occasional low 
clouds and fog. No flight plan had been filed.
According to the pilot, when he took off from Roche Harbor, the ceiling was about 700 feet 
above the ground (AGL), and remained so along his route. When he got to Blakely Island, he 
found the area near the north end of the runway was covered with low-level stratus clouds. 
Although he desired to land on runway 19, since the clouds were near the north end of the 
runway, he elected to proceed to the south end of the airport and land to the north. Reportedly, 
while on short final to runway 01, the aircraft encountered an area of downdrafts. Although the 
pilot added power and tried to adjust the sink rate, the aircraft landed very hard just off the end 
of the paved surface. When the aircraft contacted the terrain, the landing gear collapsed, the 
wings were bent upwards, and the aircraft slid onto the paved runway surface and ultimately 
came to a stop.
According to the pilot, there did not seem to be any problems with the aircraft's engines or 
flight control systems.
The pilot further stated that because of the known turbulent air and downdrafts off the south 
end of the runway, of the "several hundred" landings he has made at Blakely Island, only a few 
have been on runway 01.
