The airplane sustained substantial damage when it impacted a ditch during an emergency 
landing following a loss of engine power.  The pilot reported that the engine "popped" twice 
and the airplane lost engine power.  The pilot attempted to restart the engine but was 
unsuccessful.  The pilot-rated passenger prepared for an emergency landing at the destination 
airport.  They realized the airplane would land short of the airport and prepared to "ditch."  
The airplane touched down in a cornfield and subsequently impacted a ditch.  An FAA 
inspector examined the airplane subsequent to the accident and found five gallons of fuel in the 
left tank.  The fuel tank strainer and fittings were pulled from the right wing.  The strainer was 
destroyed, but had no signs of blockage previous to the accident.  No fuel was observed in the 
right tank or in the fuel inlet line of the carburetor.  The airframe and engine were examined 
and no anomalies were found.
Loss of engine power for an undetermined reason during cruise and the unsuitable terrain for 
landing encountered by the pilot.  The factors to the accident were the dark night, the corn 
crop, and the ditch.
On October 2, 2003, at 2100 central daylight time, a Cessna 182A, N3772D, piloted by a 
commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when it impacted terrain during a forced 
landing following a loss of engine power near Shenandoah Municipal Airport (SDA), 
Shenandoah, Iowa.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 
flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.  The 
commercial pilot reported minor injuries.  The pilot-rated passenger reported serious injuries.  
The flight departed Coles County Memorial Airport (MTO), near Mattoon, Illinois, at 1820.
According to the pilot's written statement, during cruise flight at 6,500 feet mean sea level, the 
engine "popped" twice and lost engine power.  The pilot stated he tried to restart the engine 
several times.  He reported he "went through the flow checks and restart procedures all the way 
until impact never admitting to ourselves that the engine was not going to restart."  The pilot 
stated the pilot-rated passenger had SDA in sight and tried to make an emergency landing at 
the airport.  The pilot reported they realized they "were not going to make the airport about a 
quarter mile out and prepared to ditch."  The pilot reported they touched down in a cornfield 
and subsequently impacted a ditch.  The pilot stated that the nose, nose gear, and right wing 
were separated from the airplane.  The pilot also stated there was substantial damage to the 
cockpit, dash and windshield.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane subsequent to the 
accident.  The inspector reported the right wing was separated from the aft attach point, but 
not completely detached from the airplane.  Approximately five gallons of fuel was strained 
from the left tank.  The fuel tank strainer and fittings were pulled from the right wing.  The 
strainer was destroyed, but had no signs of blockage previous to the accident.  No fuel was 
observed in the right tank or in the fuel inlet line of the carburetor.  The fuel selector was on 
the left tank.  The airframe and engine were examined and no preexisting anomalies were 
found.
