The pilot reported that he had just begun his descent when the airplane's engine suddenly lost 
power.  The pilot attempted a restart without success.  He said he declared an emergency, and 
established a best glide speed.  The pilot set up for a forced landing to a state highway.  He said 
he set "full flap" and "let the airplane stall at about 25-30 [feet], which resulted in a sudden 
drop ..."  The airplane impacted on the road.  The landing gear collapsed and the airplane slid 
on the road, substantially damaging both wings and the forward fuselage.  The airplane came 
to a stop within 200 feet of its initial impact point.  The pilot said he fueled the 28 gallon tank 
to full before leaving on his trip.  The pilot reported that since the refueling he had flown a total 
of 2 hours and 20 minutes.  The pilot said that the airplane's engine burns approximately 8 to 
8-1/2 gallons per hour.  An examination of the fuel tanks, lines, sump, and fuel filter showed no 
evidence of fuel.  No other anomalies with the airplane were found.
The pilot's inadequate preflight planning/preparation which led to fuel exhaustion and 
subsequent loss of engine power.
On October 1, 2003, at approximately 1255 mountain daylight time, an Elliott Mustang II, 
N9XQ, was substantially damaged when it impacted on a road during a forced landing, 
following a loss of engine power, 5 miles east of Cedar City, Utah.  The private pilot, the sole 
person on board the airplane, reported no injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of 
Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.  The cross-country flight originated at Monument 
Valley, Arizona, at 1200, and was en route to the pilot's private airstrip near Cedar City. 
The pilot reported that he had just begun his descent into Cedar City when the airplane's 
engine suddenly quit.  The pilot attempted a restart without success.  He said he called Cedar 
City Flight Service, declared an emergency, and established best glide speed.  The pilot set up 
for a forced landing on Utah State Highway 14.  He said he set "full flap" and "let the airplane 
stall at about 25-30 [feet], which resulted in a sudden drop ..."  The airplane impacted on the 
road.  The landing gear collapsed and the airplane slid on the road, coming to a stop within 
200 feet of its initial impact point.  
The pilot stated he had fully fueled the airplane at Cedar City before flying to Monument 
Valley.  He said the fuel tank held 28 gallons The pilot said the trip to Monument Valley takes 
about an hour and the airplane's engine burns approximately 8 to 8-1/2 gallons per hour.  The 
pilot said he had flown about 2 hours and 20 minutes since the fueling, when the engine quit.
The airplane was examined at the accident site.  It rested upright on the right edge of the 
highway, up against a rock face.  The lower cowling and bottom of the fuselage at the cockpit 
area were crushed upward. The upper cowling was buckled outward.  The left wing was 
crushed upward.  The outboard-third of the left wing was bent upward approximately 70 
degrees.  The outboard section of the right wing was bent and broken upward and aft.  The 
landing gear legs were broken out.  One of the three propeller blades was broken aft.  Flight 
control continuity was confirmed.  An examination of the fuel tanks, lines, sump, and fuel filter 
showed no evidence of fuel.  No other anomalies with the airplane were found.
The pilot did not return the Safety Board Form 6120.1/2.  The pilot did provide a written 
statement and copies of his pilot and airplane records.
