The pilot said that during a straight-in approach to the airport, he kept the airspeed at 110 
knots, because the ride was very rough.  The airplane's airspeed crossing the runway threshold 
was 100 knots.  The airplane touched down about 1,000 feet down the runway.  The pilot said 
that when he applied brake pressure, he noticed that he had no pressure on the left brake 
pedal.  The pilot said that he pumped the pedal three times, and then reapplied the brakes.  
The airplane was now three quarters of the way down the runway.  Just before reaching the 
displaced threshold, the pilot said that the airplane swerved to the right.  The pilot swerved the 
airplane to the left in hopes of turning onto the grass.  The airplane slid sideways in the grass 
crashing into a fence and coming to rest in a ditch.  Examination of the runway revealed tire 
marks beginning a third of the way down from the approach end, and running evenly down the 
runway until departing the prepared surface.  Tire impressions in the grass continued from the 
end of the runway, veering left, and ending at the spot where the airplane came to rest.  
Examination of the wreckage revealed no anomalies. 
The pilot misjudging his airspeed on final approach, resulting in a long touchdown and  
insufficient distance to stop on the remaining runway available. 
 On January 2, 1998, at 1500 central standard time (cst), a Piper PA-34-220T, N8350Z, 
operated by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when on landing roll, the 
airplane departed the end of the runway, rolled through a ditch and impacted into a fence.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was 
being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.  No flight plan was on file.  There were no injuries 
reported by the pilot or the two passengers on board.  The cross- country flight originated at 
Harrison, Arkansas, at 1330 cst, and was en route to Winterset, Iowa.
In his written statement, the pilot said that he established the airplane on a 6 and 1/2 mile 
straight-in approach to the airport. He said that the ride was very rough and that he kept the 
airspeed at 110 knots.  Crossing the approach end of the runway, the pilot said that his airspeed 
was 100 knots.  The pilot said that he "used up about 1,000 feet to negotiate the landing." As 
the pilot began to apply brake pressure, he noticed that he had no pressure on the left brake 
pedal.  The pilot said that he pumped the pedal three times, and then reapplied the brakes.  By 
this time, the airplane was three quarters of the way down the runway.  Just before reaching 
the displaced threshold, the pilot said that the airplane swerved to the right.  The pilot said that 
he swerved the airplane to the left in hopes of turning onto the grass.  The airplane began to 
slide sideways in the grass crashing into a fence and coming to rest in a ditch.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who examined the wreckage at the scene, 
found the airplane resting upright in a field approximately 75 feet off the departure end of 
runway 32 at Winterset-Madison County Airport, Iowa.  Tire marks were observed beginning 
approximately a third of the way down from the approach end of the runway, and ran evenly 
down the runway centerline until departing the prepared surface.  Tire impressions in the grass 
began at the end of the runway and veered to the left, ending at the spot where the airplane 
came to rest.  The outboard four feet of the airplane's right wing, including the right aileron 
and outboard edge of the right flap, were bent upward almost 90 degrees.  The right main 
landing gear was bent aft and broken.  The right propeller showed torsional bending and 
chordwise scratches.  The right stabilator and elevator were bent upward.  Flight control 
continuity was confirmed.  No anomalies were found in the brakes, brake lines, master 
cylinders or brake pedals.  No fluid leaks were found in the system.  Examination of the 
engines, engine controls, and other airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
