Following a total loss of engine power, during a cattle herding flight, the pilot executed an 
autorotation to an area confined by trees. Engine examination revealed a broken crankshaft & 
camshaft. The camshaft exhibited deformation consistent with overload. All four cylinder 
mounting flanges were fretted & all piston rings showed 'excessive' wear. The #1 & #4 cylinder 
top compression rings were broken. Main bearing saddle faces of the crankcase showed heavy 
fretting. The engine manufacturer Materials Laboratory reported the mode of fracture of the 
crankshaft was fatigue. The fatigue originated from the oil hole (between #3 main & #3 
crankpin journals) in the cheek and near the rear fillet radius of the #3 main bearing journal.  
The cause of the fatigue was not determined. During the overhaul, the crankshaft received a 
magnaflux inspection & re-nitriding by an inspection facility. The engine was reassembled & 
returned to service by company maintenance personnel. The engine had 1150.6 hours since 
overhaul. 
The total loss of engine power due to a fatigue failure of the crankshaft for undetermined 
reason. A factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
 On January 2, 1998, at 0830 central standard time, a Hughes 269C helicopter, N1091Y, owned 
and operated by Smith Helicopters, Inc., under Title 14 CFR Part 91, sustained substantial 
damage during an autorotation following a loss of engine power while maneuvering near 
Riviera, Texas.  The commercial pilot and the passenger were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local cattle herding flight and a flight plan was not 
filed.  The flight originated from the King Ranch at 0745.
During telephone interviews, conducted by the investigator-in-charge (IIC), and on the 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot and the operator 
reported that the pilot was maneuvering the helicopter at 75 feet agl herding cattle on the King 
Ranch when the engine "started missing briefly then quit."  The pilot executed an autorotation 
to a dirt road confined by mesquite trees 15 to 20 feet in height.  During the landing, the main 
rotor struck the tailboom.  The tailboom, vertical and horizontal stabilizer, main rotor blades, 
and the tail rotor driveshaft received structural damage.
A review of the engine maintenance records, by the FAA inspector and the IIC, revealed that 
the Lycoming HIO-360-D1A engine, S/N L-25772-51A, was manufactured in 1991.  The engine 
was overhauled in January 1995.  During the engine overhaul, the crankshaft received a 
magnaflux inspection and re-nitriding.  The crankshaft was certified and approved for return 
to service by Aircraft Engine & Accessory Co., Inc., Dallas, Texas.  The engine was reassembled 
by a mechanic and installed in N1091Y.  The engine was returned to service by company 
maintenance personnel on February 21, 1995.  At the time of the accident, the engine time 
since overhaul was 1,150.6 hours.  The last 100 hour inspection was performed on October 7, 
1997, and the airplane had accumulated 69 hours since the inspection.
On March 10, 1998, at Laredo, Texas, the FAA inspector examined the helicopter and the 
engine.  Structural damage to the airframe was confirmed.  The inspector reported that the 
engine crankshaft would not rotate.  When cylinders #1 and #3 were removed from the engine, 
the FAA inspector found that a portion of the crankshaft appeared to be separated in the area 
of the #3 main bearing.  A piece of metal was found in the oil screen sump.  The engine was 
shipped to Textron Lycoming, Williamsport, Pennsylvania, for further examination.
On September 16, 1998, in Williamsport, Pennsylvania, under the surveillance of an FAA 
inspector, a teardown of the engine revealed a broken crankshaft and camshaft.  The camshaft 
exhibited deformation consistent with overload.  All four cylinder mounting flanges were 
fretted and all piston rings showed "excessive" wear.  The #1 and the #4 cylinder top 
compression rings were broken.  The engine and aircraft logs provided no indications as to 
what service bulletins or FAA Airworthiness Directives had been complied with from overhaul 
to the time of the accident.   The #1, #2, and the #3 center main bearing saddle faces of the 
crankcase showed heavy fretting.  Fresh fretting was seen on the #4 main saddle surface.  The 
oil holes and galleys were normal.  See the enclosed reports for additional details.
The crankshaft was examined by the Textron Lycoming Materials Laboratory.  The mode of 
fracture of the crankshaft was fatigue.  The fatigue originated from the oil hole (between #3 
main and #3 crankpin journals) in the cheek and near the rear fillet radius of the #3 main 
bearing journal.  The cause of the fatigue was not determined.
The helicopter was released to the owner's representative.
