The pilot stated that during the approach phase, there was a moderate crosswind 
(approximately 10 knots) from the east. He corrected for the crosswind by banking the aircraft 
into the wind. He further stated, that shortly before the runway threshold, a gust of wind from 
the west raised the aircraft's wing. He tried to take corrective action using rudder and aileron. 
The aircraft banked to the right, and the pilot tried to pull up as the aircraft went into a nose 
down attitude. The pilot was not able to fully recover from the sudden change in the aircraft's 
attitude. As a result of this, the aircraft hit the ground with the nosewheel, and the nosewheel 
separated from the aircraft. The propeller, and later the cowling, hit the runway.  According to 
the airport manager, the pilot had called on the UNICOM frequency and asked for current 
weather. The airport manager advised the pilot of a '15 to 20 knot crosswind,' based on his 
observation of the airport windsock. 
the pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions and failure to properly flare the 
airplane, which resulted in a hard landing and overload failure of the nose gear.  The 
unfavorable wind conditions were related factors. 
 On January 2, 1998, about 1354 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N757VT, 
registered to Ormond Beach Aviation Inc., operating as a 14 CFR Part 91, personal flight, 
crashed while landing at the Everglades Airpark, Everglades City, Florida.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  The airplane was 
substantially damaged.  The pilot and one passenger were not injured.  The flight originated 
from Ormond Beach, Florida, at 1100.
According to the pilot, "...during the approach phase there was a moderate crosswind 
(approximately 10 knots) from the east."  He stated that to correct for the crosswind he 
"banked the aircraft into the wind."  The pilot further stated, "...at or shortly before the runway 
threshold a gust from the west raised the aircraft's wing.  I tried to take corrective action using 
rudder and aileron.  The aircraft banked to the right and I tried to pull up as the aircraft went 
into a nose down attitude.  I was not able to fully recover from the sudden change in the 
aircraft's attitude and as a result of this the aircraft hit the ground with the nosewheel.  As the 
speed of the aircraft was still relatively high...the nose wheel was separated from the aircraft 
and the propeller and later the cowling hit the runway.  After approximately 300 feet the 
aircraft came to a stop."
According to the airport manager, the pilot of N757VT called on the UNICOM frequency 
and asked for current weather.  The airport manager advised the pilot of a "15 to 20 knot 
crosswind," based on his observation of the airport windsock.
