During the takeoff roll, while passing 45 knots indicated airspeed, ice formed between the 
inner and outer panes of the airplane's windshield, obscuring the crew's vision.  The flight crew 
aborted the takeoff, the airplane drifted off the left side of the snow covered runway, and 
caught fire.  The crew reported the airplane and windshield were cold soaked and the 
temperature was -10 degrees Fahrenheit. The windshield anti-ice system blows air from a 
combustion heater between the windshield glass panes. The air source for the heater, once the 
airplane has forward airspeed, is two leading edge wing scoops.  The crew told the NTSB 
investigator that the taxi time was too short for the windshield to warm up, and that during the 
taxi, snow was circulated around the airplane and into the wing scoops. 
The ingestion of snow into the windshield anti-ice system, and the resulting obscured 
windshield which made runway alignment not possible.  Factors associated with this accident 
were the cold windshield, the reduced performance of the windshield anti-ice because of the 
short taxi by the crew, and the insufficient information on the system provided by the 
manufacturer. 
 On January 2, 1998, at 1526 Alaska standard time, a Douglas DC-6B airplane, N861TA, 
departed the edge of runway 34 during an aborted takeoff from the Nixon Fork Mine landing 
strip, thirty miles north of McGrath, Alaska.  The transport category airplane was destroyed by 
a postcrash fire.  The airline transport certificated pilot, and the other two flight crewmembers, 
were uninjured.  The airplane was operated by Woods Air Fuel, Inc., of Palmer, Alaska.  The 
flight was operated under 14 CFR Part 125 as a cargo flight transporting ore concentrate from 
Nixon Fork Mine.  The flight originated from Palmer at 1230, and was on the takeoff roll of the 
return leg.  Visual meteorological condition prevailed at the time of the accident, and an IFR 
flight plan was on file.  
The captain reported that at an indicated airspeed of 45 knots during the takeoff roll, ice 
formed between the inner and outer windshield panes, with the icing following the flow of 
heated air through the windshield. The crew's forward visibility was obscured, and the takeoff 
was aborted.  The captain reported that the airplane drifted left into snow berms on the side of 
the 4,200 feet long by 85 feet wide runway and caught fire.  The three crewmen evacuated the 
airplane without injury.
The three crewmen relayed to the NTSB investigator that after arrival at the mine strip, the 
airplane and windshield cold soaked for about one hour in the -10 degree Fahrenheit 
temperature. After loading the airplane, they taxied for only a few minutes in light, powdery 
snow, before beginning the takeoff roll.  The crewmen stated that the windshield anti-ice 
system was activated, but because of the short taxi, did not have time to warm completely.  All 
crewmembers indicated that during the taxi, snow was circulated around the airplane and the 
wing scoops.  
Research revealed that the windshield anti-ice system was modified as part of installing 
Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) number 981SO on June 26, 1987.  This STC eliminated 
the superchargers on engines numbers 3 and 4 from providing conditioned air to the airplane's 
cabin.  The modification was part of a conversion to a cargo configuration.
The modified cockpit heating and windshield anti-ice system receives supply air from one of 
two sources.  On the ground, a blower fan draws air from the underside of the fuselage for a 
combustion heater.  As the airplane transitions to flight, ram air pressure from two wing 
leading edge scoops becomes greater than ground blower discharge air, and becomes the 
heater air supply source.  Air and any particulate matter in the wing scoops and ducting passes 
directly to the heater.  Once airborne, the blower fan is deactivated by a weight on wheels 
switch.  
From the heater the warm air is ducted directly to the windshield, where it flows between the 
outer glass pane and the inner vinyl pane, and is then discharged into the cockpit.
The "DC-6 Airplane Operating Manual" used by two other companies states "...Certain 
combinations of temperature and humidity will cause moisture to condense from the air 
between the windshield panels and settle on the inner surfaces of the glass, obscuring vision. 
Once formed, anti-icing airflow with heater operation will be required to clear the panels."  
This language is not included in the STC literature, nor in the flight handbook for the company 
operating the accident airplane.
