Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sebastian, FL
Accident Number:
ERA14LA279
Date & Time:
06/02/2014, 1700 EDT 
Registration:
N360VT
Aircraft:
FREDERICK HAYS-ROTH VELOCITY 
TWIN
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Hard landing
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot/owner reported that he accompanied the chief pilot of the airplane kit manufacturer 
on operational ground and flight tests of the airplane following the installation of a rebuilt left 
propeller. The tests were "normal," and the chief pilot deplaned. The pilot then serviced the 
airplane with fuel and departed to perform three solo takeoffs and landings. On the third 
takeoff, the airplane pulled left and required hard right rudder to maintain runway alignment. 
When the airplane was about traffic pattern altitude, the pilot noted a 1,200-rpm difference 
between the left and right engines; the left engine was producing 1,400 rpm, and the right 
engine was producing 2,600 rpm. While flying the remainder of the traffic pattern, the pilot 
attempted to troubleshoot and get the rpm on the two engines to match until he was on final 
approach to the runway. The pilot reduced the engine power to idle as the airplane crossed the 
runway threshold, and the airplane "floated awhile" before touching down and subsequently 
bouncing again. The pilot stated that, during the second touchdown, the left wing lifted "due to 
the crosswind from the left" and that he had inadequate speed to control the airplane. The pilot 
chose to abort the landing after the second bounce when the airplane was at a 45-degree, nose-
high attitude. Both engines accelerated to full power, but the airplane collided with the runway, 
and both main landing gear and propellers were separated. Examination of the propeller 
assembly revealed no preimpact mechanical anomalies, and all noted damage was consistent 
with impact and overstress.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper landing flare, which resulted in a bounced landing. Also causal to the 
accident were the pilot's subsequent delayed decision to abort the landing and his improper 
Page 2 of 8ERA14LA279
execution of the aborted landing, which resulted in the airplane exceeding its critical angle-of-
attack and experiencing an aerodynamic stall.
Findings
Aircraft
Propeller system - Not specified
Angle of attack - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 8ERA14LA279
Factual Information
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern 
downwind
Unknown or undetermined
Landing-flare/touchdown
Hard landing (Defining event)
Landing-landing roll
Runway excursion
On June 2, 2014, about 1700 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Velocity 
Twin, N360VT, was substantially damaged when it collided with the runway and terrain 
following a loss of control while landing at Sebastian Municipal Airport (X26), Sebastian, 
Florida. The private pilot/owner was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, 
and no flight plan was filed for the local flight, which was conducted under the provisions of 
Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot stated that he accompanied the chief pilot for the airplane kit 
manufacturer in his airplane for an "operational test" following the installation of an 
overhauled propeller on the number 1 (left) engine. The ground and flight tests were "normal" 
and the chief pilot deplaned before the pilot refueled the airplane and departed by himself to 
perform three takeoffs and landings.
On the third takeoff, the pilot said the airplane "pulled" to the left and required "hard" right 
rudder to maintain runway alignment. About traffic pattern altitude, the pilot noted a 1,200 
rpm difference between the left and right engines; with the left engine producing 1,400 rpm 
and the right engine producing 2,600 rpm. Throughout the remainder of the traffic pattern, the 
pilot attempted to troubleshoot and match the rpm on the two engines until he was on final 
approach to runway 10.
The pilot reduced engine power to idle as he crossed the runway threshold, and the airplane 
"floated awhile" before touching down, and bouncing back into the air. During the second 
touchdown, the left wing lifted "due to the crosswind from the left" and the pilot stated that he 
had inadequate speed to control the airplane. He elected to abort the landing and advanced 
both throttles; but the airplane yawed to the right, departed the runway, and collided with 
terrain.
In a telephone interview with a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, the pilot stated that 
upon landing "the wind caught him," which resulted in a couple of "bumps" down the runway.
In both a written statement and a telephone interview, a witness described an "unstable" 
approach before the airplane contacted the runway and "launched" back into the air. He 
described the right wing and the landing gear striking the ground twice before the airplane 
bounced back into the air. He said, "At this point he had a 40-45 degree nose-up attitude. He 
went to full power, but he was already stalled. The airplane struck the ground out of control 
and the landing gear and both propellers separated from the airplane."
Page 4 of 8ERA14LA279
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
66
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/14/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1470 hours (Total, all aircraft), 15 hours (Total, this make and model), 18 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane multiengine, single engine, 
and instrument airplane. His most recent FAA third class medical certificate was issued on 
May 14, 2013. He reported 1,500 total hours of flight experience, of which 17 hours were in the 
accident airplane make and model.
According to the chief pilot of Velocity Aircraft, the airplane transition syllabus time for the 
Velocity Twin was 5.0 hours. The pilot required 11.5 hours of training prior to his first solo 
flight in the airplane. On his first solo flight, the cargo door was left open, and a bungee cord 
and other loose cargo departed the airplane and passed through the arc of the right propeller, 
which destroyed the blades and required a complete rebuild of the right propeller system.
Page 5 of 8ERA14LA279
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
FREDERICK HAYS-ROTH
Registration:
N360VT
Model/Series:
VELOCITY TWIN 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2014
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
VT004
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/07/2014, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
55 Hours
Engines:
 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
55 Hours as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-320
Registered Owner:
BAY AREA AIR LLC
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
BAY AREA AIR LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 2014. According to company 
records, its most recent conditional inspection was completed February 7, 2014. The airplane 
had accrued about 55 total hours of operation at the time of the accident.
The rebuilt propeller was returned and installed on the airplane June 2, 2014. The chief pilot 
performed the ground and operational flight testing on the right propeller, and right propeller 
governor, and the pilot/owner accompanied him during the test. In his statement, the chief 
pilot described in detail the manner in which he conducted the tests and monitored the 
propeller's performance on the ground, and at takeoff, climb, and cruise power settings. He 
stated that the performance of the propeller and governor was "normal."
Page 6 of 8ERA14LA279
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
VRB, 23 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
11 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1653 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
120°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 3600 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 15 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.09 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Sebastian, FL (X26)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Sebastian, FL (X26)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1630 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
At 0954, the weather conditions reported at Vero Beach, Florida (VRB), 11 miles southeast of 
the accident airport, included a broken ceiling at 3,600 feet, visibility 10 miles, temperature 26 
degrees C, dewpoint 19 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.09 inches of mercury. The 
wind was from 080 degrees at 12 knots. According to the chief pilot, the Automated Surface 
Observing System (ASOS) at X26 reported winds from 100 degrees at 15 knots gusting to 19 
knots just before the accident flight.
Airport Information
Airport:
SEBASTIAN MUNI (X26)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
21 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
10
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3199 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Page 7 of 8ERA14LA279
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
27.813333, -80.495556 (est)
The wreckage was recovered from the accident site and moved into the aircraft kit 
manufacturer's facility where it was examined by an FAA inspector on June 3, 2014. The 
canard supporting structure, wings, and fuel tank areas appeared undamaged. There was 
damage to the wing tips, ailerons, landing gear, fuselage around the left main gear cutout, 
fuselage aft of the left main gear, lower fuselage access panel, the left side of the empennage, 
canard, and both propellers. There was a section of a wooden propeller blade stuck in the 
damaged area of the empennage.
The blades of the left propeller could be rotated independently in the propeller hub with hand 
pressure. Several of the leading edge strips that were recovered showed damage consistent with 
impact with the landing gear leg. The right propeller blades were secure in the hub.
Continuity and rigging of the propeller controls was confirmed.
Tests And Research
The left propeller assembly was removed, and examined at the manufacturer's facility in 
Deland, Florida on July 16, 2014 under the supervision of the FAA inspector. Each of the three 
blades was fractured at its root.
Disassembly of the propeller assembly revealed the piston extension displayed three index 
marks or impressions consistent with blade pin contact. The pitch change blocks were 
fractured. According to the inspector's report, "The number one blade was removed and the 
piston extension (with serviceable pitch change blocks) was reinstalled without the return 
springs so the movement of the pitch change blocks could be observed when the blade was 
rotated. It was noted that the pitch change blocks moved less than 1/16th of an inch with the 
full travel of the blade from low pitch to feather. It was not obvious – what caused the broken 
pitch change blocks."
Photographs of the pitch change blocks were reviewed by an NTSB Senior Materials 
Investigator who stated the fractures were consistent with overload failure.
Additional Information
Page 8 of 8ERA14LA279
The Airplane Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-3), Chapter 14, "Transition to a Multiengine 
Airplane" stated, "The complexity of multiengine airplanes makes a knowledge of and 
proficiency in emergency go-around procedures particularly essential for safe piloting. The 
emergency go-around during a landing approach is inherently critical because it is usually 
initiated at a very low altitude and airspeed with the airplane's configuration and trim 
adjustments set for landing. Unless absolutely necessary, the decision to go around should not 
be delayed to the point where the airplane is ready to touch down. The more altitude and time 
available to apply power, establish a climb, retrim, and set up a go-around configuration, the 
easier and safer the maneuver becomes."
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Brian C Rayner
Adopted Date:
06/22/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Thomas Gross; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL
Publish Date:
06/12/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89358
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
