According to witness statements and tire marks on the runway, the airplane touched down 
more than halfway down the runway while landing with a slight quartering tailwind. As the 
nosewheel contacted the runway, the airplane veered to the right. The pilot applied full left 
rudder and full reverse on the left power lever, but was unsuccessful in correcting the 
alignment of the airplane. He then engaged the nosewheel steering button on the left power 
lever, and the airplane began a more aggressive turn to the right. It departed the runway, 
traveled down an embankment, and came to rest against the airport boundary fence. 
Postaccident examination of the airplane, engines, brakes, and nose landing gear steering 
actuator revealed no obvious mechanical anomalies. After the airplane was repaired and 
returned to service it again experienced an intermittent loss of steering. As a result, a series of 
troubleshooting taxi tests were performed. The airplane veered off the runway as it reached an 
airspeed of 50 knots and the brakes were applied. Further examination of the airplane revealed 
damaged wires in the nosewheel steering harness, which would have caused an intermittent 
loss of steering. Although an electrical anomaly contributed to the loss of control, the fact that 
the pilots landed long, and potentially with excess speed, resulted in less runway and time 
available to recover from the anomaly.
Damaged wiring in the nosewheel steering harness, which resulted in a loss of control during 
landing. Contributing to the accident was the pilots' improper touchdown point.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 2010, about 1521 eastern standard time, a Fairchild SA227 Metro III, N227ML, 
registered to 472 LLC, ran off the side of runway 23 during landing roll at the Lake 
Cumberland Regional Airport (SME), Somerset, Kentucky. The pilot, co-pilot and passenger 
were not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight was operated by 
Locair, Inc., as flight 151, an on-demand air taxi flight, conducted under the provisions of Title 
14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135, with an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan 
filed. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time of the accident. The flight 
originated from Baltimore/Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport (BWI), 
Baltimore, Maryland, at 1320 the same day.
According to the pilot-in-command (pilot flying), the airplane was on a stabilized approach to 
runway 23. It touched down normally with the main landing gear contacting first, and then the 
nose landing gear. As the nose wheel contacted the runway, the airplane veered to the right. 
The pilot applied full left rudder and full reverse on the left power lever; but was unsuccessful 
in correcting the alignment of the airplane. He then engaged the nose wheel steering button on 
the left power lever, and the airplane began a more aggressive turn to the right. It departed the 
runway, traveled down an embankment and came to rest against the airport boundary fence.
The co-pilot (non-flying pilot) stated that after the airplane touched down, the pilot-in-
command brought the power levers to reverse. At that time, the airplane suddenly turned to 
the right and exited the runway. Despite the pilot-in-commands' constant efforts to correct the 
airplane's path, including full reverse on the left engine, the airplane continued to veer to the 
right. It came to a rest after sliding down the embankment and impacting the airport fence. 
A Locair customer service representative observed the airplane's approach, as she was outside 
on the tarmac waiting for it to land. She stated that the airplane touched down normally on the 
runway and began to taxi. At the point where it needed to make a turn toward the terminal, it 
began to "fishtail." It continued this movement for "a little bit," then straightened out and went 
off the runway. 
Another witness observed the airplane touchdown beyond the 3,000 feet distance remaining 
marker for runway 23. He also noted that the winds were reported on the AWOS from 330 
degrees.
 PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot flying, age 41, held an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating for airplane 
multiengine land. He also held a flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane single and 
multiengine land, and instrument airplane. His most recent first-class medical certificate was 
issued on December 6, 2009. At that time, he reported 5,350 hours of total flight experience. 
The pilot monitoring, age 33, held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single 
and multiengine land, and instrument airplane. His most recent first-class medical certificate 
was issued on August 8, 2008. At that time, he reported 350 hours of total flight experience.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was manufactured in 1982, and equipped with two Airesearch TPE331-11U 
turboprop engines. The airplane was maintained on a continuous airworthiness inspection 
program, and the most recent inspection was completed on December 3, 2009 at 25,945 total 
aircraft hours. At the time of the accident, the airplane had accumulated 25,998 hours. 
According to the Metro III Landing Distance Chart in the Airplane Flight Manual, an airplane 
with a landing weight of 11,000 pounds required approximately 2,600 feet of landing distance, 
with the wind, temperature, and elevation conditions present for the accident airplane. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather recorded at SME, at 1515, included wind from 310 degrees at 5 knots, 10 miles 
visibility with light snow, overcast clouds at 2,500 feet, temperature -7 degrees C, dew point -11 
degrees C, and altimeter setting of 30.34 inches mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Lake Cumberland Regional Airport was comprised of a single runway, oriented in a 5/23 
configuration. 
Runway 5/23 was 5,800 feet long and 100 feet wide, made of asphalt. 
After the accident, a visual inspection of the runway by the airport manager revealed no water, 
ice or snow. A friction test was also performed by airport personnel, which yielded the 
following results:
First 1/3 of the runway: 71% friction
Second 1/3 of the runway: 64 % friction
Third 1/3 of the runway: 51% friction
Overall average:62% friction
FLIGHT RECORDERS     
The airplane was equipped with a Fairchild model A-100A cockpit voice recorder (CVR). The 
CVR was retained and forwarded to the NTSB Vehicle Recorders Laboratory, Washington, 
D.C., for data download. According to the Specialist's Factual Report, none of the audio was 
pertinent to the accident investigation. The audio was consistent with a CVR which had 
malfunctioned and stopped recording some time prior to the accident. There are also 
indications that an attempt had been made to erase the tape while still installed in the CVR 
unit, but after the tape mechanism had stopped running. [Additional information regarding the 
CVR content can be found in the Vehicle Recorder Specialist's Report located in the public 
docket.]
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
Examination of the runway by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, revealed tire 
marks from all three landing gear, in the center of runway 23, beginning just past the 2,000 
feet remaining sign. The markings appeared to track straight, without skidding, for 120 feet, 
before beginning a slow curve to the right. They continued to travel in a curve an additional 
285 feet before exiting the runway onto the grass parallel to the runway. The markings 
continued through the grass, until the left propeller struck the Taxiway D intersection sign. The 
tire marks continued across Taxiway D, into the grass again, and across Taxiway A. After 
crossing Taxiway A, the markings continued down the embankment, terminating where the 
airplane struck the fence (1,131 feet from the initial observed transfer markings). 
All runway markings appeared to be "friction" transfer and not skid marks. The markings were 
indicative to rolling tires only, and there was no indication of locking of the brake assemblies.  
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed the 
right wing was substantially damaged, outboard of the landing light assembly. The wing 
section displayed impact and accordion crushing damage. Additionally, the left propeller 
displayed damage to 2 of the 4 blades, indicative of contact with the airport taxiway sign. All 
four blades were curled at their tips, indicative of striking rocks at the base of the embankment. 
The two damaged blades were locked in the low pitch setting and the other two were free 
moving in the propeller hub. The right engine propeller was observed to be in the feathered 
position with damage to all four blades.
The nose section of the airplane sustained scratching from contact with the fence, but was not 
compromised. The flaps were observed to be partially extended.
The cockpit examination revealed the nose wheel steering switch was in the "ARMED" 
position, and the engine power levers were between the ground idle and reverse positions. The 
right power lever was more difficult to move than the left lever. The flap control was between 
the ¼ and ½ positions. 
The airplane was subsequently recovered for further examination. 
Visual examination of the landing gear assemblies appeared undamaged, and the tire 
assemblies did not indicate any damage and/or scuffing. All tires were inflated and wheel 
assemblies appeared undamaged. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Engine Examination 
Examination of the engine revealed the right power lever was stiff and difficult to operate, even 
with the friction locks at a minimum. The left power lever operated smoothly and unrestricted. 
A check of the engine rigging parameters revealed the right engine led the left engine by 8-10 
degrees. One possibility for this discrepancy was that the right engine entered into reverse 
before the left engine. 
Brake Examination
The left landing gear brake was submitted for an operational bench test and teardown 
examination. No defects or discrepancies were noted during the testing or examination. 
Nose Landing Gear (NLG) Steering Actuator Examination
The NLG actuator was also submitted for an operational bench test and visual inspection. The 
results of the testing revealed the reported failure could not be duplicated. Examination of the 
hydraulic fluid retrieved from inside the unit revealed the fluid was in "like new" condition and 
contained no contamination. 
Taxi testing
After the accident, Locair maintenance advised a ﬁconnection™ had been repaired and the nose 
wheel steering appeared to operate normally. The National Transportation Safety Board 
(NTSB) Investigator-In-Charge (IIC) was notified and a request was made for the FAA to ride 
on board the aircraft for taxi testing to confirm the issue was resolved.
At the initiation of the test, the AMT taxied slowly across the ramp and onto a taxiway. The 
brakes were applied and the nose wheel steering (NWS) responded appropriately. This test was 
conducted 5 more times, with no anomalies. The AMT then proceeded to runway 23 for an 
additional taxi test. He aligned the airplane left of centerline and slowly applied power. As the 
airspeed reached 20 knots, the AMT applied both brakes, and the airplane gradually veered to 
the right. The AMT engaged the NWS, which appeared to function normally, and the airplane 
returned to center. The same test was repeated a second time, and when the airplane reached 
35 knots, the AMT engaged the NWS and the airplane returned to center. 
A third, and final, test was performed. As the airplane reached 50 knots, the AMT applied both 
brakes and the airplane veered sharply to the right. The AMT continued to apply left brake and 
engaged the NWS; however, the airplane continued to the right and exited the runway. The 
AMT continued to apply "hard left brake" and stated, "It's not responding–it's not turning–I 
can't steer it!"
The airplane continued to travel down the embankment and came to rest in the grass. 
After the second runway excursion, further examination of the nose wheel steering assembly 
was conducted. The results of the examination revealed damaged wires in the nose wheel 
steering harness. The harness was rewired, re-installed on the airplane and operationally 
tested. No further anomalies were experienced with the nose wheel steering.
