Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Jasper, TX
Accident Number:
DFW06LA121
Date & Time:
05/01/2006, 0800 CDT 
Registration:
N8504T
Aircraft:
Air Tractor AT-802A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The turbine powered agricultural airplane was loaded with a payload of 5,500 pounds of 
chemicals prior to a local aerial application flight.  The 8,500-hour non-instrument rated 
commercial pilot reported to local authorities that while in-flight he experienced some 
problems with the on-board agricultural-navigation system; however, he elected to proceed to 
the field to be sprayed.  While en route to the field, the engine surged a couple of times and lost 
power.  The pilot attempted to execute a forced landing to a pasture.  During the approach, the 
pilot was forced to make a sharp turn to avoid colliding with a fence, resulting in a hard landing 
and a subsequent loss of directional control.  The payload of chemicals was found in the 
hopper, and the reason why the pilot did not elect to dump the load following the loss of engine 
power was not determined.  The 2005 model airplane sustained major structural damage in 
the area aft of the engine firewall.  Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation 
Administration inspector, who traveled to the accident site, revealed less than a cup of fuel in 
one tank and less than 5 gallons in the other.  A completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft 
Accident/Incident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) was never received from neither the pilot nor 
the operator.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.  A contributing factor was the lack of suitable 
landing for the pilot to execute the forced landing.
Page 2 of 5DFW06LA121
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - CONGESTED/CONFINED AREA
4. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
Page 3 of 5DFW06LA121
Factual Information
On 1 May 2006, at 0800 central daylight time, a single-engine Air Tractor AT-802A 
agricultural airplane, N8504T, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a 
reported loss of engine power near Jasper, Texas.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the 
airplane, sustained minor injuries.  The airplane was registered to Ag Pilots, Inc., of Onalaska, 
Texas, and was being operated by Thrash Aviation.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the aerial application flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  The local flight originated 
from the Jasper County Airport (JAS) at time unknown.
The turbine powered agricultural airplane was loaded with a payload of 5,500 pounds of 
chemicals prior to a local aerial application flight.  The 8,500-hour non-instrument rated 
commercial pilot reported to local authorities that while in-flight he experienced some 
problems with the on-board agricultural-navigation system; however, he elected to proceed to 
the field to be sprayed.  While enroute to the field, the PT6A series engine surged a couple of 
time and lost power.  The pilot attempted to execute a forced landing to a pasture.  During the 
approach, the pilot was forced to make a sharp turn to avoid colliding with a fence, resulting in 
a hard landing and a loss of directional control.  
The payload of chemicals was found in the hopper, and the reason why the pilot was unable to 
dump the load following the loss of engine power was not determined.  The 2005 model 
airplane sustained major structural damage in the area aft of the engine firewall.  
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, who traveled to 
the accident site, revealed less of a cup of fuel was found in one tank and less than 5 gallons 
were found in the other.  A completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report (NTSB 
Form 6120.1) was not received from either the pilot or the operator.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
8500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 150 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 4 of 5DFW06LA121
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Air Tractor
Registration:
N8504T
Model/Series:
AT-802A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
802A-0218
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
8500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney Canada
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A
Registered Owner:
AG Pilots Incorporated
Rated Power:
800 hp
Operator:
Jimmy Thrash
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
Thrash Aviation
Operator Designator Code:
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Jasper, TX (JAS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
30.885556, -94.034722
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Hector R Casanova
Adopted Date:
10/31/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Brian Gallagher; FAA FSDO; Houston, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
