Page 1 of 12
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Desert Center, CA
Accident Number:
LAX06FA156
Date & Time:
05/01/2006, 1430 PDT 
Registration:
C-FICL
Aircraft:
Robinson R44 Raven II
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
The Canadian certificated commercial helicopter pilot was conducting a cross-country delivery 
flight with a non-rated passenger occupying the copilot seat.  The passenger and pilot together 
had previously made delivery flights from the Robinson factory to Canada.  Two witnesses saw 
the helicopter just before it impacted the ground and reported that the tail boom had separated 
from the fuselage.  No witnesses were identified who saw the initial breakup sequence.  Both 
main rotor blades were bent downward at significant angles, with one blade having penetrated 
the cabin on the right side with a downward slicing front to rear arc.  The primary wreckage 
debris field was approximately 500 feet long on an easterly heading.  The helicopter sustained 
damage consistent with a high-energy, fuselage level, vertical ground impact.  Detailed post 
accident investigation of the engine, the airframe, and the control systems disclosed no 
evidence of any preimpact anomalies.  The removable cyclic was installed on the left side 
copilot's position, contrary to manufacturer's recommendations when a non-rated passenger is 
seated in the left seat.  The removable pedals and collective for the left side were not installed.  
The cyclic controls for both the pilot's and copilot's positions were broken from their respective 
mounting points.  The copilot's cyclic grip exhibited inward crushing.  The Safety Board 
adopted a Special Investigation Report on April 2, 1996, following the investigation into R22 
and R44 accidents involving loss of main rotor control and divergence of the main rotor disk, 
which included a finding that the cause of the loss of main rotor control in many of the 
accidents "most likely stems from a large, abrupt pilot control input to a helicopter that is 
highly responsive to cyclic control inputs."
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
a loss of control and the divergence of the main rotor blade system from its normal rotational 
path for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 12LAX06FA156
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
2. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 12LAX06FA156
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 1, 2006, about 1430 Pacific daylight time, a Robinson R44 Raven II, Canadian 
registration C-FICL, experienced an in-flight breakup and impacted desert terrain near Desert 
Center, California.  Zimmer Air Service, Inc., was operating the helicopter under the provisions 
of 14 CFR Part 91.  The Canadian certificated commercial pilot and the non-rated passenger 
sustained fatal injuries.  The helicopter was destroyed.  The cross-country delivery flight 
departed Zamperini Field Airport (TOA), Torrance, California, at 1305, with a planned 
refueling stop at Blythe Airport (BLH), Blythe, California.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.  The approximate global positioning system (GPS) 
coordinates of the primary wreckage were 33 degrees 38.016 minutes north latitude and 115 
degrees 05.224 minutes west longitude.
The pilot had taken delivery of the new helicopter from the Robinson Helicopter Company 
factory in Torrance on the day of the accident.  The pilot and passenger, who were employed by 
Zimmer Air Service, Inc., departed from TOA with an intended final destination of Blenheim, 
Ontario, Canada.
Riverside County Sheriff's Department personnel responded to the accident site and 
interviewed two ground witnesses.  The witnesses related that they saw the helicopter just 
before it impacted the ground.  They reported that the tail boom had separated from the 
fuselage; they did not see the separation sequence.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The operator reported that the pilot held a Canadian issued commercial pilot certificate with 
ratings for airplane single engine land and helicopter, with the following type ratings: BH06; 
BH47; BH47T; HL12; RH44; S350; SK55; and SK58.
The pilot held a first-class medical certificate issued on December 5, 2005.  It had the 
limitation that the pilot must wear glasses.
The operator reported that the pilot had a total rotorcraft flight time of 7,615 hours.  He logged 
25 hours in the last 90 days, and 12 hours in the last 30 days.  He had an estimated 1,041 hours 
in this make and model, and had completed a biennial flight review on March 31, 2006.
The operator reported that the passenger did not hold any pilot certificates nor was he 
attempting to obtain any ratings.  The passenger was related to the pilot by marriage and had 
flown with the accident pilot on previous delivery flights. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter was a Robinson R44 Raven II, serial number 11209.  A review of the helicopter's 
logbooks revealed that the helicopter had a total airframe time of 4.0 hours when it left the 
factory.  The tachometer read 5.2 hours at the accident scene.
The engine was a Textron Lycoming IO-540-AE1A5, serial number L-31092-48A.  Total time 
recorded on the engine was 5.2 hours.
Fueling records at TOA established that the helicopter was fueled to capacity (48.9 gallons) on 
May 1, 2006.  Examination of the maintenance and flight department records revealed no 
unresolved maintenance discrepancies against the helicopter prior to departure.
Page 4 of 12LAX06FA156
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The closest official weather observation station was Blythe airport, which was 18 nm east of the 
accident site.  The elevation of the weather observation station was 397 feet mean sea level 
(msl).  A METAR for BLH was issued at 1453.  It reported winds from 170 degrees at 8 knots; 
visibility 10 miles; skies clear; temperature 38 degrees Celsius; dew point 01 degrees Celsius; 
altimeter 29.74 inHg.
COMMUNICATIONS
The helicopter was not in contact with any ATC facility.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Investigators from the National Transportation Safety Board, the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA), and Robinson Helicopter Company examined the wreckage at the 
accident scene.
The on-scene examination of the accident site and wreckage revealed that the helicopter and 
separated components came to rest about 200 yards south of Interstate 10 (I-10) at mile 
marker 124.  The accident site was 16 nm east of Desert Center, and 25 miles west of the city of 
Blythe.  The area was open and flat with low shrubs, typical of desert terrain.
The main wreckage, consisting of the fuselage, engine, transmission, cockpit, most of the right 
skid tube, a portion of the left skid tube, and the majority of both main rotor blades, came to 
rest on an orientation of 280 degrees magnetic.
The tail boom was 100 feet west of the main wreckage.  The tail boom separated just aft of the 
main fuselage attach point.  The tail rotor blades and tail rotor transmission were attached to 
the tail boom, with minor ground impact damage noted.
The primary wreckage debris field was about 500 feet long.  The primary wreckage debris field 
consisted of the right side pilot's door, which was in two pieces, and pieces of fiberglass and 
Plexiglass.  A secondary debris field, consisting of papers and light cockpit materials, was 
another 400 feet downwind from the accident site.  The debris path was along a magnetic 
bearing of 090 degrees.
Cockpit and Cabin
The removable cyclic was installed on the left side, which is the normal position for a copilot or 
passenger.  The removable anti torque pedals and collective had not been installed on the left 
side.  The removable pedals were in the baggage compartment.  Both the pilot and copilot 
cyclic grips were detached from their respective mounting positions.  The copilot cyclic grip 
was also crushed inward.  The pilot's collective was in a position close to full down, and the 
friction slider was fractured below the slot.  The pilot's pedals were in a position close to full 
left.  The ignition key was in the OFF position, while the throttle twist grip was in a full on 
position.  The cockpit mixture control was in the full rich position; however, the arm at the fuel 
servo was in the full lean position.
Miscellaneous personal items were recovered, which included luggage, clothing, toiletries, a 
digital camera, a P.D.A., a handheld GPS, quart bottles of oil, a cabin cover, airport guidebooks, 
notes, and aircraft charts.
Fuel System
Page 5 of 12LAX06FA156
Both fuel caps were in place.  Both fuel tanks ruptured with hydraulic bulging in the lower 
corners.  There was a strong odor of fuel in the sand beneath the helicopter and evidence of 
fluid flow.  The finger strainer in the auxiliary tank was free of debris.  The fuel line between 
the auxiliary tank and the main tank separated, and fractured in several places.
The gascolator bowl was dislodged, but remained in place.  Investigators removed the 
gascolator bowl.  It was clean inside, but the screen was partially crumpled and inside the bowl. 
The fitting between the gascolator and the electric fuel pump was broken.  The top of the 
electric fuel pump separated from the lower portion.
The fuel return line between the return pressure valve and the auxiliary tank was kinked, but it 
was still intact.  Investigators were able to blow air through all the components of the vent 
lines.
Lubrication Systems
The main rotor and tail rotor systems are lubricated using Swepco 90 weight gear oil, which is 
normally blue in color.
The engine is lubricated using 20-50-weight mineral oil, which is normally a transparent 
golden color.
The hydraulic system operates using Robinson hydraulic fluid, Part number A257-15, which is 
normally red in color.   
Powerplant
The powerplant was severely damaged.  Most of the accessory case fractured.  The alternator 
drive pulley was in contact with the starter ring gear.  The pulley exhibited a row of scores on 
its aft surface.  The space of the scoring was approximately in size and dimension (spacing) to 
the ring gear teeth.  The upper sheave's rear surface was in contact with the starter ring gear.  
There was some scoring at the contact area, with the scores spaced at the approximate size and 
dimension of the ring gear teeth.  The engine oil filler cap was found secured to the filler tube, 
which had broken off of the engine casing. 
Driveline
The drive belts were all intact, with no sign of rolling or chafing.  The upper and lower sheaves 
were displaced longitudinally, and the belts were not in place in the sheave grooves.  The belt 
tension actuator had broken into several pieces.  Investigators were unable to locate part of the 
tube between the upper and lower portion the actuator.  The drive motor and worm gear 
separated, and the attachment lug to the upper actuator fractured.  The upper and lower 
actuator bearings rotated freely.  The sprag clutch locked, and free-wheeled normally when 
manually manipulated.  The forward flex coupling remained intact, although distorted.
The main rotor gearbox was open, and fractured into several pieces.  The shaft tilted forward, 
and the gears exhibited blue oil residue.  The output shaft and the hydraulic pump drive were 
free to rotate approximately 45 degrees.  However, motion was constrained by interference 
further up the mast.  The condition of the pinion and ring gears appeared normal.  The mast 
tube exhibited a large dent approximately halfway up, and the main rotor shaft appeared to be 
bent slightly.
Both droop stops and their corresponding retention bolts were in place.  Both elastomeric 
teeter stops had been crushed in the center.  The one for the main rotor blade (SN 2608B) was 
Page 6 of 12LAX06FA156
also displaced from its retention bracket; however, both retention brackets remained intact.  
There was slight circular arc scoring on the main rotor hub just inboard of both main rotor 
blade pitch change housings.  The upper swashplate and the main rotor magnetic pickup 
mount bracket exhibited a yellow substance, as well as some deformation.  The spindle for the 
main rotor blade (2608B) fractured at the coning bolt, but the side opposite the droop stop 
"tusk" remained intact around the coning bolt shank.  The droop stop tusk and the spindle for 
the main rotor blade (2628B) were intact.
Both main rotor blades were bent downward with compression buckling on the aft portion of 
the blade.  One main rotor blade (SN 2608B) was separated at two locations that were 
approximately 27 and 142 inches from the coning hinge bolt.  The main blade spar fractured 
approximately 109 inches from the coning hinge bolt, but the aft portion of the blade remained 
intact.  The lower portion of the blade had a piece of Plexiglas embedded in its lower surface 
approximately 77 to 88 inches from the coning bolt.
The second main rotor blade (SN 2628B) was bent downward more than 90 degrees at 
approximately 32 inches from the coning bolt, and was partially separated at 61 inches from 
the coning bolt.  This separation was approximately 7/8 of the chord from the leading edge of 
the blade to the trailing edge; the remaining attached portion of the blade was cut during the 
recovery process.  The remainder of the blade from this fracture outboard was intact.
The intermediate flex coupling was intact, but distorted.  The tail cone separated just aft of the 
fuselage attach point.  The tail rotor damper bearing rotated freely.  The manufacturer 
represented that it felt a little gritty.  The stainless steel friction arm separated, and the 
mounting bracket separated from the tail cone.
The aft flex coupling was intact.  The tail rotor gearbox was intact; with the exception of one 
mount tab.  It contained blue oil, and it rotated at least one full turn.  The pitch change slider 
bearing rotated freely.  The hub and tail rotor blades were intact.
Flight Controls
Investigators examined the flight control systems and located numerous discontinuities 
throughout the flight control assemblies.  Examinations of the fracture surfaces associated with 
the flight control discontinuities were all observed to be consistent with overload.  According to 
the manufacturer, no evidence of preimpact failures of the flight control systems was found.
Airframe
The fuselage exhibited severe crushing and impact damage.  The right front door and the cabin 
immediately above and below the door, exhibited a vertical cut that extended laterally inboard 
approximately 18 inches.  The rain gutter exhibited a yellow material above the cut in the right 
front door.  The door handle opening on the right front door had a small piece of what 
appeared to be main rotor blade skin lodged in it.  Main rotor blade (SN 2608B) was found 
extending through the mast fairing, aft of the mast tube, approximately halfway up.
The tail cone separated in the forward portion of the second bay.  At the separation, the tail 
cone was partially flattened out horizontally.  The tail cone was intact from the separation point 
aft, and exhibited a small dent adjacent to the tip of the tail rotor.  The empennage, tail rotor 
visual guard, and tail skid "stinger" were intact.  The upper and lower stabilizers exhibited 
minor buckling.
The belly of the aircraft, as well as the tail cone and empennage, exhibited a thin coating of 
Page 7 of 12LAX06FA156
engine oil.  The oil film was denser at the forward portion of the tail cone, becoming less dense 
moving rearward.  The Robinson representative stated it was not uncommon to see an excess 
of oil being discharged out the breather tube due to overfill at the factory.
Most of the landing gear remained attached to the airframe.  The right skid toe was 
approximately 140 feet northeast of the main wreckage; it exhibited a large dent on the right 
side near the tip.  Both cross tubes remained attached to their respective struts, and were fairly 
straight.  The left skid separated at the attachment points for both left struts.
Wreckage Recovery
On May 2, 2006, the wreckage was recovered from the accident site for further investigation.  
On May 12, 2006, the FAA accident coordinator returned to the accident site, and recovered a 
portion of the main rotor pitch horn and pitch link.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Riverside County Coroner completed an autopsy.  The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences 
Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed toxicological testing of specimens 
of the pilot.  Analysis of the specimens contained no findings for tested drugs.
The report contained the following findings for volatiles: 16 mg/dL, ethanol detected in muscle.  
The report stated that the ethanol found in this case was from sources other than ingestion of 
ethanol.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Investigators examined the wreckage at Aircraft Recovery Service, Littlerock, California, on 
May 3, 2006.  The FAA, Robinson Helicopter Company, and Lycoming were parties to the 
investigation and assisted in the examination.
Investigators removed the engine.  They slung it from a hoist, and disassembled the engine.
Investigators removed the top spark plugs.  All spark plugs were clean with no mechanical 
deformation.  The spark plug electrodes were gray, which corresponded to normal operation 
according to the Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug AV-27 Chart.
Investigators could not rotate the crankshaft due to impact damage to the engine case.  
Mechanical continuity of the rotating group and internal mechanisms was established visually 
during the disassembly and examination of the engine.  According to the manufacturer's 
investigator, no evidence of lubrication deprivation or contamination, or any evidence of 
signatures or conditions indicated any preimpact catastrophic mechanical malfunction were 
observed.  The camshaft was intact, and each cam lobe appeared normal in shape.  The 
accessory gears, including the crankshaft gear, bolt, and dowel, were intact, and remained 
undamaged by any preimpact malfunction.  The combustion chamber of each cylinder 
remained undamaged.  The gas path and combustion signatures, as viewed from the spark 
plugs, combustion chambers, and exhaust components, displayed coloration consistent with 
normal operation.  The manufacturer's investigator also indicated that the valve train was 
observed to be undamaged by any preimpact mechanical malfunction.
The magnetos sustained substantial damage.  The right magneto could not be tested due to the 
sustained damage; however, investigators were able to obtain spark from the left magneto.  The 
ignition harness sustained varying degrees of damage and could not be tested.  However, the 
ignition harness was attached at each magneto and respective spark plug.
Page 8 of 12LAX06FA156
The oil filter was detached and crushed.  The oil suction screen and oil filter were 
uncontaminated by any preimpact debris.  The manufacturer's investigator also did not 
observe any evidence of preimpact lubrication system contamination.
The fuel injector servo was partially displaced from the engine with a portion of the servo 
remaining secured at its mounting pad.  It exhibited fracture surface signatures that the 
manufacturer's investigator stated were consistent with overload.  The fuel injection servo and 
induction system were examined and observed to be free from obstruction.  The throttle and 
mixture controls were securely attached to their respective control arms of the servo.  The 
servo fuel inlet screen was not recovered.
The fuel flow divider remained secure at the mounting bracket.  Fuel lines remained secure at 
each flow divider fitting, and fuel injectors remained secure at each cylinder.  The fuel injection 
nozzles remained secure at each cylinder with the respective fuel line attached.  The flow 
divider was disassembled.  There was no evidence of internal mechanical malfunction or 
obstruction to the fuel flow.  The diaphragm remained intact and undamaged.  The fuel 
ejection nozzles were also removed and examined.  The nozzles were free of visible 
contamination and obstruction flow.
The fuel pump was displaced from the engine and fractured.  The portion of the mounting 
flange remained secure at the mounting pad.  It exhibited fracture surface signatures, which 
the manufacturer's representative stated were consistent with overload.  He opened the fuel 
pump for examination.  The fuel pump remained free of internal mechanical malfunction and 
obstruction to the flow.
The warning light panel was examined; the low rotor rpm, the oil pressure - engine; the 
governor OFF, and the auxiliary fuel pump lights each had a stretched coil.  The low fuel, 
clutch, tail rotor chip light, main rotor chip, main rotor temperature, rotor brake, carbon 
monoxide, engine fire, and fuel filter lights each had a tight coil.  With regard to the alternator, 
the filament appeared to be excessively long, but no stretch was observed.
The detached pitch link and the portion of the main rotor pitch horn was sent to the Safety 
Board Materials Laboratory, Washington, D.C., for further examination.  The Materials 
Laboratory examined the pitch link, and noted that a portion of the pitch link thread adjacent 
to the fracture face displayed "cup and cone" features consistent with a bending overload event.
Examination of the fracture face of the portion of the main rotor pitch horn that was still 
attached to the pitch link displayed a clean surface with no indications of a pre-existing 
condition and 45-degree shear lips, consistent with an overload event.
A damaged handheld Garmin GPS, model number 296, serial number 670199944, was 
recovered at the accident site.  The unit was sent to Garmin International to attempt to recover 
any flight data.  Garmin personnel examined the unit but were unsuccessful in extracting any 
data.  
Searches of all available radar sources in the area of the accident were unsuccessful in 
recovering any data of the accident flight.
On August 17, 2006, a Safety Board investigator took the spindle and blade root of the main 
rotor blade (SN 2608B) to Robinson Helicopter Company for hardness testing.  The spindle 
drawing calls out a hardness requirement of HRC 36.5-41.0.  Tested values ranged from 36.6 to 
37.7.  The investigator and Robinson Helicopter Company personnel also tested the hardness 
Page 9 of 12LAX06FA156
of the separated blade pitch horn.  A review of the manufacturer's drawing for the pitch horn 
revealed no specified hardness requirement for the component.  The hardness was measured 
using a scale and tip size not recommended for forged aluminum, so the hardness readings 
were not accurate and contained broad scatter results.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
On April 2, 1996, the Safety Board adopted a Special Investigation Report, "Robinson 
Helicopter Company R22 Loss of Main Rotor Control Accidents," (NTSB/SIR-96/03).  The 
Safety Board's special investigation initially focused on R22 accidents in which the main rotor 
blade diverged from its normal path and struck the helicopter.  When similar R44 accidents 
occurred, the special investigation was expanded to include those accidents.
In the findings of the investigation the report states, "...between 1981 and 1985, 31 R22 
accidents and three R44 accidents (domestic and foreign) have involved a loss of main rotor 
control.  The investigations of these accidents did not identify any precipitating progressive 
mechanical failures or material defects.  The cause of the loss of main rotor control in many of 
the accidents most likely stems from a large, abrupt pilot control input to a helicopter that is 
highly responsive to cyclic control inputs."
The SIR identified the following characteristics that were common to the R22 and R44 
accidents identified above.
1.An in-flight breakup or main rotor blade contact to the airframe occurred in flight 
before collision with any object or terrain.
2.There was no evidence of an initiating airframe or engine component malfunction.
3.Flight into adverse weather such as low visibility or ceilings was not involved.
4.Pilot impairment from drugs or alcohol was not involved.
In the Robinson Model R44 II Pilot Operating Handbook, under normal procedures, Section 4, 
page 4-5 it states:
CAUTION
Remove left seat controls if person in
that seat is not a rated helicopter pilot.
The FAA approved this POH change on June 13, 2005.
The Safety Board investigator released the wreckage to the owner's representative on August 
29, 2006.
Page 10 of 12LAX06FA156
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
63, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2006
Flight Time:
1041 hours (Total, this make and model), 25 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 30 
days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Robinson
Registration:
C-FICL
Model/Series:
R44 Raven II 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
11209
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/2006, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
5.2 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5.2 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-AE1A5
Registered Owner:
Zimmer Air Services, Inc.
Rated Power:
245 hp
Operator:
Zimmer Air Services, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 11 of 12LAX06FA156
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BLH, 399 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
18 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.74 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
38°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
TORRANCE, CA (TOA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
BLYTHE, CA (BLH)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1305 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.633611, -115.086944
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Patrick H Jones
Adopted Date:
11/29/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Gabriel Serrano; Federal Aviation Adminstration; Riverside, CA
Ken Martin; Robinson Helicopter Company; Torrance, CA
Mark Platt; Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 12 of 12LAX06FA156
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
