The pilot was making his inaugural flight in the recently purchased, recently reassembled 
unregistered experimental airplane. After the pilot's initial takeoff from his home airstrip, 
witnesses saw the airplane turn back toward the runway then lost sight of it behind a tree line. 
They continued to hear the airplane's engine operate until hearing the airplane impact the 
ground. Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no preexisting mechanical 
anomalies, and structural damage indicated that it had impacted the ground in a stall/spin to 
the right. The pilot had not flown in about 6 years, and when a family member suggested that 
he get some refresher flight training before his first flight in the airplane, the pilot declined to 
do so.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed, which resulted in an inadvertent stall/spin. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's lack of recent flight experience.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 2, 2011, about 1110 central daylight time, an unregistered experimental Rans S18 
light sport airplane was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain near a private turf 
airstrip in Fayetteville, Tennessee. The certificated private pilot was fatally injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight, which 
was operated under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
 
Family members stated that the accident flight was the pilot's first flight in the airplane, but 
that he had taxied it on the grass airstrip several times in order to familiarize himself with the 
flight controls.
 
Two witnesses, located approximately 1/4 mile north of the north-south airstrip, stated that 
they heard an airplane that "sounded like a crop duster." They then observed the airplane 
airborne behind trees at the departure [northern] end of the runway, and stated that it 
appeared to bank sharply to the left, back towards the runway. They lost sight of the airplane, 
and afterwords, heard the sound of an impact. They also stated that the airplane's engine was 
running "loudly" until the sound of impact.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot, age 70, held a private pilot certificate. According to the pilot's logbook, his last 
recorded flight was on August 14, 2005. A family member stated that the pilot's wife had urged 
him to get some flight instruction prior to flying the airplane by himself, since it had been some 
time since he had flown; however, the pilot declined to do so. The pilot's latest medical 
certificate was issued on June 6, 2005, and at the time, he indicated 640 hours of flight time.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The two-seat airplane was powered by a Rotax 503 engine. According supporting 
documentation, the airplane was purchased during an on-line auction on July 12, 2011, and a 
bill of sale was signed for it on July 14, 2011. After transport, the airplane was reassembled on 
the pilot's property. No maintenance logbooks were located; however, the advertisement for 
sale stated that it had approximately 200 hours of total airframe and engine time, that it had 
always been hangared, and that it had previously flown under an "ultralight instructor 
exemption."   
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The nearest recorded weather was at an airport about 12 nautical miles south of the accident 
site, about 5 minutes after the accident, and included clear skies and calm wind.
AIRSTRIP INFORMATION
The turf airstrip was mowed into a larger field, and partly indiscernible from its surroundings, 
oriented about 010/190 degrees magnetic, approximately 1,400 feet long and 50 feet wide.
 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
 
The airplane came to rest inverted approximately 300 feet east of the airstrip near its southern 
end, in the vicinity of 35 degrees, 6.29 minutes north latitude, 086 degrees, 32.58 minutes west 
longitude. Two ground scars were located underneath the wreckage, each measuring about 1 
foot in length, and oriented toward 080 degrees magnetic. 
The nose and cockpit area exhibited significant fore-to-aft crush damage, and when the 
airplane was righted, the nose was observed bent upwards about 80 degrees. 
The left and right wings, vertical stabilizer, horizontal stabilizer, flaps, ailerons, and elevators 
remained attached to the airframe. Continuity was confirmed from all flight control surfaces to 
the cockpit area. 
The wooden propeller remained attached to the engine, although one blade was fracture-
separated opposite the direction of rotation about one-quarter of its length from the hub. The 
leading edge of the separated portion of the blade exhibited gouging and chordwise scratching. 
The propeller rotated freely by hand, and crankshaft continuity as well as thumb compression 
on both cylinders were confirmed. 
MEDICAL AND TOXICOLOGIOCAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was conducted on the pilot at the Tennessee Office of the Medical Examiner, 
Nashville, Tennessee, where the cause of death was determined to be "multiple blunt force 
injuries."
Subsequent toxicological testing was performed by the FAA Forensic Toxicology Research 
Team, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, with the following results:
Amlodipine in blood and urine, diphenhydramine in blood and urine, and rosuvastatin in urine 
only.
According to the National Institute of Health online reference, amlodipine is used to treat high 
blood pressure and chest pain, diphenhydramine is used to relieve symptoms of common cold, 
hay fever or allergies, and rosuvastatin is used to reduce cholesterol and other fatty substances 
in the blood.
