The pilot reported that he performed an engine run-up prior to takeoff and everything was 
normal. He had the flaps extended 2 notches when he initiated the takeoff to the north on the 
2,500-foot-long wet grass runway. The airplane became airborne about half way down the 
runway. The pilot stated that upon reaching 65 to 70 mph, he reduced the flaps to 1 notch to 
maintain the best rate of climb. He stated that the airplane cleared the initial group of trees, 
then it began to descend. The airplane subsequently contacted the trees and sustained 
substantial damage to the fuselage and both wings. A witness said the airplane was ﬁmushyﬂ 
during the takeoff and the nose remained high prior to the right wing dropping and the 
airplane descending. The airplane was about 190 pounds under gross weight and the density 
altitude was approximately 2,600 feet. The operation of the airplane near maximum gross 
weight at a high density altitude on a wet grass runway degraded the airplane™s takeoff 
performance. A postaccident examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have precluded any normal operation. The pilot reported that he did not 
get the landing gear retracted prior to impact.
The pilot™s improper preflight planning and his failure to gain proper airspeed during takeoff 
from a grass airstrip resulting in a stall, the loss of control, and subsequent impact with the 
trees.  Contributing to the accident was the pilot operating the airplane at near maximum gross 
weight and the high density altitude.
On August 1, 2011, at 0920 central daylight time, a Bellanca 14-13, N74260, contacted trees 
and the terrain during takeoff from the Matson Airport (2WI6), Stoughton, Wisconsin. The 
private pilot and the passenger both received serious injuries. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage to the fuselage and both wings. The airplane was owned and operated by 
the pilot under the provisions 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The personal flight was 
operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan. The planned destination for 
the flight was the Worthington Municipal Airport (OTG), Worthington, Minnesota.
The pilot reported that he performed an engine run-up prior to takeoff and everything was 
normal. He had the flaps extended 2 notches when he initiated the takeoff to the north on the 
2,500 foot long grass runway. The airplane became airborne about half way down the runway. 
The pilot stated that upon reaching 65 to 70 miles per hour, he reduced the flaps to 1 notch to 
maintain best climb. He stated the airplane cleared the initial group of trees, then the airplane 
began to descend. The airplane subsequently contacted the trees and came to rest in a clearing. 
The pilot reported that he did not get the landing gear retracted prior to impact. 
A relative of the pilot™s who watched the takeoff reported that the airplane was about 25 to 30 
feet above his head when it passed near him at the north (departure) end of the runway. He 
stated the airplane looked ﬁmushyﬂ as it crossed the highway, and the nose remained high until 
the right wing dropped and the airplane contacted the trees. This witness reported that he did 
not hear any unusual engine noises. 
A second witness who heard the airplane for 1 ½ to 2 seconds reported hearing the engine 
sounded like it was ﬁstumblingﬂ prior to it backfiring immediately before the sound of the 
impact.
According to a FAA inspector, the runway was dew covered at the time of the takeoff.  The 
north half of the runway sloped downward, and the highway and the terrain on which the trees 
were located were higher than the elevation at the departure (north) end of the runway. The 
inspector reported that pieces of the right wing were located near the treeline and there was a 
slash in the terrain at the initial ground impact. There was a piece of broken propeller blade 
located near the slash mark. 
The winds at the time of the accident were variable at 4 knots.
A postaccident inspection of the airplane and engine revealed the left fuel tank was ruptured 
during the accident and the fuel level in the right tank was about 4 inches below the filler cap. 
Both magnetos produced spark when turned by hand. Fuel was present in the fuel pump. The 
fuel pump check valves functioned normally and the pump diaphragm was intact. The 
carburetor was partially separated from the engine due to impact and it did not contain any 
fuel. The carburetor accelerator pump functioned normally. The only anomaly noted with the 
fuel system was that the inner sleeve at one of the end fittings on the fuel line that ran from the 
fuel pump to the carburetor was crimped, which decreased the inside diameter of the fuel line 
at the end fitting. A postaccident examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have resulted in a loss of engine power. 
The field elevation at the 2WI6 is 915 feet. Density altitude at the time of the accident was 
approximately 2,600 feet. The pilot reported that the gross weight at the time of the accident 
was about 1,910 pounds and the maximum gross weight was 2,100 pounds.
