Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Chesapeake, VA
Accident Number:
NYC08LA001
Date & Time:
10/03/2007, 1818 EDT 
Registration:
N8VE
Aircraft:
Lambert John G Varieze
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot/owner's girlfriend stated that the purpose of the flight was to test the speed brake 
installed in the amateur-built airplane. She quoted the pilot as saying that during the first hour 
he owned the airplane, he tried the speed brake and it really scared him. He had since 
accumulated 70 total hours in the airplane and was going to try the speed brake again. 
Witnesses described watching the accident airplane taxi from its hangar and then listening to 
the pilot announce the takeoff, crosswind, and downwind legs of the traffic pattern over the 
Unicom frequency. Seconds later, the witnesses heard a voice transmit cries for help. Other 
witnesses were traveling southbound along a divided highway, adjacent to the airport, in their 
car. They noticed the airplane flying erratically, at low altitude, as it paralleled their course on 
the west side of the highway. The airplane then crossed the roadway in front of their vehicle at 
low altitude, and circled back towards them before striking the ground on the east side of the 
roadway, scattering debris across all four lanes in a westerly direction. The witnesses' vehicle 
drove through and over wreckage as their vehicle was struck by flying debris. Examination of 
the wreckage and its components revealed no evidence of preimpact anomalies. The airplane's 
builder assisted the pilot/owner with a complete disassembly and annual inspection of the 
airplane about 1 year prior to the accident, with no mechanical, performance, or handling 
deficiencies noted with the speed brake stowed or deployed. The pilot/owner did not express 
any concerns to the builder about the speed brake, nor the handling characteristics of the 
airplane with the speed brake deployed.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of control in flight for undetermined reasons. 
Page 2 of 7NYC08LA001
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - DOWNWIND
Findings
1. REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
2. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7NYC08LA001
Factual Information
On October 3, 2007, about 1818 eastern daylight time, an amateur-built Varieze, N8VE, was 
destroyed during collision with terrain after takeoff from Chesapeake Regional Airport (CPK), 
Chesapeake, Virginia. The certificated private pilot/owner was killed. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight that was 
conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
In an interview, the pilot's girlfriend stated that the purpose of the flight was to test the speed 
brake installed in the airplane. She quoted the pilot as saying that during the first hour he 
owned the airplane, he tried the speed brake and it really scared him. He had since 
accumulated 70 total hours in the airplane and was going to try the speed brake again. 
In a written statement, one witness described watching the accident airplane taxi from its 
hangar to runway 5, then listening to the pilot announce the takeoff, crosswind, and downwind 
legs of the traffic pattern over the Unicom frequency. Seconds later, the witness heard a voice 
transmit cries for help.
In a telephone interview and written statement, a flight instructor stated he and a student 
joined the traffic pattern in their airplane, and heard the accident airplane announce takeoff 
and the subsequent legs of the traffic pattern, before he heard "panicked" cries for help over the 
radio. No further transmissions were heard from the accident airplane.
Another witness and his family were traveling southbound along a divided highway in their car, 
when they noticed the airplane flying erratically, at low altitude, as it paralleled their course on 
the west side of the highway. The airplane then crossed the roadway in front of their vehicle at 
low altitude, and circled back towards them before striking the ground on the east side of the 
roadway, scattering debris across all four lanes. The witnesses' vehicle drove through and over 
wreckage as their vehicle was struck by flying debris.
Examination of photographs from a news gathering helicopter revealed that the wreckage path 
was oriented westerly, and was about 300 feet long. The airplane and its components were 
scattered across the roadway, but the majority of the wreckage came to rest in a field on the 
west side of the highway. The Virginia State Police recovered the wreckage and moved it to a 
hangar on the airport, where Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors examined it on 
October 4, 2007.
According to the inspectors, control continuity was established from the cockpit area out to 
cable breaks, and from the breaks to their respective control surfaces. The cable breaks were 
consistent with overload. However, examination of some cables revealed flat spots, chafing, 
kinks, and looped strands. The cables were harvested and forwarded to the National 
Transportation Safety Board Materials Laboratory in Washington, DC, for examination.
Examination of the engine revealed that the wooden propeller blades were broken off near the 
hub, and the fractures were splintered opposite the direction of rotation. The engine was 
rotated by hand at the propeller, and continuity was established through the drive train and 
valve train to the accessory section. Compression was confirmed using the thumb method. 
Ignition spark could not be established due to impact damage to the electronic ignition system 
and the one magneto.
The pilot/owner held a private pilot certificate, with a rating for airplane single-engine land. 
Page 4 of 7NYC08LA001
His most recent second-class medical certificate was issued April 18, 2006. The pilot reported 
526 total hours of flight experience on that date. A cursory examination of his logbook revealed 
570 total hours of flight experience.
According to FAA records and maintenance records, the airplane was manufactured in 1986, 
and had accrued approximately 1,547.7 total aircraft hours. The airplane's most recent 
condition inspection was completed on June 27, 2007, at 1,544.7 aircraft hours. 
At 1819, the reported weather at Chesapeake Regional Airport included clear skies and wind 
from 110 degrees at 4 knots.
In addition to flight control cables, the propeller, fuel selector control, fuel selector valve, speed 
brake handle with cables, and the airspeed indicator were forwarded to the Safety Board 
Materials Laboratory, Washington, DC, for examination.
Examination of all components revealed no preimpact failures or anomalies. The propeller 
fractures were consistent with overstress. All cable fractures were consistent with overload. The 
fuel selector control and valve displayed no abnormal wear, and fractures were consistent with 
overload. Examination of the airspeed indicator did not provide definitive evidence of airspeed 
at ground contact.
The speed brake was described in the Varieze Owner's Manual as a "drag device" designed to 
increase the descent angle, and to slow the airplane during the landing flare. The speed range 
for deployment was 90 knots and slower. Above 95 knots, the speed brake panel would 
automatically close.
In a written statement, the airplane's designer explained that deployment of the speed brake 
initiates a low-intensity rumbling vibration, but does not affect the handling characteristics of 
the airplane. The speed brake creates only direct drag, due to its position on the belly of the 
airplane, and does not affect the airflow over any of the lifting or control surfaces. He added 
that a speed brake panel stuck in the deployed position above 95 knots would not adversely 
affect handling. He further stated that the airplane would climb with the panel deployed, but 
that a climb in this configuration required more power, and adversely affected engine cooling. 
The designer concluded that no owners or builders reported any problems or handling 
deficiencies associated with the speed brake.
The builder of the accident airplane accrued 1,500 hours of flight experience in it, before he 
sold it. He assisted the accident pilot in a complete disassembly and annual inspection of the 
airplane in June 2006. The builder then flew the airplane for about 30 minutes, and he noted 
no deficiencies in the performance and handling of the airplane, with the speed brake deployed 
or stowed. Further, at no time did the accident pilot express any concerns, or ask any questions 
about the speed brake, its deployment, or the handling characteristics of the airplane with the 
speed brake deployed, of the builder.
Page 5 of 7NYC08LA001
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
44, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/18/2006
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
578 hours (Total, all aircraft), 70 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Lambert John G
Registration:
N8VE
Model/Series:
Varieze 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
1996
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/27/2007, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
3 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1547 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
O-235
Registered Owner:
Jefrey M. Arnold
Rated Power:
110 hp
Operator:
Jefrey M. Arnold
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7NYC08LA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CPK, 20 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1819 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
30°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 27°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Chesapeake, VA (CPK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (CPK)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1816 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Chesapeake Regional Airport (CPK)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
20 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
05
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5500 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
36.659444, -76.318889 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Brian C Rayner
Adopted Date:
05/06/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Elwyn Jordan; FAA/FSDO; Richmond, VA
Publish Date:
05/06/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7NYC08LA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
