Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SIMPSONVILLE, SC
Accident Number:
MIA99LA093
Date & Time:
03/01/1999, 1530 EST 
Registration:
N1122V
Aircraft:
Scott A. George Jr. FISHER 
CELEBRITY
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that the flight departed with full fuel and after takeoff, he orbited the airport 
about 10-15 minutes at 1,100 feet agl, then proceeded on course at the same altitude.  About 10-
15 minutes later, he noted that the CHT increased but the oil pressure and temperature 
indications were normal.  He verified the mixture control was in the full rich position and 
continued the flight, noting that the CHT continued to increase.  He applied throttle to 
maintain altitude but the CHT increased and at that time, the engine rpm began to decrease.  
Unable to maintain altitude, he selected a site for a forced landing but was unable to land there 
due to a total loss of engine power. While descending for a forced landing on a off-ramp of a 
highway, the right wing collided with a light pole.  The airplane then rolled inverted and 
impacted a fence.  Examination of the engine by an FAA Airworthiness Inspector revealed that 
a plastic 90-degree fitting located at the inlet of the carburetor was broken.  Additionally, all 
cylinder heads were found to be cracked between spark plug holes.  Impact damage to the right 
aft cylinder head was noted. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The unsuitable terrain encountered during the forced landing.  Contributing to the accident 
was the total loss of engine power due to the failure of a plastic 90-degree fitting at the inlet 
fitting of the carburetor. 
Page 2 of 6MIA99LA093
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (F) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE FITTING - FAILURE,TOTAL
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. OBJECT - POLE
3. (C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6MIA99LA093
Factual Information
 On March 1, 1999, about 1530 eastern standard time, a homebuilt George A. Scott Jr., Fisher 
Celebrity, N1122V, registered to R. Wayne Pearce and Cyrus D. Rogers, experienced a total loss 
of engine power and subsequent collision with a light pole while descending for a forced 
landing near Simpsonville, South Carolina.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The airplane was 
substantially damaged and the airline transport-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  
The flight originated about 30 minutes earlier from Flight World Airport, Greer, South 
Carolina.
     The airplane was purchased on February 6, 1999, and the pilot stated that the purpose of the 
flight was to position the airplane to the new owners.  After takeoff with full fuel, he circled the 
departure airport at about 1,100 feet agl for about 10-15 minutes then proceeded on the flight.  
About 10-15 minutes later, while flying at 1,100 feet agl, he first noted that the cylinder head 
temperature (CHT) increased but the oil pressure and oil temperature were indicating 
normally.  He verified that the mixture was in the full rich position, continued the flight, and 
noted that the CHT continued to increase.  He applied throttle to maintain altitude but the 
CHT increased and at that time, the engine rpm began to decrease.  Unable to maintain 
altitude, he selected a sight for the forced landing, but was unable to land there due to a total 
loss of engine power.  While descending for a forced landing on an off ramp for a highway, the 
right wing collided with a light pole.  The airplane then rolled inverted and collided with a 
highway security fence.  Fuel leakage was noted postcrash.
     Examination of the accident site by an FAA airworthiness inspector revealed that the 
airplane was inverted against the perimeter fence for the on-ramp to the highway.  The right 
wing was damaged due to the contact with the light pole about 18 feet agl, and the left wing was 
damaged due to ground contact.  The right main and tailwheel were separated; the left main 
was attached.  The airplane was recovered and examination of the engine by an FAA 
airworthiness inspector revealed that after the top cowling was removed, the fuel line at the 
inlet of the carburetor was not connected.  A 90-degree fitting which was made of plastic and 
connected the fuel line to the carburetor inlet, was broken.  The electric fuel pump was 
operationally checked and found to operate normally.  Examination of each cylinder for 
compression was accomplished and all were normal except for the right aft cylinder which had 
no compression.  All cylinder heads were removed and a hole was found at the 6 o'clock 
position of the cylinder which had no compression.  The FAA inspector attributed the hole to 
impact damage.  All cylinder heads were noted to be cracked between the spark plug holes.  
Examination of the valves, pistons, and connecting rods showed no signs of damage.
Page 4 of 6MIA99LA093
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/05/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
7000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3 hours (Total, this make and model), 6800 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Scott A. George Jr.
Registration:
N1122V
Model/Series:
FISHER CELEBRITY FISHER 
CEL
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
AV1050
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/11/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1250 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
41 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Volkswagen
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
R. WAYNE PEARCE & CYRUS 
ROGERS
Rated Power:
80 hp
Operator:
R. WAYNE PEARCE & CYRUS 
ROGERS
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA99LA093
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GMU, 1048 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
329°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
GREER, SC (SC72)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
EASLEY, SC (SC86)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TIMOTHY    W MONVILLE
Adopted Date:
06/22/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
ANTHONY G FINOCCHI; W. COLUMBIA, SC
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA99LA093
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
