Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Toms River, NJ
Accident Number:
NYC06LA167
Date & Time:
07/01/2006, 1245 EDT 
Registration:
N50619
Aircraft:
Bellanca 7GCBC
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Banner Tow
Analysis 
While in cruise flight, at an altitude of 1,000 feet, the airplane's engine lost power.  The pilot 
applied full throttle; however, the engine failed to respond, and the airplane continued to lose 
altitude and airspeed.  At an altitude of 800 feet, the pilot applied carburetor heat and looked 
for a place to land.  He performed a forced landing on a road, during which the airplane 
impacted a road sign.  Examination of the airplane revealed the throttle and carburetor heat 
controls were observed in the off position, and approximately 17 gallons of fuel was drained 
from the airplane, with no contamination observed.  Fuel was also observed in the carburetor 
bowl, gascolator, and fuel lines.  The throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control linkages 
were connected and operated smoothly.  The throttle and carburetor heat controls were 
observed in the off position.  The engine was test run on the airframe.  It started normally and 
was operated between 1500 and 1700 RPM.  During the test run, operational checks of the 
magnetos, mixture and carburetor heat controls revealed no anomalies.  Interpolation of a 
carburetor icing probability chart revealed that atmospheric conditions were conducive to 
"icing at glide or cruise power."
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Carburetor icing, and the pilot's delayed application of carburetor heat, which resulted in a loss 
of engine power, and subsequent force landing.  A factor in the accident was carburetor icing 
conditions.
Page 2 of 5NYC06LA167
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - ICE
3. (C) CARBURETOR HEAT - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
4. OBJECT - SIGN
Page 3 of 5NYC06LA167
Factual Information
On July 1, 2006, at 1245 eastern daylight time, a Bellanca 7GCBC, N50619, was substantially 
damaged during a forced landing in Toms River, New Jersey.  The certificated commercial pilot 
was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local banner towing flight 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, as he was flying westbound at an altitude of 1,000 feet, the airplane's 
engine lost power.  The pilot applied full throttle; however, the engine did not respond, and the 
airplane continued to lose altitude and airspeed.  At an altitude of 800 feet, the pilot applied 
carburetor heat and looked for a place to land.  He performed a forced landing on a road, 
during which the airplane impacted a road sign.  The airplane subsequently spun around, the 
landing gear impacted a curb, and the airplane skidded to a stop in a grass area. 
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
that approximately 17 gallons of fuel were drained from the airplane, with no contamination 
observed.  Fuel was also observed in the carburetor bowl, gascolator, and fuel lines.  The 
throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control linkages were connected and operated smoothly.  
The throttle and carburetor heat controls were observed in the off position.
The engine was test run on the airframe.  It started normally and was operated between 1500 
and 1700 RPM.  During the test run, operational checks of the magnetos, mixture and 
carburetor heat controls revealed no anomalies.
Weather reported at McGuire Air Force Base, Wrightstown, New Jersey, approximately 22 
miles to the northwest, at 1255, included winds from 290 degrees at 7 knots, visibility 7 miles, 
scattered clouds at 5,000 feet, temperature 84 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 61 degrees 
Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting of 30.16 inches of mercury.
Interpolation of a carburetor icing probability chart revealed that atmospheric conditions were 
conducive to "light icing at glide or cruise power."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2645 hours (Total, all aircraft), 37 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5NYC06LA167
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bellanca
Registration:
N50619
Model/Series:
7GCBC 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1171-79
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
Island Aerial Ads
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
Island Aerial Ads
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
WRI, 131 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
18 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1255 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
290°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.16 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Linden, NJ (LDJ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (LDJ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1200 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
39.955556, -74.202222
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jill M Andrews
Adopted Date:
07/25/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Ernie Scardecchio; FAA/FSDO; Philadelphia, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
