Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
GROVELAND, CA
Accident Number:
LAX96LA152
Date & Time:
04/02/1996, 1058 PST 
Registration:
N59LP
Aircraft:
POWELL GLASAIR
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot (part owner of the aircraft) held an A&P certificate & had completed a 
condition/annual inspection of the aircraft before the flight. The aircraft co-owner stated there 
was a problem with the throttle cable, & the pilot was going to order a new one, but had not yet 
done so. Witnesses said the aircraft departed straight out after takeoff. About 4 minutes later, it 
entered a downwind to the pattern, low & very close to the runway. The witnesses estimated 
the aircraft's altitude was between 200 and 300 feet agl. At first, some witnesses thought the 
pilot was going to make a downwind landing on the runway. The witnesses said the aircraft 
made a tight turn from downwind to base. During the base-to-final turn, the right wing 
dropped, and the aircraft entered a nose-down descent and crashed. The witnesses heard the 
engine running before impact, but they described the sound as 'not full power.'  An 
examination of the engine & controls revealed that a clip, which secured the accelerator pump 
plunger to its actuation shaft in the carburetor, was missing & the pump was inoperative. The 
throttle cable housing/actuating shaft at the carburetor end was found separated from the 
cable sheath, exposing the unsupported inside cable. A piece of welding rod was found bent 
around the housing end & taped to the sheath. The cable was removed from the aircraft & 
operationally tested. During push-pull tests, the carburetor end would sometimes move an 
amount corresponding to the cockpit end input; at other times, the carburetor end would move 
only slightly. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's decision to fly the aircraft with a known mechanical discrepancy in the throttle 
linkage, which resulted in a partial loss of engine power; and his failure to maintain an 
adequate airspeed while maneuvering for an emergency landing, which resulted in an 
inadvertent stall/spin.  Inadequate maintenance/annual inspection was a related factor. 
Page 2 of 6LAX96LA152
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) MAINTENANCE,ANNUAL INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OWNER/PILOT MECHANIC
2. (C) THROTTLE/POWER LEVER,CABLE - LOOSE
3. (C) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - ATTEMPTED - OWNER/PILOT MECHANIC
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
4. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (C) STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 6LAX96LA152
Factual Information
 On April 2, 1996, at 1058 hours Pacific standard time, a Powell Glasair homebuilt 
experimental airplane, N59LP, collided with trees and the ground following a loss of control 
during the base-to-final turn at the Pine Mountain Lake Airport, Groveland, California.  The 
aircraft was owned and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and 
no flight plan was filed for the local area personal flight.  The aircraft was destroyed in the 
collision sequence.  The private pilot, the sole occupant, sustained fatal injuries.  The flight 
originated from the airport about 4 minutes prior to the accident.
Ground witnesses said the aircraft departed straight out following takeoff.  About 4 minutes 
later, it made a downwind entry to the pattern "low and very close to the runway."  The 
witnesses consistently estimated the aircraft's altitude as between 200 and 300 feet agl.  One 
witness said the aircraft was so close that at first he thought the pilot was going to make a 
downwind landing on the runway.  The witnesses said the aircraft made a tight turn from 
downwind to base.  During the base-to-final turn, the right wing dropped and the aircraft 
entered a nose-down vertical descent to ground impact in a tree.  The witnesses said they heard 
engine sounds throughout, however, they were described as "not full power."
The pilot holds an FAA Airframe and Powerplant mechanics certificate.  Immediately prior to 
the accident flight, the pilot completed a condition/annual inspection on the aircraft and the 
airframe and engine logbooks were annotated to reflect the inspection.  During a telephone 
interview, the aircraft co-owner stated that they had been having problems with the throttle 
cable and the pilot was going to order a new one.
An FAA airworthiness inspector responded to the accident site and interviewed witnesses and 
examined the wreckage.  The engine portion of the wreckage examination was conducted with 
the assistance of  a technical representative from Textron Lycoming Engines.  Their respective 
reports are attached to this report.
The FAA inspector reported that he found no discrepancies with the aircraft's control system.  
Fuel was found in the aircraft tanks and all lines to the carburetor.
The engine crankshaft rotated easily by hand, with compression developed in each cylinder.  
Accessory gear and valve train continuity was established throughout the engine, with normal 
valve lift developed.  Both magnetos were timed to 25 degrees before top dead center and 
produced strong sparks at each ignition lead.  The examination report notes that the spark 
plugs exhibited normal operating signatures and the induction system was free of obstructions.  
No discrepancies were found with the fuel pump.  Disassembly of the carburetor revealed that 
the clip which secures the accelerator pump plunger to its actuation shaft was missing and the 
pump was inoperative.
The throttle cable was examined in detail.  The cable housing/actuating shaft at the carburetor 
end was found separated from the cable sheath, exposing the unsupported inside cable.  A 
piece of welding rod was found bent around the housing end and taped to the sheath.  The 
cable was removed from the aircraft and subjected to a series of operational tests.  For the 
tests, the cable was supported by hand at each housing end and then the cockpit end was 
actuated, with no resistance on the carburetor end.  In both push and pull directions, the 
carburetor end was observed to move intermittently.  On some occasions, the carburetor end 
would move an amount corresponding to the cockpit end input; however, at other times, the 
Page 4 of 6LAX96LA152
carburetor end would only move slightly if at all.
The pilot sustained fatal injuries in the accident and an autopsy was conducted by the 
Tuolumne County Sheriff/Coroner with specimens retained for toxicological analysis.  The 
results of the toxicological tests were negative for alcohol and all screened drug substances.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/26/1994
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1286 hours (Total, all aircraft), 15 hours (Total, this make and model), 6 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
POWELL
Registration:
N59LP
Model/Series:
GLASAIR GLASAIR
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
156
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/02/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1656 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A1G
Registered Owner:
BOBBY HOCKETT & WALTER 
MAAS
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
BOBBY A. HOCKETT
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX96LA152
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
15 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (Q68)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1054 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
PINE MOUNTAIN LAKE (Q68)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2930 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3625 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing; 
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JEFF         RICH
Adopted Date:
02/01/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
JIM   MURRY; FRESNO, CA
MARK W PLATT; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX96LA152
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
