The pilot experienced a power loss while en route, and performed a forced landing with no 
damage into a field that had once been an airport.  The airplane was repaired and the pilot 
prepared for departure.  A farmer cut the grass in the field in a 1,500 foot long, by 50 foot wide 
area for the pilot to use as a runway.  An additional 1,600 had recently been cut by the farmer, 
and it was not re-cut.  The pilot reported he attempted a short field takeoff, lifted at 65 to 70 
kts, and the airplane did not climb,  He settled back, gained more speed and attempted to lift 
off again.  The airplane would not climb, the trees were approaching, and he aborted the 
takeoff.  The airplane struck trees.  The on-board passenger reported that the airplane lifted off 
at 65 kts, nose high, and settled back on the ground, bounced up again, and then the pilot cut 
the power.  A witness said the airplane became airborne in a nose high pitch attitude, settled 
back to the ground, became airborne again in a nose high pitch attitude.  The pilot cut the 
power and the airplane struck trees.  There were no reported problems with the airplane or 
engine.  According to the FAA approved AFM, the airspeed that the pilot reported he used for 
takeoff were greater than those specified.  The field was located in the bottom of a canyon that 
was about 1,500 feet wide, and would have required the pilot to climb out while remaining 
below the top of the surrounding terrain.
The pilot's delayed decision to perform an aborted takeoff, which did not allow for sufficient 
room to stop.  A factor was the grass runway.
On July 1, 2003, about 1430 eastern daylight time, a Mooney M20J, N1084B, was substantially 
damaged during an aborted takeoff from a non-designated airstrip in De Lancey, New York.  
The certificated commercial pilot and passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the positioning flight destined for Doylestown, Pennsylvania (DYL).  
No flight plan had been filed for the flight that was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot reported that on June 26, 2003, he was cruising at 8,000 feet, en route from 
Burlington, Vermont (BTV), to Doylestown, when he experienced a total power loss.  He set up 
for forced landing on an abandon airstrip, formerly known as Bishop Airstrip, De Lancey, New 
York.  The landing was completed without damage, and the pilot brought a mechanic in to 
assess the situation.  A problem was discovered in the single drive, dual magneto system.  The 
magneto drive system was repaired, and the airplane released for flight.  A mechanic 
accompanied the pilot on the accident flight.
The field that the pilot landed in was originally an airstrip that was 4,800 feet long, and 50 feet 
wide.  It was orientated 010/190 degrees magnetic.  The runway had since been plowed for 
agricultural use.  The current owner of the property on which the airstrip was located reported 
that he cut the grass in a 1,600 feet, by 50 feet wide swath.  He added that the hay beyond the 
area that he cut for the pilot, had recently been cut and was about 1,500 feet long for a total of 
3,100 feet available for takeoff.  The owner reported that he offered to cut an additional 400 
feet that was located before the cut area; however, the pilot declined the offer.  
The pilot stated:
"...after testing the mags and conducting pre-flight, I took off with one passenger.  I attempted 
to make a short field takeoff.  At 65 - 70 knots, I pulled the aircraft off.  It did not climb.  We 
settled back on the ground, picked up a little more speed and attempted to lift-off.  The aircraft 
would not climb.  We were approaching the end of the field, I elected to abort the take-off.  We 
ended up at the end of the field.  The left wing hit a tree and came off.  The nose gear was also 
broken off...."
In a follow-up interview, the pilot reported that he aborted the takeoff with about 400 feet 
remaining to the trees that were ahead  When asked, the pilot reported that there were no 
problems with the engine.
The passenger onboard the airplane stated:
"Power appeared normal.  Lift off at 65 kts - nose high - plane settled back onto field - bounced 
up again - and sees we would not clear trees - pilot cut power - steered slight right, left wing hit 
tree - tore off.  Plane slid approx. 50 ft turned left - exited aircraft."
The mechanic who repaired the engine witnessed the accident.  He stated:
"...I installed a repaired magneto on N1084B.  Runup was satisfactory.  Aircraft attempted a 
departure to the northeast into a headwind.  The farmer mowed a portion of his field for the 
takeoff.  The aircraft accelerated normally but ran off the end of the mowed area.  The pilot 
then lifted off at a high angle of pitch and settled back into the area of higher grass.  The pilot 
continued to takeoff again and lifted off again, with a high angle of pitch.  It seemed as he was 
trying to pull it off the high grass portion of the runway, the aircraft now airborne veered to the 
southeast and hit a tree..."
The pilot reported the wind was a left quartering crosswind of 8 to 10 knots.  The property 
owner reported the winds were from the west, about 15 knots.
According to the Mooney M20J Pilot's Operating Handbook, and FAA Approved Airplane 
Flight Manual, for a grass runway takeoff, the lift off speed would range from 55 knots at 2,300 
pounds, to 59 knots, at 2,900 pounds.  The speed at 50 feet would be 71 knots at 2,300 pounds 
and 76 knots at 2,900 pounds.
The field was located in the bottom of a stream bed canyon that was about 1,500 feet wide.  
Higher terrain existed in all quadrants.  Initial climb would been in a winding canyon. below 
the tops of the hills on the surrounding terrain.
