The airplane was substantially damaged when it overran the grass runway and hit a ditch 
embankment.  The pilot reported that on the final landing attempt he landed past a mower that 
had cleared the runway about 1/4 of the way down the length of the runway.  He stated that he 
touched down past the halfway point on the runway and was too fast to stop on the grass 
runway, subsequently impacting the ditch embankment.  The pilot reported no mechanical 
difficulties with the airplane.  The tailwind component was calculated to be 5 knots.
The pilot's misjudgment of speed and distance resulting in an overrun.  Factors were the ditch 
embankment, and the tailwind component.
On July 1, 2003, at 1430 central daylight time, a Cessna A185F, N30CM, piloted by a private 
pilot, sustained substantial damage when it overran runway 36 (1,800 feet by 100 feet, 
grass/turf) and went into a ditch at the Sky Harbor Seaplane Base, Eveleth, Minnesota.  The 14 
CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight 
plan.  The pilot and passenger were not injured.  The flight originated from the Manitowish 
Waters Airport, Manitowish Waters, Wisconsin, at 1310.
The runway is adjacent to the seaplane base and is used by aircraft coming to the base to have 
floats installed.
In a written report, the pilot stated that on his first landing approach, he noticed a mower on 
the runway and aborted the landing.  He contacted the airport to have the mower exit the 
runway.  The pilot stated that he circled the airstrip 2 to 3 times before making another landing 
attempt.  On the second landing attempt, the mower had moved to the right side of the runway 
about 1/4 of the way down the length of the runway.  The pilot stated that he landed past the 
location of the mower, touching down past the halfway point on the runway.  He reported that 
the airplane was too fast to stop on the grass runway, subsequently impacting the ditch 
embankment.  The pilot reported no mechanical difficulties with the airplane.
A weather reporting station about 2 nautical miles and 200 degrees from the accident site 
recorded the wind at 1436 as 230 degrees at 8 knots.  The tailwind component was calculated 
to be 5 knots.
