While flying over a wild animal orphanage and observing the animals, the pilot stated that he 
started losing altitude after completing a turn.  The pilot added that he "straightened it out, but 
he still couldn™t maintain altitude."  The airplane came to rest nose down in a wooded area 
inside the animal sanctuary.  The IIC calculated the density altitude to be approximately 3,288 
feet at the time of the accident.
The pilot's failure to maintain minimum required airspeed while maneuvering, resulting in an 
inadvertent stall of the airplane.
On July 1, 2003, about 1040 central daylight time, a Champion 7AC single-engine airplane, 
N84426, was substantially damaged when it impacted the ground following a loss of control 
while maneuvering near San Antonio, Texas.  The 761-hour private pilot received serious 
injuries and his passenger was not injured.  The airplane, registered to and operated by the 
pilot, was operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the personal flight, which originated 
from San Geronimo Airpark (8T8), near San Antonio, Texas at 1000.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot stated that he 
was flying over a wild animal orphanage at about 1,500 feet observing the animals when he 
started losing altitude after completing a turn.  The pilot added that he "straightened it out, but 
he still couldn't maintain altitude."  The airplane came to rest nose down in a heavily wooded 
area inside the animal sanctuary.
According to the FAA inspector that interviewed the pilot after the accident, the pilot's wife 
stated that he previously told her that he thought that he stalled the airplane.
With a temperature at 33 degrees Celsius, field elevation approximately 1,000 feet, and an 
altimeter setting of 30.01 inches of Mercury, the investigator-in-charge (IIC) calculated the 
density altitude to be 3,288 feet at the time of the accident.  
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, revealed 
structural damage to the wings and wing struts.  The nose section of the airplane, the propeller, 
landing gear, and fuel tank were also damaged. 
