The airplane was damaged during a forced landing in a rough plowed field following a loss of 
engine power during cruise flight.  Examination of the engine revealed that the crankshaft gear 
retaining bolt was missing and the gear's anti-rotation pin was sheared.  The oil pan of the 
engine was examined and no bolt was found.  The crankshaft gear retaining bolt was not found 
within the engine.  A review of the maintenance records revealed that the engine was last 
overhauled on April 6, 1986, and had accumulated 522 hours time in service since the 
overhaul.  No subsequent logbook entries were noted that indicated removal of the crankshaft 
gear or retaining bolt.
A loss of engine power due to the improper installation of the crankshaft gear due to the 
omission of the retaining bolt and subsequent shear failure of the anti-rotation pin.  The 
unsuitable terrain encountered,  and the rough field were factors.
On July 2, 2003, at 1008 central daylight time, a Piper PA-24, N6315P, piloted by an airline 
transport pilot, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing following an in-flight loss 
of engine power near Winamac, Indiana.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident.  The pilot and his four passengers reported no injuries.  The 14 CFR Part 
91 personal flight was operating on an IFR flight plan.  The flight departed from Plymouth, 
Michigan, at 0819, with an intended destination of Perryville, Missouri.
The airplane's engine stopped producing power during cruise flight.  The pilot was given radar 
vectors to the Arens Field Airport (RWN), Winamac, Indiana.  The pilot was not able to reach 
RWN and executed a forced landing in a rough plowed field.
A postaccident examination was conducted by the Federal Aviation Administration.  During 
the initial examination of the airplane's engine, valve train continuity could not be established.  
Rotation of the crankshaft produced no movement of the valve train components.  A 
subsequent examination of the accessory section of the engine revealed that the crankshaft 
gear retaining bolt was missing and the gear's anti-rotation pin was sheared.  The oil pan of the 
engine was examined and no bolt was found.  The crankshaft gear retaining bolt was not found 
within the engine.
A review of the maintenance records revealed that the engine was last overhauled on April 6, 
1986, and had accumulated 522 hours time in service since the overhaul.  No subsequent 
logbook entries were noted that indicated removal of the crankshaft gear or retaining bolt.
