Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Andersonville, GA
Accident Number:
MIA07LA129
Date & Time:
08/01/2007, 1130 EDT 
Registration:
N5721N
Aircraft:
Piper J3C-65
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to an FAA inspector, he interviewed several witnesses who said that the pilot was 
giving airplane rides from his private grass airstrip. On the fifth and final airplane ride, during 
initial climb after takeoff, the engine stopped. The inspector said that witnesses told him that 
they saw the airplane turn about 180 degrees toward the departure runway, but it descended 
quickly and impacted the ground in a level attitude. The on scene examination revealed the 
presence of fuel, and no obvious anomalies. An examination was performed by the NTSB, and a 
representative from the engine manufacturer. During the examination, crash related damaged 
parts were replaced, and a club propeller was fitted. The engine was then test run. Initially, 
when fuel was added, the fuel poured from the carburetor, consistent with the needle valve 
having been stuck in the open position due to an obstruction. After tapping on the wall of the 
carburetor, the obstruction was cleared, and fuel stopped flowing out of the carburetor. The 
test run was then completed without further anomalies.  A teardown examination of the 
carburetor revealed debris within the carburetor float bowl large enough to block the needle 
valve, or fuel metering orifice.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper decision to make a 180-degree turn at low altitude to return to the 
departure runway following a loss of engine power during takeoff-initial climb. A factor in the 
accident was contamination in the carburetor.
Page 2 of 6MIA07LA129
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - CONTAMINATION,OTHER THAN WATER
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO REVERSE DIRECTION
Findings
2. ALTITUDE - LOW - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6MIA07LA129
Factual Information
On August 1, 2007, about 1130 eastern daylight time, a Piper J3C-65, N5721N, registered to 
and operated by a private individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed shortly 
after taking off from a private field in Andersonville, Georgia. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The private-rated pilot and one passenger received 
serious injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage. The flight was originating at the 
time of the accident.
An FAA inspector responded to the scene of the accident, and stated that he examined the 
wreckage and found fuel to be present in the airplane, but noted no obvious anomalies. He 
further stated that he interviewed several witnesses who said that the pilot was giving airplane 
rides to construction workers, who had been working on his house. According to the inspector, 
the witnesses said that the pilot was taking off and landing on his private landing strip, while 
giving the airplane rides, and he had given rides to four workers. In the process of giving the 
fifth and final airplane ride, during initial climb after takeoff, the airplane's engine ceased 
operating. He said that the witnesses said that they observed the airplane as it turned about 
180 degrees in the direction of the runway from where it had just departed, but it descended 
quickly and impacted the ground in a level attitude.
A postcrash examination was performed by the NTSB, along with a representative of Teledyne 
Continental Motors. The examination revealed that several engine mounts had fractured 
during the impact, and that the carburetor had separated from it's attach point to the engine 
manifold. In addition the oil sump had been crushed, and the propeller flange and propeller 
had been bent beyond the permissible limits of a test run.
During the course of the examination the engine was removed from the airframe, and parts 
which exhibited damage consistent with the damage having occurred during the accident, were 
replaced. The parts that were replaced include, the intake manifold, oil sump, and the propeller 
flange. In addition, a club propeller was fitted. 
The engine was then given a test run, and initially during the test, when fuel was added, the 
fuel "poured from" the carburetor, consistent with the needle valve having been stuck in the 
open position due to an obstruction. After tapping on the side of the carburetor with a 
screwdriver handle, the obstruction was cleared, and fuel stopped flowing out of the 
carburetor. The test run was then completed with no other anomalies being noted.
A follow-on teardown examination of the carburetor revealed the presence of debris within the 
carburetor float bowl, of a size that was capable of blocking the needle valve, or fuel metering 
orifice.
Page 4 of 6MIA07LA129
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
57, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2007
Flight Time:
209 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N5721N
Model/Series:
J3C-65 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
13550
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/01/2006, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1220 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1417 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Teledyne Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
A-65-8
Registered Owner:
Charles W. Hodges
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
Charles W. Hodges
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA07LA129
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MCN
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1553 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.98 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C / 20°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Andersonville, GA 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
32.196944, -84.141667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John W Lovell
Adopted Date:
02/28/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Rick Hoy; FAA FSDO; Atlanta, GA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA07LA129
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
