Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Broomfield, CO
Accident Number:
DEN07LA132
Date & Time:
08/01/2007, 1635 MDT 
Registration:
N568TD
Aircraft:
Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business - Sightseeing
Analysis 
According to the pilot, this was his sixth sightseeing flight of the day.  He had just landed and 
three passengers disembarked.  Three other passengers boarded the helicopter.  As the pilot 
brought the throttle to full rpm and increased torque, the helicopter turned left about 15 
degrees.  Approximately 3 inches of opposite pedal was used to bring the helicopter back to its 
original heading.  The pilot continued to increase torque and as the skids started to come off 
the ground, the nose pitched up rapidly and the helicopter rolled to the right.  The left skid was 
about 3 inches off the ground during the yaw.  The right skid never left the ground.  Full 
forward and left cyclic had no effect.  The pilot then lowered collective and tried to roll off the 
throttle.  The helicopter rolled right until the main rotor blades contacted the ground. A piece 
of main rotor blade struck a nearby hangar.  The pilot reported no control anomalies and a 
subsequent examination revealed no discrepancies.  FAA's "Rotorcraft Flying Handbook" 
(FAA-H-8083-21) defines "dynamic rollover" as "the tendency of a helicopter to continue 
rolling when the critical angle is exceeded, if one gear is on the ground, and the helicopter is 
pivoting around that point."
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the helicopter, resulting in an inadvertent dynamic 
rollover.
Page 2 of 6DEN07LA132
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: ROLL OVER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF
Findings
2. (C) DYNAMIC ROLLOVER - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6DEN07LA132
Factual Information
On August 1, 2007, approximately 1635 mountain daylight time, a Bell 206B, N268TD, piloted 
by an airline transport-certificated pilot, was substantially damaged when it yawed to the left 
and rolled over to the right and struck the helipad while taking off at Rocky Mountain 
Metropolitan Airport (BJC), Broomfield, Colorado.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the time of the accident.  The sightseeing flight was being conducted under the provisions of 
Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.  The pilot and two passengers aboard the helicopter 
received minor injuries.  One passenger was not injured.  The local flight was originating at the 
time of the accident.
According to the pilot, this was his sixth sightseeing flight of the day.  He had just landed and 
three passengers disembarked.  Three other passengers boarded the helicopter.  As the pilot 
brought the throttle to full rpm and increased torque, the helicopter turned left about 15 
degrees.  Approximately 3 inches of opposite pedal was used to bring the helicopter back to its 
original heading.  The pilot continued to increase torque and as the skids started to come off 
the ground, the nose pitched up rapidly and the helicopter rolled to the right.  The left skid was 
about 3 inches off the ground during the yaw.  The right skid never left the ground.  Full 
forward and left cyclic had no effect.  The pilot then lowered collective and tried to roll off the 
throttle.  The helicopter rolled right until the main rotor blades contacted the ground. A piece 
of main rotor blade struck a nearby hangar.  The pilot reported no control anomalies.
On August 15, 2007, the helicopter was examined by FAA and Bell Helicopter investigators.  
They reported finding no anomalies.
FAA's "Rotorcraft Flying Handbook" (FAA-H-8083-21) defines "dynamic rollover" as "the 
tendency of a helicopter to continue rolling when the critical angle is exceeded, if one gear is on 
the ground, and the helicopter is pivoting around that point."  It elaborates:  "A helicopter is 
susceptible to a lateral rolling tendency, called dynamic rollover, when lifting off the surface.  
For dynamic rollover to occur, some factor has to first cause the helicopter to roll or pivot 
around a skid...until its critical rollover angle is reached.  Then, beyond this point, main rotor 
thrust continues the roll and recovery is impossible.  If the critical rollover angle is exceeded, 
the helicopter rolls on its side regardless of the cyclic corrections made."
Page 4 of 6DEN07LA132
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Helicopter; 
Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2007
Flight Time:
17867 hours (Total, all aircraft), 106 hours (Total, this make and model), 16246 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 46 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N568TD
Model/Series:
206B 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2976
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2007, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
9353 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls Royce
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
250-620B
Registered Owner:
Vertical Lift, LLC
Rated Power:
420 hp
Operator:
Rotors of the Rockies
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
RT6A
Page 5 of 6DEN07LA132
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BJC, 5670 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1650 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 11000 ft agl
Visibility
30 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 20000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
60°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.15 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
33°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Broomfield, CO (BJC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (BJC)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1635 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Rocky Mountain Metropolitan (BJC)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
5670 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
Unknown
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
39.908889, -105.117222
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
09/27/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Gary L Kopp; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Denver, CO
Brent Weckwerth; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Denver, CO
Steven R Scully; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Denver, CO
David Dosker; Bell Helicopter Textron, Inc.; Fort Worth, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DEN07LA132
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
