Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Clear Lake, IA
Accident Number:
CEN13FA122
Date & Time:
01/02/2013, 2057 CST 
Registration:
N445MT
Aircraft:
BELL HELICOPTER 407
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning - Air Medical (Medical Emergency)
Analysis 
GPS tracking data revealed that, after departure, the helicopter proceeded westbound about 
600 ft above ground level (agl), following a roadway. About 6 minutes after liftoff, when the 
helicopter was about 3/4 mile south of the accident site, it turned right and became established 
on a northerly course. The helicopter subsequently turned left and appeared to be on a 
southerly heading at the final data point. Shortly before beginning the left turn, the helicopter 
entered a climb, reached an altitude of about 1,800 ft agl, and then entered a descent that 
continued until impact.
Weather observations from the nearest Automated Surface Observing System, located about 7 
miles east of the accident site, indicated that the ceilings and visibility appeared to be adequate 
for nighttime helicopter operations and did not detect any freezing precipitation. Although an 
airmen™s meteorological information advisory for icing conditions was current for the route of 
flight, and several pilot reports of icing conditions had been filed, none of the reports were in 
the immediate vicinity of the intended route of flight. Witnesses and first responders reported 
mist, drizzle, and icy road conditions at the time of the accident. It is likely that the pilot 
inadvertently encountered localized icing conditions, which resulted in his subsequent in-flight 
loss of helicopter control.
A postaccident examination of the helicopter revealed no preimpact failures or malfunctions. 
The engine control unit recorded engine torque, engine overspeed, and rotor overspeed events; 
however, due to their timing and nature, the events were likely a result of damage that 
occurred during the impact sequence. Evidence also indicated that the cyclic centering, engine 
overspeed, and hydraulic system warning lights illuminated; it is also likely that their 
illumination was associated with the impact sequence. Further, the engine anti-ice status light 
was illuminated, which was consistent with the activation of the anti-ice system at some point 
during the accident flight.
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 10CEN13FA122
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s inadvertent encounter with localized icing conditions and his subsequent in-flight 
loss of helicopter control.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Freezing rain/sleet - Awareness of condition (Cause)
Freezing rain/sleet - Effect on equipment (Cause)
Page 3 of 10CEN13FA122
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 2013, at 2057 central standard time, a Bell Helicopter model 407, N445MT, 
impacted terrain near Clear Lake, Iowa. The pilot and two medical crew members sustained 
fatal injuries. The helicopter was destroyed. The helicopter was registered to Suntrust 
Equipment Leasing & Finance Corporation and operated by Med-Trans Corporation under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a positioning flight. Night visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was operated on a company flight plan 
in accordance with Part 135 of the aviation regulations. A flight plan was not filed with the 
Federal Aviation Administration. The flight originated from the Mercy Medical Center, Mason 
City, Iowa, about 2049, with an intended destination of the Palo Alto County Hospital, (IA76), 
Emmetsburg, Iowa.
A witness located about 1 mile south of the accident site, reported observing the helicopter as it 
approached from the east. He noted that it appeared to slow and then turn to the north. When 
he looked again, the helicopter appeared to descend straight down. He subsequently went back 
into his house and called 911. He described the current weather conditions as "misty," with a 
light wind.
A second witness reported that he was working in his garage when he heard the helicopter. He 
stated that the sound of the helicopter changed as if it was turning, followed by what he 
described as a "thump" and then everything was quiet. He subsequently responded to the 
accident with the Ventura Fire Department. He reported that there was a coating of ice on his 
truck windshield that the wipers would not clear. He decided to drive another car to the fire 
stations because it had been parked in the garage. He was on the third fire truck out of the 
station and as they were waiting to cross Highway 18 at Balsam Avenue, they observed a Clear 
Lake police car, also responding to the accident, slide through the intersection. They informed 
dispatch to advise following units to expect slick road conditions. He noted that there was a 
haze in the air, which was evident when looking toward a street light; however, he did not 
recall any precipitation at the time.
A pilot located at the Mason City Municipal Airport (MCW) reported that he saw the helicopter 
fly overhead and estimated its altitude as 300 feet above ground level (agl). He was leaving the 
airport at that time and noted there was a glaze of ice on his car. He added that the roads were 
icy as he drove out of the airport and onto Highway 18. He commented that he had flown into 
Mason City about 1830 and encountered some light rime ice while flying through a cloud.
GPS tracking data depicted the helicopter at the medical center at 2049:44 (hhmm:ss). After 
liftoff, the helicopter proceeded westbound along Highway 18 about 1,800 feet mean sea level 
(msl). The helicopter passed just south of the Mason City airport at 2052:44. About 2056:09, 
the helicopter entered a right turn, becoming established on a northbound course about 10 
seconds later. The helicopter simultaneously entered a climb, ultimately reaching 
approximately 2,995 feet msl at 2057:04. About one minute prior to reaching the apex of the 
climb, the helicopter entered a left turn, which continued until the helicopter was established 
on a southbound course. The final tracking data point was recorded at 2057:14. The final data 
point was located about 774 feet north of the accident site, with an associated altitude of 2,723 
feet msl. The published field elevation of the Mason City airport was 1,214 feet.
Page 4 of 10CEN13FA122
The helicopter impacted a harvested agricultural field. The main wreckage came to rest along a 
line of trees and bushes separating the fields. The debris path was about 100 feet long and was 
oriented on a 246-degree magnetic bearing.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate with helicopter and single-engine airplane 
ratings; his airplane rating was limited to private pilot privileges. He was issued a second class 
airman medical certificate on April 17, 2012, with a limitation for corrective lenses. 
The pilot completed the operator's new hire training program on September 24, 2012, with 
night vision goggle (NVG) training completed on September 27, 2014. The pilot's Part 135 
checkride was completed on September 29, 2012, and his new hire base training was 
completed on October 5, 2012.
At the time of his initial employment, the pilot reported having accumulated a total flight time 
of 2,808 hours, with 2,720 hours in helicopters. Of that total flight time, 248 hours were at 
night. Duty and flight time records indicated that during October, the pilot accumulated 3.7 
hours of flight time, all in daylight conditions. During November, the pilot accumulated 9.9 
hours total flight time. Of that flight time, 3.1 hours were at night with the aid of NVGs. During 
December, the pilot accumulated 5.6 hours, all of which were at night, with 5.4 hours using 
NVGs. His most recent flight for the operator was December 21, 2012.
The pilot was on-duty for 12 hours the day before the accident, but did not log any flight time 
during that shift. The pilot reported for duty at 1820 on the evening of the accident. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident aircraft was a Bell Helicopter model 407, serial number 53959. The helicopter 
was configured for helicopter emergency medical services (HEMS) operations. The FAA type 
certificate required one flight crew member (pilot) and permitted operations under day or 
night visual flight rules (VFR). The helicopter was not certificated for intentional flight into 
known icing conditions. The operator noted that the helicopter was equipped for instrument 
flight; however, it was not certified for flight under instrument flight rules (IFR). The 
helicopter was equipped with heated pitot and static ports; however, the rotor blades were not 
equipped with ice protection. The helicopter was powered by a Rolls-Royce Allison model 250-
C47B turboshaft engine, serial number CAE-847212, with maximum takeoff and maximum 
continuous power ratings of 650 and 600 shaft horsepower, respectively.
The helicopter was issued a normal category standard airworthiness certificate in June 2009. 
The helicopter was purchased by Sun Trust Equipment Finance on April 29, 2010, and 
subsequently leased by Med-Trans Corporation. The helicopter was maintained under an 
approved aircraft inspection program. The most recent inspection was completed on December 
28, 2012, at 952.2 hours total airframe time. A review of the available maintenance records did 
not reveal a history of outstanding maintenance discrepancies. At the time of the accident, the 
helicopter airframe and engine had accumulated about 956 hours total time.
The engine anti-ice system is controlled by a switch on the overhead panel. When activated, the 
system routes air from the diffuser scroll to the engine compressor front support guide vanes in 
order to prevent the formation of ice. In the event of a loss of electrical power, the system will 
be activated and route hot air to the engine guide vanes.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
Page 5 of 10CEN13FA122
The Mason City Municipal Airport Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS), located 
about 7 miles east of the accident site, at 2053, recorded weather conditions as: wind from 300 
degrees at 8 knots; 8 miles visibility; broken clouds at 1,700 feet agl, overcast clouds at 3,300 
feet agl; temperature -3 degrees Celsius; dew point -5 degrees Celsius; and an altimeter setting 
of 30.05 inches of mercury. At 2100, the recorded conditions included a wind from 310 degrees 
at 9 knots, broken clouds at 1,700 feet agl, and overcast clouds at 3,300 feet agl. At 2105, the 
wind was from 310 degrees at 10 knots, with broken clouds at 1,500 feet agl and overcast 
clouds at 2,000 feet agl. At 2110, the wind was from 310 degrees at 12 knots, with overcast 
clouds at 1,500 feet agl.
The Forest City Municipal Airport Automated Weather Observing System (AWOS), located 
about 8 miles northwest of the accident site, at 2055, recorded conditions as: wind from 300 
degrees at 9 knots; 10 miles visibility; overcast clouds at 1,000 feet agl; temperature -2 degrees 
Celsius; dew point -3 degrees Celsius; and an altimeter setting of 30.04 inches of mercury. At 
1955, about one hour before the accident, the observation included a note of unknown freezing 
precipitation. However, this notation was not included in the subsequent observations.
The MCW terminal forecast, issued at 1959, expected wind from 250 degrees at 6 knots, 5 miles 
visibility in light snow, and overcast clouds at 1,400 feet agl.
Satellite imagery depicted an overcast layer of stratiform clouds over the region with cloud tops 
near 11,000 feet. The regional radar mosaic for Iowa did not depict any significant 
meteorological echoes in the vicinity of the accident site about the time of the accident. 
However, the radar scan sampled the airspace from about 6,630 feet to 15,100 feet over the 
accident site. Any echoes below this height would not have been detected by the weather radar.
Pilot reports (PIREP) filed between 1500 and 2400 over Iowa indicated light to moderate rime 
ice ranging in altitude from 3,500 feet msl to 8,500 feet msl. These reports ranged from Sioux 
City, at the western end of the state, to Dubuque at the eastern end of the state. The closest 
PIREP was over Spencer, Iowa, about 70 miles west of the accident site where a pilot reported 
light rime icing during climb at 6,400 feet msl. This was about 23 miles west of the accident 
flight intended destination.
An Airman Meteorological Information (AIRMET) advisory for icing was current for the route 
of flight. AIRMET Zulu was issued at 2045 and was in effect until 0600. It warned of moderate 
icing conditions below 10,000 feet msl, with icing conditions expected to continue through 
0900.
Witnesses and first responders reported mist, drizzle, and icy road conditions at the time of the 
accident. One first responder reported observing a police car slide through a roadway 
intersection due to the slick conditions while responding to the accident site.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The helicopter impacted a harvested agricultural field. The debris path was about 100 feet long 
and was oriented on a 246-degree magnetic bearing. The helicopter was fragmented, and the 
cockpit and cabin areas were compromised. A postimpact fire ensued. The main wreckage 
consisted of the main rotor blades, transmission, engine, portions of the fuselage, and the tail 
boom. The tail rotor had separated from the tail boom and was located about 80 feet east-
northeast of the main wreckage. The landing skids had separated from the fuselage. The left 
skid was located at the initial impact point; the right skid was located about 35 feet west of the 
main wreckage.
Page 6 of 10CEN13FA122
The main rotor blades remained attached to the hub; however, each blade exhibited bending 
and delamination consistent with ground impact. Separations of the pitch change links and one 
pitch change horn were consistent with overstress. The main rotor transmission remained 
attached to the fragmented upper fuselage bulkhead. The transmission drive input/output 
shafts and main rotor mast rotated freely. Examination of the freewheeling unit revealed that 
the shaft had fractured at the main rotor drive spline and at the tail rotor drive spline. 
Appearance of the fracture surfaces was consistent with overstress failures. 
The flight control system was fragmented similar to the overall airframe structure. Separations 
of the control tubes and support brackets appeared consistent with overstress failures. The 
hydraulic actuator servos remained secured to the mating fuselage bulkhead; however, the 
attached fuselage structure was separated from the surrounding airframe panels. Portions of 
the servos were deformed consistent with impact forces. The mating control system push-pull 
tubes and hydraulic lines remained secured to the servos.
The tail boom was separated at the forward end and was located with the main wreckage. The 
tail boom remained straight from forward to aft ends; however, the tail boom cross-section was 
deformed at both ends. The tail rotor assembly was separated from the boom. The tail rotor 
blades were deformed and fragmented consistent with impact forces; however, both blades 
remained secured to the hub. The pitch change links were intact; although, the green pitch 
change link was deformed. Continuity within the gearbox was confirmed via rotation of the 
output drive mast. The forward portion of the tail rotor drive shaft remained attached to the 
tail boom. A separation of a section of the drive shaft near the horizontal/vertical stabilizers 
appeared consistent with a main rotor strike at that location. The tail rotor bearing supports 
remained attached to the tail boom except for one support located near the horizontal 
stabilizer, which was separated from the tail boom and remained attached to the separated 
section of the tail rotor drive shaft. The bearings appeared intact.
A postaccident examination of the engine was performed under the direct supervision of an 
NTSB powerplant specialist. The engine exhibited deformation of several components, which 
appeared consistent with impact forces. The hydro-mechanical unit (HMU) was partially 
separated from the accessory gearbox; the HMU drive shaft was fractured consistent with an 
overstress failure. The compressor impeller blades, the impeller inducer shroud, gas producer 
rotor, and power turbine rotor exhibited rub marks consistent with rotation at impact. The 
power turbine N2 coupling was fractured near the forward spline consistent with tensile 
overload. The accessory gearbox components appeared intact and rotated freely. The engine 
bearings appeared intact, were oil wetted, and rotated freely. Dirt and corn stalk debris was 
observed throughout the engine air flow path. No anomalies consistent with a preimpact 
failure or malfunction were observed.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy of the pilot was completed at the Mercy Medical Center, Mason City, Iowa, on 
January 3, 2013. The pilot's death was attributed to multiple blunt force injuries sustained as a 
result of the accident. FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute toxicology testing was negative for 
all substances in the screening profile.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Helicopter engine operation was controlled by a Triumph Engine Control Systems, formerly 
Goodrich Pump & Engine Controls, model EMC-35R Engine Control Unit (ECU), serial 
Page 7 of 10CEN13FA122
number JG09ANU1247. One corner of the ECU housing was broken out, exposing a portion of 
the underlying circuit board. The non-volatile memory components related to the primary and 
reversionary governors was downloaded. The total ECU and engine operating times were 
1,196.80 hours and 1,003.06 hours, respectively.
The ECU did not provide for continuous recording of engine parameters. However, the unit did 
record engine fault and incident data. The ECU incorporated primary and reversionary 
governor systems, which provided redundancy for engine operation. ECU data was organized 
into engine history, last engine run faults, time stamped faults, accumulated faults, and 
incident data. Time data associated with each fault or incident corresponded to the engine run 
time. Upon logging of a fault or incident event, the ECU also recorded 12 seconds of pre-event 
data into non-volatile memory.
The last engine run fault data files associated with both the primary and reversionary 
governors did not contain any fault codes. The time stamped fault data file associated with the 
primary governor did not contain any fault codes. The time stamped fault data file associated 
with the reversionary governor contained a total of 21 faults. The most recent fault was 
recorded at 733 hours ECU operating time. Because the current engine operating time was 
about 1,003 hours, the most recent fault was recorded about 270 hours before the end of data, 
which was well before and not relevant to, the accident flight. The reversionary governor 
accumulated fault data file contained only faults also recorded into the time stamped fault data 
file.
Three incidents were contained in the snapshot data file. The first was recorded at 
1,003:06:16.344 (hh:mm:ss.sss) engine operating time and consisted of a high engine torque 
event of 110 percent. The associated 12 seconds of pre-event data were unremarkable, with 
engine speed, rotor speed, and engine torque parameters within normal limits. The collective 
pitch parameter was about 58 percent and the fuel flow about 452 pounds per hour (pph) 
during this timeframe. Cyclic and anti-torque pedal positions were not recorded by the ECU. 
The second snapshot was recorded at 1,003:06:22.873 and consisted of a high power turbine 
event of 108 percent. An engine overspeed parameter is set due to this event. In addition, the 
collective pitch parameter had decreased to 32 percent and fuel flow to 36 pph at this time. The 
third snapshot was recorded at 1,003:06:22.920 and consisted of a high rotor speed of 109 
percent. The loss of subsequent data was consistent with a loss of electrical power to the ECU 
at impact. In addition, the engine and rotor overspeed events, in conjunction with a decreasing 
fuel flow and collective pitch, was consistent with the rotor system being aerodynamically 
driven above 100-percent, such as in the descent prior to impact.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Light bulb filaments from the caution and warning panel were examined by the investigator-in-
charge at the NTSB materials laboratory. The filaments associated with the cyclic centering, 
engine anti-ice, engine overspeed, and hydraulic system exhibited stretching consistent with 
illumination at the time of impact.
According to the aircraft flight manual, the cyclic centering annunciator light will be 
illuminated when the helicopter is on the ground and the cyclic stick is not centered. The 
engine anti-ice annunciator will illuminate when the engine anti-ice system is activated. Engine 
overspeed annunciation is provided when an overspeed condition is detected by the ECU. 
Hydraulic system indication is provided when the system pressure decreases below 650 psi. 
Page 8 of 10CEN13FA122
The normal hydraulic system operating pressure is 1,000 psi.
History of Flight
Enroute
Structural icing
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
53
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/17/2012
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/29/2012
Flight Time:
2808 hours (Total, all aircraft), 29 hours (Total, this make and model), 2697 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 29 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL HELICOPTER
Registration:
N445MT
Model/Series:
407 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
53959
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/28/2012, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5252 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
3 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
953 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls-Royce
ELT:
C126 installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
250-C47B
Registered Owner:
Suntrust Equipment Finance 
& Leasing Corp
Rated Power:
650 hp
Operator:
Med-Trans Corporation
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Mercy Air
Operator Designator Code:
M3XA
Page 9 of 10CEN13FA122
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MCW, 1214 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2053 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
261°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
8 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 1700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.05 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-3°C / -5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Mason City, IA 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Emmetsburg, IA (IA76)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2049 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Mason City Municipal (MCW)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
1214 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
43.142778, -93.482778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy Sorensen
Adopted Date:
02/12/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Jeffrey Rock; FAA -- Des Moines Flight Standards; Ankeny, IA
Brian Foster; Med-Trans Air Medical Transport; Lewisville, TX
Jeff Edwards; Rolls-Royce Corporation; Indianapolis, IN
Harold Barrentine; Bell Helicopter; Ft Worth, TX
Bruce Millar; Triumph Engine Control Systems; West Hartford, CT
Publish Date:
02/12/2015
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85944
Page 10 of 10CEN13FA122
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
