Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Jasper, AL
Accident Number:
ERA13FA101
Date & Time:
01/01/2013, 2240 CST 
Registration:
N7700Y
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-30
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to the airport manager, who was also a flight instructor, the student pilot had 
completed 10 hours of dual instruction in a single-engine airplane and completed three 
supervised solos. After the student pilot's third supervised solo, he discontinued his training 
with the airport manager and enrolled in a flight program at a community college. The airport 
manager did not know if the student pilot continued with his training. A review of the student 
pilot's records revealed that he had no entries or endorsements related to multiengine, night, 
or instrument flights. 
Instrument meteorological conditions existed on the night of the accident. An airport security 
video showed the accident airplane taxiing to the active runway. Shortly thereafter, the 
airplane™s strobe lights can be seen reflecting off of the runway and then illuminating in the low 
clouds; the strobe lights then disappear from the camera™s view. A witness in the area reported 
hearing an airplane flying low and then the sound of a loud crash. The witness subsequently 
contacted the local authorities, and the airplane was located 1 mile from the airport in a heavily 
wooded area. The airplane™s owner reported that he had not given the student pilot permission 
to use the airplane. An examination of the airplane did not reveal any anomalies that would 
have precluded normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The student pilot™s poor judgment to take a multiengine airplane for which he did not have 
experience or permission to operate and depart into night instrument meteorological 
conditions, which resulted in a loss of airplane control and impact with terrain.
Page 2 of 7ERA13FA101
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Student pilot (Cause)
Qualification/certification - Student pilot (Cause)
Stolen/unauthorized - Student pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Student pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Low ceiling - Effect on personnel (Cause)
Page 3 of 7ERA13FA101
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2013, about 2240 central standard time, a twin-engine Piper PA-30, N7700Y, 
collided with terrain during an uncontrolled descent in Jasper, Alabama. The student pilot and 
two passengers were fatally injured, and the airplane was destroyed. The airplane was 
unregistered and was owned by a private individual. The unauthorized flight was conducted in 
night, instrument meteorological conditions and no flight plan was filed. The flight departed 
from Walker County Airport-Bevill Field, Jasper, Alabama, at 2235.
Witnesses stated that, on the night of the accident, it was dark and raining. They heard an 
airplane flying very low and, shortly thereafter, they heard a loud crash. The witnesses called 
the local authorities and reported that the airplane had crashed.  
According to the airport manager/instructor, the student pilot worked as a cleanup person at 
the airport in trade for flight lessons. The airport manager said that the student pilot 
completed 10 hours of dual instruction and a solo flight on April 27, 2012. He also said that the 
student pilot received his flight lessons in a Cessna C-172 airplane. The student pilot completed 
two other supervised solos before enrolling at the Wallace State Community College aviation 
program. He continued coming to the airport and doing odd jobs for various airplane owners 
in exchange for rides. The airport manager and had no knowledge of the student ever taking 
any other lessons. 
The owner of the airplane stated that he knew the student pilot from seeing him around the 
airport. He went on to say that he never gave permission to the student pilot to fly his airplane. 
He said that the student pilot did not have a key for his airplane, and it was not kept locked. On 
the night of the accident, the owner was informed that his airplane was missing from the 
airport. When he arrived at the airport, he verified that his airplane was missing and reported 
that it was last seen on December 23, 2012.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the student pilot made no contact 
with air traffic control facilities prior to the accident, and there were no known radio 
transmissions.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 17, held a student pilot certificate and reported a total of 6 hours of flight time in 
the last 6 months as of the exam dated February 28, 2012.  The student pilot was issued a class 
3 medical certificate with limitations for corrective lenses. Review of FAA records did not 
reveal any other certifications other than the student pilot certificate. A review of copies of the 
student pilot's logbook revealed that he had accumulated total of 15.5 flight hours as of 
September 16, 2012. The logbook showed that, on April 27, 2012, he was signed off on his first 
solo flight. On August 26, 2012, he was signed off for the private pilot knowledge test, but there 
are no records of him taking the test. The student pilot's logbook did not show any entries or 
endorsements related to multi-engine, night, or instrument flights.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The four-seat, low-wing airplane, serial number 30-785, was manufactured in 1965. It was 
powered by two Lycoming model IO-320-B1A 160-hp engines equipped with Hartzell HC-
E2YL-2BS hubs and F7663-4 blades. Review of copies of maintenance logbook records showed 
Page 4 of 7ERA13FA101
an annual inspection was completed August 13, 2012, at a recorded airframe total time of 
1369.5 hours and a total time of 5160.6 hours. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The recorded weather at the Walker County-Bevill Field, Jasper, Alabama (JFX) at an elevation 
of 483 feet, revealed at 2255, conditions were wind 350 degrees at 8 knots, cloud conditions 
broken at 400 feet above ground level, temperature 45 degrees Celsius (C); dew point 43 
degrees C; altimeter 30.11 inches of mercury. A witness reported that there was fog and mist in 
the area at the time of the accident.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The airplane was found in heavily wooded area about 1 mile southwest from JFX. The fuselage 
of the airplane came to rest on a course of 050 degrees magnetic. The cockpit and cabin were 
crushed and fragmented. The nose gear assembly was broken away from the fuselage and 
located along the debris path. The instrument panel and instruments were impact damaged. 
The empennage remained attached to the fuselage and was buckled. The vertical and 
horizontal stabilizers were still attached and buckled. The rudder and elevators remained 
attached to the flight surfaces at the attachment points, and the respective flight control cables 
were connected. The left and right aileron cables were broken in overstress, and the ends of the 
cables remained attached to their respective bellcranks. Flight control continuity was 
established from the flight controls to the flight control surfaces. The left and right fuel 
selectors were found in the on position.
The right wing was attached to the fuselage at the wing root, and the outboard section was 
fragmented throughout the debris path. The right engine was broken away from the wing 
nacelle and was impact damaged. The right main fuel tanks were breached, and the fuel caps 
were secured to the wing. The main landing gear assembly was broken away from the wing and 
was located on the debris path in the extended position.
The left wing was attached to the fuselage at the wing root, and the outboard section extending 
past the engine nacelle was fragmented throughout the debris path. The engine remained 
attached to the wing nacelle and was impact damaged. The left main fuel tanks were breached, 
and the fuel caps were secure. The left main landing gear was found in the extended position.
Examination of both engines revealed that the propellers remained attached to the hubs. Both 
propeller blade assemblies displayed "S" bending and scoring throughout the blade spans. 
There was evidence of propeller blade cuts on tree branches throughout the accident site. The 
branches measured approximately 4-inches in diameter and were found within the debris path 
severed cleanly in diagonal linear patterns. There were no discrepancies noted that would have 
precluded normal operation of both propeller blade assemblies. Both engines remained 
attached to their respective wings, and each showed crush damage. Examination of both 
engines did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the student pilot on January 3, 2013, by the Alabama 
Department of Forensic Sciences, Huntsville, Alabama. The autopsy findings included blunt 
force injuries, and the report listed the specific injuries. The cause of death was reported as 
three of the listed injuries.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Page 5 of 7ERA13FA101
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The toxicology report stated no 
ethanol was detected in the liver or the muscle, and no drugs were detected in the liver.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
A review of video footage retrieved from the airport security camera showed that, on the night 
of the accident, an airplane is seen taxiing on the ramp at a high rate of speed to the active 
runway. As the airplane departs the strobes lights are seen reflecting off of the runway and 
continue up into a low cloud ceiling. The strobes are then seen pulsating in the clouds before 
being lost from the camera's view.
Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 61.89(a) states, in part, that a student pilot 
may not act as pilot in command of an aircraft that is carrying a passenger, or when the flight 
cannot be made with visual reference to the surface, or in any manner contrary to any 
limitations placed in the pilot's logbook by an authorized instructor.
History of Flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) 
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
17
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/28/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 15 hours (Total, all aircraft), 0.1 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 6 of 7ERA13FA101
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N7700Y
Model/Series:
PA-30 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
30-785
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/13/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3725 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1370 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91  installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-320 SERIES
Registered Owner:
Albert D. Whitworth
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
JFX, 483 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1055 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
190°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 400 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.11 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Jasper, AL (JFX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Jasper, AL (JFX)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2235 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Walker County Airport (JFX)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
483 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5004 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 7 of 7ERA13FA101
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.886111, -87.316667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eric Alleyne
Adopted Date:
04/07/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven Blansett; FAA/FSDO; Birmingham, AL
Greg H Muse; FAA/FSDO; Birmingham, AL
Ronald Maynard; Piper Aircraft; Vero Beach, FL
Publish Date:
04/07/2015
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85922
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
