Page 1 of 3ANC17LA051
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Tujunga, CA
Accident Number:
ANC17LA051
Date & Time:
09/02/2017, 0948 PDT 
Registration:
N304FD
Aircraft:
LEONARDO AW139
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Public Aircraft
On September 2, 2017, about 0948 Pacific daylight time, a Leonardo (formerly 
AugustaWestland Philadelphia) AW139 helicopter, N304FD, sustained substantial damage 
after impacting trees while conducting aerial firefighting operations in a residential area in 
Tujunga, California. The pilot and crewmember sustained no injuries. The helicopter was 
registered to the City of Los Angeles and was operated by the Los Angeles Fire Department as a 
public use visual flight rules aerial firefighting flight, operating as Fire 4. Visual meteorological 
conditions with moderate smoke were present in the area at the time of the accident and flight 
following procedures were utilized by the operator. The helicopter departed from the Van Nuys 
Airport, Van Nuys, California about 0815 to conduct the aerial firefighting operations for the 
day. 
The operator reported that the helicopter was in support of the La Tuna wildfire, that was 
spreading throughout the Verdugo Mountains. The helicopter was tasked with structure 
protection for a residential complex on a ridgeline, about one half mile northeast of Interstate 
210, known as the Foothill Freeway. The pilot was stationed in the right seat, and a helicopter 
pilot crewmember, who was not type rated in the AW139 model, was stationed in the left seat. 
The helicopter was operating with several other firefighting helicopters, which were all 
supporting the structure protection for the residential complex via water drops. The team of 
helicopters were operating out of the Green Verdugo helispot, which is located next to the 
Green Verdugo reservoir about 2 miles northwest of the residential complex. 
Once on station, the pilot performed a high reconnaissance orbit over the residential complex, 
with the intent of conducting a water drop from the south to the north. During the high 
reconnaissance, the pilot noted the prevailing wind, the smoke conditions, the ground 
obstructions, and his intended approach and departure route for the water drop. The pilot 
reported the wind condition was variable and originated from the east. 
When the pilot was flying from south to north to drop the water in a descending profile, about 
100 feet above the trees and about 40 knots, and about 200 feet away from the residential 
complex, the helicopter began an uncommanded yaw to the right and the vertical descent 
increased. The pilot released the water and the helicopter continued to yaw to the right and 
descend rapidly. The pilot reported he had little positive control of the helicopter. The 
Page 2 of 3ANC17LA051
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
crewmember verbally called out the trees located on the left side of the helicopter. The main 
rotor blades impacted a eucalyptus tree, following with the tailboom and tail rotor system 
impacting a pine tree. After the tree impacts, the uncommanded yaw appeared to decrease and 
the pilot regained control of the helicopter. The pilot departed from the residential complex 
area by initiating a climbing turn to the northwest and initiated a mayday call. The pilot flew 
about 1 mile north, and made a landing at a school athletic field without further incident.
The helicopter was equipped with a Simplex Aerospace model 326 GII aerial firefighting belly-
mounted tank that has the capability to hold 450 gallons of water via a supplemental type 
certificate. 
The pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical failures or malfunctions with the 
airframe or engine that would have precluded normal operation.
The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the left stabilizer, the right stabilizer, and the 
tailboom. The heliocopter was secured and is pending transportation to the manufacturer's 
repair station for a comprehensive damage assessment.
The cockpit voice recordings, the flight data recordings, the terrain awareness and warning 
system data, and the flight tracking system data were secured for future download of the 
various data parameters.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
LEONARDO
Registration:
N304FD
Model/Series:
AW139 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
Los Angeles Fire Department
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KBUR, 732 ft msl
Observation Time:
1653 UTC
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
33°C / 16°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3900 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
8 knots / , 120°
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
29.83 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Departure Point: 
VAN NUYS, CA (VNY)
Destination: 
Tujunga, CA 
Page 3 of 3ANC17LA051
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
34.246667, -118.299722 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael J Hodges
Additional Participating Persons:
Stephen Cirigliano; FAA Van Nuys FSDO; Van Nuys, CA
Pending Designation; Agenzia Nazionale per la Sicurezza del Volo; Rome,   
Giorgio Dossena; Leonardo (Advisor); Cascina Costa,   
Earl Chapman; Transportation Safety Board of Canada; Gatineau, QC
Claude Beaudry; Pratt & Whitney Canada (Advisor); Longueuil, QC
Scot Davison; Los Angeles Fire Department; Los Angeles, CA
Tony Pircey; Los Angeles Fire Department; Los Angeles, CA
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
