After maneuvering in the local area for approximately 15 minutes, the pilot initiated a descent, 
at idle power, to return to the airport. As he leveled the airplane in the traffic pattern (over 
water), he advanced the throttle to increase power; however, the engine did not respond. The 
pilot attempted, unsuccessfully, to restart the engine, and then prepared for a forced landing to 
the water, approximately 6 miles off shore. After the airplane came to rest, the pilot egressed 
and entered the life raft he had in the airplane. The airplane sank after about 5 minutes and 
was not recovered. The pilot purchased the airplane new approximately 2 years prior to the 
accident and no recent maintenance had been performed. Fuel records indicated the airplane 
was last refueled approximately 1 month prior with 13.8 gallons of fuel. According to the pilot, 
he last flew the airplane approximately 2 to 3 weeks prior to the accident, and prior to the 
accident flight, he departed with "just under full fuel," approximately 20 gallons.
A loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
On March 1, 2008, at 1515 eastern standard time, a Diamond DA 20, N859MS, was presumed 
to be substantially damaged during a ditching in the Atlantic Ocean, near Key West, Florida. 
The certificated private pilot was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and 
no flight plan was filed for the flight, which originated at the Florida Keys Marathon Airport 
(MTH), Marathon, Florida, at 1500. The personal flight was destined for the Key West 
International Airport (EYW), Key West, Florida, and was conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the pilot, after departure he climbed the airplane to an altitude of 8,000 feet and 
practiced steep turns. He then flew toward EYW, where he intended to practice touch-and-go 
landings. The pilot reduced the power to idle, and initiated a descent. When the airplane 
reached the traffic pattern altitude of 850 feet, the pilot leveled-off the airplane. He advanced 
the throttle to increase the power; however, the engine did not respond. The propeller 
continued to turn momentarily and then stopped completely. The pilot completed the 
emergency checklist; however, he could not restart the engine. He reported a "mayday" to air 
traffic control and gave his position, which was approximately 6 miles south of the Big Pine 
Key shoreline. 
The pilot performed a forced landing to the water, and after the airplane came to rest, the pilot 
opened the canopy and inflated the life raft he had in the airplane. He entered the life raft and 
watched the airplane float for approximately 5 minutes, before sinking.
Approximately 90 minutes later, a fisherman picked up the pilot and brought him to shore.
The pilot purchased the airplane new in April 2006. He reported the airplane and engine 
logbooks were in the airplane at the time of the accident. The next annual inspection was due 
in May 2008, and no recent maintenance had been performed on the airplane.
The pilot reported he last flown the airplane approximately 2 to 3 weeks prior to the accident. 
He estimated the airplane had "just under full fuel," (approximately 20 gallons), prior to 
departure.  
According to fuel records provided by the Fixed Base Operator (FBO) where the airplane was 
based, the airplane was last refueled on February 6, 2008, with 13.8 gallons of fuel.
As of the date of this report, there were no plans to recover the airplane from the Atlantic 
Ocean.
History of Flight
Enroute-descent
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Ditching
