The pilot was flying westbound into the sun (275 degrees, 7 degrees above the horizon) during 
an aerial application pass over a cotton field.  There was a circular pivotal sprinkler system 
which extended from the northern center of the field to the southeast.  The pilot said that he 
looked over to adjust his onboard global positioning system and he struck the sprinkler.  The 
impact separated the left main landing gear and initiated a fire in the right hand forward part 
of the cockpit.  The pilot landed the airplane in the adjacent peanut field and the airplane 
ground looped during the emergency landing attempt.  The airplane was destroyed during the 
subsequent post landing fire. 
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate altitude/clearance during an aerial application.  Also 
causal was the inadvertent ground loop/swerve during the landing. 
 On September 2, 1998, approximately 1740 mountain daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-502B, 
N50620, was destroyed by fire following an emergency landing near Portales, New Mexico.  
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant in the airplane, received minor injuries.  The airplane 
was owned/operated by  King AG Leasing Inc. under Title 14 CFR Part 137.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local aerial application flight which originated 
approximately 25 minutes before the accident.  No flight plan had been filed.
According to the pilot, he had flown 7 or 8 east-west passes over a cotton field, and was flying 
westbound into the sun (266 degrees, 19 degrees above the horizon).  He said that there was a 
circular pivotal sprinkler extending from the northern center of the field to the southeast.  He 
was adjusting his onboard global positioning system (GPS) and when he looked up, "I was right 
at the sprinkler."  He said that he "immediately pulled up elevator but still struck the 
sprinkler."  The pilot stated that a fire broke out in the right hand forward part of the cockpit 
and he knew he had to get out as soon as possible.
The pilot reported that the sprinkler impact had separated the left main landing gear and when 
he landed in the adjacent peanut field, the airplane ground looped to the left.  He further stated 
that when the airplane came to rest, "I opened the left cockpit door and bailed out as quick as 
possible."  The pilot received second degree burns on his right hand and arm, and first degree 
burns on his face.
