As the airplane neared its destination the pilot did a pre- landing checklist.  When he placed 
the mixture to full 'RICH' the engine began to run rough.  He said the application of carburetor 
heat did not eliminate the roughness.  The pilot said he positioned the fuel selector to the 
'RIGHT' fuel tank and the engine began to run normally for a short time and then quit.  The 
on-scene examination revealed no usable fuel in the airplane's fuel tanks.  The pilot said he had 
told another pilot to fill the fuel tanks to the filler neck the day before the accident flight.  
During his preflight inspection of the airplane, the pilot said he did not visually check the fuel 
level, but relied on the fuel tank guages to confirm that the tanks were 'FULL.' 
An inadequate preflight inspection by the pilot which resulted in fuel exhaustion and 
subsequent loss of engine power. 
 On September 2, 1998, at 1050 central daylight time (cdt), a Cessna 172N, N6703E, piloted by 
a commercial pilot, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a total loss of 
power during cruise flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 Civil Air Patrol aerial observation flight was not operating on a 
flight plan. The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.  The flight departed Hutchinson, 
Minnesota, at 0740 cdt.
According to the pilot's written statement, the pilot said he was preparing to land at an airport 
and was doing the landing checklist.  He said the engine began running "...very rough..."  when 
he pushed the mixture control in.  The pilot said he immediately applied the carburetor heat 
"...but the engine continued to run rough."  He said he switched the fuel tank selector to the 
wing's "RIGHT" fuel tank.  "[The] engine smoothed out momentarily and quit."  The pilot said 
he made a forced landing in an alfalfa field that had about a 15-degree downslope incline.  
The pilot said the right wing had about "...1-quart of fuel in the right tank."  He said he didn't 
look in the left tank but could hear "...fuel sloshing around..." in the tank when he rocked the 
wings. 
Before departing on the accident flight, the pilot said another pilot had filled the fuel tanks.  
The accident pilot said he told the other pilot to fuel the accident airplanes fuel tanks to  "...the 
filler neck and watched as he did."  The airplane did not fly after it had been refueled until the 
accident flight.  During the accident flight's preflight inspection the pilot said he did not 
visually check the fuel tanks. He made sure the fuel caps were on tight and noted that both fuel 
tank gauges showed "FULL."
The Federal Aviation Administration Principal Maintenance Inspector (PMI) said he did not 
observe fuel in N6703E's fuel tanks.
