The pilot stated he applied full power and was climbing to a higher altitude as he crossed a bay. 
The engine suddenly made a loud noise and lost power. He turned back to the closest shore and 
an airport. He was unable to reach the airport and made a forced landing in a sandy area, at 
which time the aircraft nosed over. Postcrash examination of the engine by an FAA inspector 
showed the No. 1 cylinder exhaust valve head had broken off from the stem resulting in the No. 
1 piston breaking and the No. 1 connecting rod bending. The No. 1 exhaust valve had 
accumulated 1,527 flight hours since new. 
Failure of the number one cylinder exhaust valve resulting in loss of engine power and a forced 
landing on unsuitable terrain at which time the aircraft nosed over. 
 On September 1, 1998, about 1702 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 150H, N50009, 
registered to New Market Airport, Inc., nosed over while making a forced landing following a 
loss of engine power at Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina, while on a Title 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was 
filed. The aircraft received substantial damage and the commercial-rated pilot and one 
passenger received minor injuries. The flight originated from Hatteras, North Carolina, the 
same day, about 1615.
The pilot stated he had refueled at Manteo, North Carolina, and then flew to Hatteras, 
which took about 45 minutes. After being on the ground at Hatteras for about 1 hour, he 
departed for the return trip to Manteo. As he crossed over Kill Devil Hills, he started to climb 
to a higher altitude to cross over the bay. About 1/4 of the way across the bay, the engine 
suddenly snapped and made a thud noise and then began to lose power and vibrate. He turned 
back toward Kill Devil Hills, and tried to make it to First Flight Airport. The aircraft would not 
maintain altitude and he made a forced landing in a sandy area, at which time the aircraft 
nosed over.
Postcrash examination of the engine by an FAA inspector showed that the No. 1 cylinder 
exhaust valve head had broken off and caused the No. 1 piston to break and the No. 1 
connecting rod to bend. Damage to the No. 1 cylinder exhaust valve prevented metallurgical 
examination. Logbook records showed the No. 1 cylinder exhaust valve had been installed in 
the cylinder during engine overhaul on April 25, 1979, at aircraft and engine total time 2324.6. 
The No. 1 and No. 4 cylinders were removed for repair on November 10, 1981. At the time of 
the accident the aircraft and engine had accumulated 1,527 flight hours since the engine 
overhaul and 1,236 flight hours since the No. 1 cylinder repair. (See FAA inspector statement 
and aircraft maintenance records attached to this report)
