The commercial pilot departed under special VFR conditions on a CFR part 135 flight for a 
remote lake.   During the flight, low clouds, rain, and fog were present in an area of 
mountainous terrain along the route of flight.  The pilot stated that he intended to utilize a 
narrow mountain pass to transit the area, and as he entered the mountain pass, discovered that 
the ceiling and visibility would not allow safe passage.  He said that he made an emergency 180 
degree turn in an attempt to exit the pass, and subsequently collided with terrain.  After initial 
impact, the airplane slid downhill about 100 feet, and came to rest on a 35 degree slope.  The 
pilot stated that weather conditions at the time of the accident consisted of: Ceiling, 500 foot 
overcast; visibility, 2 miles with rain and fog; wind 360 degrees, at 8 knots.  The pilot noted 
that there were no preaccident anomalies with the airplane. 
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with terrain.  Contributing factors were the pilot's 
delayed remedial action (course reversal), low ceilings, rain, fog, and mountainous terrain. 
 On September 2, 1998, about 1002 Alaska daylight time, an amphibious Grumman G-44 
airplane, N139F, sustained substantial damage during a collision with mountainous terrain, 
about 80 miles north of Dillingham, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight 
rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident 
occurred.  The airplane was operated by Fresh Water Adventures, Inc., Dillingham.  The 
certificated commercial pilot, and the two passengers aboard were not injured.  Instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of departure, and company flight following 
procedures were in effect.  The flight originated at the Dillingham Airport, about 0840, under 
special VFR weather conditions.   
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on September 2, the pilot reported that he was transporting two hunters to a remote 
lake located about 100 miles north of Dillingham.  During the flight, low clouds, rain, and fog 
were present in an area of mountainous terrain along the route of flight.  The pilot stated that 
he intended to utilize a narrow mountain pass to transit the area, and as he entered the 
mountain pass, discovered that the ceiling and visibility would not allow safe passage.  He said 
that he made an emergency 180 degree turn in an attempt to exit the pass, and subsequently 
collided with terrain.  After initial impact, the airplane slid downhill about 100 feet, and came 
to rest on a 35 degree slope.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage, wings, and elevator. 
The pilot stated that weather conditions at the time of the accident consisted of: Ceiling, 500 
foot overcast; visibility, 2 miles with rain and fog; wind 360 degrees, at 8 knots.         
The closest official weather observation station is Dillingham, located about 80 nautical miles 
southeast of the accident site.  On September 2, 1998, at 0925, an Aviation Routine Weather 
Report (METAR) was reporting, in part: Wind, 330 degrees at 6 knots; visibility, 3 statute 
miles with light rain and mist; clouds, 500 feet broken, 800 feet overcast; temperature, 48 
degrees F; dew point, 48 degrees F; altimeter, 29.34 inHg.
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident anomalies with the airplane.
