During the landing roll on runway 31 with a right crosswind, the commercial pilot lost control 
of the airplane, and it exited the right side of the runway.  The pilot turned the airplane to 
parallel the runway and attempted to stop; however, he was unable to stop before the nose 
wheel impacted the embankment at the edge of intersecting runway 18/36. The nose landing 
gear separated from the airplane, and the airplane nosed down, slid across runway 18/36 and 
came to rest in the grass.  According to the pilot, the wind was from 010 degrees at 7 knots 
gusting to 15 knots.  At 1553, the reported winds at the airport were from 020 degrees at 11 
knots. 
The pilot's inadequate compensation for the crosswind resulting in a loss of control.  A factor 
was the crosswind. 
 On September 2, 1998, at 1530 central daylight time, a Cessna T210M airplane, Mexican 
registration XA-RIM, was substantially damaged when it impacted an embankment and nosed 
down during the landing roll at the McAllen Miller International Airport in McAllen, Texas.  
The airplane was owned and operated by Milenium Air Servicios of Guadalajara, Mexico.  The 
commercial pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and a VFR flight plan was filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight 
from Reynosa, Mexico, to McAllen.  
According to the pilot's written statement, following the touchdown on runway 31, a "heavy 
crosswind" made him "lose control," and the airplane exited the right side of the runway.  He 
turned the airplane to parallel the runway and attempted to stop; however, he was unable to 
stop before the nose wheel impacted the embankment at the edge of intersecting runway 
18/36.  The nose landing gear separated from the airplane, and the airplane nosed down, slid 
across runway 18/36 and came to rest in the grass.
According to the pilot, the wind was from 010 degrees at 7 knots gusting to 15 knots.  At 1553, 
the reported winds at the airport were from 020 degrees at 11 knots.
A mechanic employed by McCreery Aviation Company, a fixed-base operator (FBO) on the 
airport, examined the airplane and reported that the firewall, propeller, engine, and nose 
landing gear were damaged.
