National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Kalamazoo, MI
Accident Number: CHI04LA097
Date & Time: 04/02/2004, 0909 EST
Registration: N986AV
Aircraft: Cessna 172R
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane, operated by a university aviation training program as a student solo instructional flight, veered off runway 05 during landing.
The flight was the student pilot's second solo flight at which time he had accumulated a total flight time of 28 hours.
The university placed a maximum crosswind limitation of 5 knots for the student pilot's solo flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed with winds from 340 degrees at 13 knots at the time of the accident.
The student pilot performed eight takeoff and landings on runway 35 when the tower air traffic controller instructed the student pilot to change to runway 05.
The student pilot complied with the instruction and landed on runway 05 using a 30-degree flap setting.
The airplane information manual states that in strong crosswinds a minimum flap setting required for field length should be used.
Federal Aviation Order states that air traffic control (ATC) is to use the runway most nearly aligned with the wind when the wind is 5 knots or more.
There was no runway in use program in effect for the accident runway.
The order notes that if a pilot prefers to use a runway different from the one specified, the pilot is expected to advise ATC.
The student pilot did not advise ATC of his preference of runway use.
The crosswind conditions were a contributing factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - INADEQUATE - ATC PERSONNEL(LCL/GND/CLNC) 3.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 5.
The airplane impacted two runway lights and a taxiway sign.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 solo instructional flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The student pilot was uninjured.
The local flight originated from AZO at 0808.
The student pilot reported that his last dual instructional flight was with his flight instructor on April 1, 2004, at which time they discussed his assigned solo flight for the morning of April 2, 2004.
The student pilot reported that he used runway 05 (3,466 feet by 100 feet, asphalt) during his first solo flight, which he described as fine.
On the day of the accident, the student pilot checked winds, which were reported to be 360 degrees at 10 knots.
He filled out his dispatch release sheet and had it signed by the flight instructor on duty.
The student pilot then departed using runway 35 and performed eight touch and go's on runway 35.
Another Kalamazoo air traffic controller (ATC) then changed the runway in use for aircraft to runway 05.
The student pilot complied with the runway change and performed one touch and go on runway 05.
As the airplane touched down, it felt to the student pilot as if the left wing lifted up.
The airplane rolled down the runway on the right main and nose wheel.
He regained control of the airplane before he put flaps up, continued the roll out, and took off.
He then decided that he would end his flight and requested a full stop landing.
He indicated that he felt confident that he could land the airplane safely.
He selected 30 degrees of flaps and while in ground effect he applied two quick nose-up trims to flair easier, which his instructor recommended.
He noted that the airplane was crabbing on final and touched down on the left main landing gear and the right main landing gear.
The wind caught the wing and forced the airplane to nose down.
The airplane began to fishtail and skid hitting the runway 05 apron sign and shearing off the left main landing gear off coming to rest in grass.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION The pilot was enrolled in WMU's Aviation Science and Administration program on January 2, 2004.
He was issued an airman medical certificate on November 22, 2003.
He received his first solo endorsement on March 30, 2004, in a Cessna 172R at a total flight time of 22.5 hours.
He accumulated a total flight time of 25.5 hours at the time of his second solo flight, which was the accident flight.
The airplane accumulated a total time of 2,647 hours.
According to the Cessna 172R Skyhawk Information Manual, "When landing in a strong crosswind, use the minimum flap setting required for the field length.
If flaps settings greater than 20 degrees are used in sideslips with full rudder deflection, some elevator oscillation may be felt at normal approach speeds.
However, this does not affect the control of the airplane.
Although the crab or combination method of drift correction may be used, the wing low method gives the best control.
After touchdown, hold a straight course with the steerable nose wheel and occasional braking if necessary.
"The maximum allowable crosswind velocity is dependent upon pilot capability as well as airplane limitations.
Operation in direct crosswinds of 15 knots has been demonstrated."
AIRPORT INFORMATION Runway 17-35 was a 6,500 feet by 150 feet grooved asphalt runway.
Runway 05-23 was a 3,436 feet by 100 feet grooved asphalt runway.
According to the airport manager, only runway 17-35 was part of a runway use program, which was voluntary for jet aircraft noise abatement.
TESTS AND RESEARCH The pilot stated during an interview that he "thinks" the maximum demonstrated cross wind for the accident airplane is 15 knots.
He said that prior to the accident he did not know what the crosswind landing flaps setting and procedures were, but he received instruction in these area following the accident.
He said that the air traffic controller who initiated the runway change was different from the one prior to the change.
The change in runways occurred about 0910.
The pilot said that the reason he did not request a different runway was due to his being a new student; he felt belittled by the "tower" and was intimidated by air traffic control.
The airport manager said that the airport has a voluntary runway in use program that is "strictly" for noise abatement for noise abatement and only for runway 17-35.
The noise abatement is mainly designed for jet aircraft.
According to Federal Aviation Administration Order 8400.9, National Safety and Operational Criteria for Runway Use Programs, section 3-5-1: a.
2 - At airports where a "runway use" program is established, ATC will assign runways deemed to have the least noise impact.
If in the interest of safety a runway different from that specified is preferred, the pilot is expected to advise ATC accordingly.
ATC will honor such requests and advise pilots when the requested runway is noise sensitive.
The student pilot did not advise ATC of his preference of runways to use.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
