National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Windsor Locks, CT
Accident Number: NYC04LA099
Date & Time: 04/01/2004, 1830 EST
Registration: N149CJ
Aircraft: Beech 1900D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 16 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis After landing, and while taxiing to the ramp at night, the airplane's left engine and fuselage was struck by a fuel truck.
Witness statements did not reveal headlights illuminated on the fuel truck.
Weather at the time of the accident included light rain and mist with 2 miles visibility.
The Airport Ramp Rules and Regulations, stated in part: "All vehicles shall always relinquish right-of-way to any aircraft moving under its own power or under tow, except emergency conditions," and "all vehicles will have lights on during the hours between dusk and dawn and during periods of low visibility."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The fuel truck driver's failure to maintain clearance with a taxiing airplane, resulting in the collision between the fuel truck and the airplane.
A factor in the accident was the night condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
OBJECT - VEHICLE 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - DRIVER OF VEHICLE 3.
The certificated airline transport pilot (captain), first officer, and 14 passengers were uninjured.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The flight was operating on an instrument flight rules flight plan between Syracuse Hancock International Airport (SYR), Syracuse, New York, and Windsor Locks.
The scheduled passenger flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
According to a written statement provided by the captain, the flight landed on runway 24, and was cleared to taxi to the ramp.
As the airplane entered the ramp area, the flight crew planned to stop beyond the hold-short line, to wait for another airplane to exit gate 25.
As the flight crew crossed the hold-short line, and were almost at a complete stop, they felt a "buffet," which became a "large jolt," on the left side of the fuselage.
After realizing a fuel truck impacted the left engine and propeller, the captain shut down the engines, and evacuated the passengers from the right window emergency exit.
The captain stated that the taxi lights, flood lights, navigation lights, and beacon were illuminated while taxiing.
The fuel truck driver reported in a written statement that he was traveling on the ramp from gate 11 to gate 25, to fuel the inbound Colgan Air flight.
As he was traveling within the "marked roadway," he suddenly observed a red light.
Realizing it was a wing light, he slammed on the brakes, and the airplane's engine impacted the right side of the truck cab.
According to a written statement provided by a passenger, as the airplane was taxiing to the terminal, he looked to the left and noticed a fuel truck headed into the airplane's path.
The passenger stated that the fuel truck did not have any headlights or strobe lights illuminated, and estimated it was traveling about 15 mph.
The truck disappeared from view briefly, and then collided with the front left side of the airplane.
A second aircraft refueler observed the accident fueling truck driving northbound on the ramp roadway.
The refueler did not observe any lights on the refueling truck.
Weather reported at BDL, at 1819, included winds from 020 degrees at 10 knots, 2 miles visibility, with light rain and mist.
The Bradley International Airport, Ramp Rules and Regulations, Section II, Vehicle Operations, stated in part: "All vehicles shall always relinquish right-of-way to any aircraft moving under its own power or under tow, except emergency conditions."
The regulations also stated that, "all vehicles will have lights on during the hours between dusk and dawn and during periods of low visibility."
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
