National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Orem, UT
Accident Number: DEN04LA056
Date & Time: 04/02/2004, 0300 MST
Registration: N66758
Aircraft: Cessna 150M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot said that he "ran out of fuel."
The pilot attempted a forced landing to an open field near the east shore of the lake.
During the forced landing, the airplane's right wing struck several branches on the top of a 50-foot tree and the airplane subsequently struck the ground in a nose-down attitude.
An examination of the airplane showed that both wing fuel tanks were intact.
Approximately 2 cups of fuel was recovered from the tanks.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's improper in-flight planning and decision making, resulting in fuel exhaustion and the loss of engine power.
Contributing factors include the dark night light conditions, and the trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(F) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY Findings 3.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 4.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT Factual Information On April 2, 2004, at approximately 0300 mountain standard time, a Cessna 150M, N66758, was substantially damaged when it impacted trees during a forced landing to a field near Orem, Utah.
The private pilot, and passenger sustained minor injuries.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal cross-country flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.
The flight to Provo, Utah, originated at Emmett, Idaho, at approximately 0010.
The pilot said that he "ran out of fuel," and was forced to make an emergency landing.
Prior to the flight, the pilot purchased 22.8 gallons of fuel.
During the flight to Provo, the engine "cut" as he was flying south over Utah Lake.
The pilot attempted a forced landing to an open field near the east shore of the lake.
During the forced landing, the airplane's right wing struck several branches on the top of a 50-foot tree near the edge of the field.
The airplane spun to the right, approximately 180 degrees, and struck the ground in a nose-down attitude approximately 100 feet southeast of the tree.
According to Cessna's pilot operating handbook (POH), for a Cessna 150M with standard fuel tanks, the total fuel capacity is 26 gallons, and the total useable fuel is 22.5 gallons.
An examination of the airplane showed the airplane's engine separated from the firewall, the upper portion of the firewall crushed aft, the leading edges of both wings crushed aft, and a buckled aft fuselage.
Further examination showed both fuel tanks were intact.
On draining both wing tank sumps, approximately 2 cups of fuel was recovered.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 28, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
