Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
NASHVILLE, AR
Accident Number:
FTW01LA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2000, 1600 CDT 
Registration:
N11390
Aircraft:
Cessna 150L
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During the takeoff, the single-engine airplane 'began to run rough for a few minutes.'  The pilot 
landed the airplane at the airport, taxied to the ramp area, and conducted a ground run of the 
airplane.  No discrepancies were noted during the ground run, and the pilot performed the 
second takeoff.  During that takeoff/initial climb, approximately 400 feet agl, the engine began 
to run rough and then stopped completely.  The pilot landed the airplane in a field adjacent to 
the airport, and during the landing roll, the airplane struck a terrace, collapsed the nose 
landing gear, nosed over and came to rest inverted.  The operator reported an accumulated 
flight time of 3 hours since the last known refueling.  The pilot/operator estimated the fuel at 
the last takeoff was 8 gallons.  No evidence of fuel was found at the accident site or in the 
airplane.  The integrity of the fuel system was not compromised.  No discrepancies were noted 
during the 17-minute post-accident engine run. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to refuel resulting in loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.  A factor 
was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
Page 2 of 6FTW01LA001
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. (C) REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
----------
Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
3. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - BERM
Page 3 of 6FTW01LA001
Factual Information
 On October 1, 2000, at 1600 central daylight time, a Cessna 150L single-engine airplane, 
N11390, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power during takeoff/initial 
climb from the Nashville Howard County Airport, near Nashville, Arkansas.  The airplane was 
owned and operated by Pro Aviation, Inc., of Mountain Home, Arkansas.  The private pilot, 
sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-
country flight to Mountain Home, Arkansas, with a refueling stop planned at Hot Springs, 
Arkansas.  The 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 flight was originating at the time of the 
accident.  A flight plan was not filed.
The pilot reported that earlier in the day, he and a passenger departed Mountain Home, 
Arkansas, with full fuel for the cross-country flight to Nashville.  The GPS time recorded for the 
flight was 1 hour and 53 minutes.  After deplaning the passenger at Nashville, the pilot took 
another passenger for a local flight for 10 to 15 minutes in the vicinity of Nashville.  After 
returning the passenger to the Nashville Howard County Airport, the pilot departed for the 
return cross-country flight to Mountain Home.
During the takeoff, the airplane "began to run rough for a few minutes."  The pilot landed the 
airplane on runway 19, taxied to the ramp area, and conducted a ground run of the airplane.  
No discrepancies were noted during the ground run, and the pilot performed the second 
takeoff.  During the runway 19 takeoff/initial climb, approximately 400 feet agl, the engine 
began to run rough and then stopped completely.  With the engine stopped, the pilot 
determined that the airplane would not make the airport.  The pilot landed the airplane in a 
field adjacent to the airport, and during the landing roll, the airplane struck a terrace, collapsed 
the nose landing gear, nosed over and came to rest inverted.
Local authorities reported that the vertical stabilizer was damaged and the propeller blades 
were straight.  The FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, found no evidence of 
fuel at the site or in the airplane.  He further reported that the integrity of the fuel system was 
not compromised.  The operator reported an accumulated flight time of 3 hours since the last 
known refueling.  In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), it was 
reported that the estimated fuel on board at the last takeoff was 8 gallons.
At 1553, the local weather observation at Texarkana, Arkansas (31 nautical miles southwest of 
the accident site), reported the wind from 200 degrees at 10 knots.
The wings were removed from the airframe and the airplane was transported to Air Salvage of 
Dallas, Lancaster, Texas, for further investigation.  On November 15, 2000, the engine 
remained attached to the airframe with the original propeller installed for an engine run.  No 
discrepancies were noted during the 17 minute engine run at various power settings.
Page 4 of 6FTW01LA001
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/09/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
271 hours (Total, all aircraft), 70 hours (Total, this make and model), 187 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N11390
Model/Series:
150L 150L
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
15075379
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/20/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
28 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7195 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
PRO AVIATION, INC
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
PRO AVIATION, INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW01LA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TXK, 389 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
31 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
210°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
200°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (M77)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
HOT SPRINGS, AR (HOT)
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
1600 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
NASHVILLE HOWARD COUNTY (M77)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
553 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
19
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
3660 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JOYCE        ROACH
Adopted Date:
05/09/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVID   HALL; LITTLE ROCK, AR
TONY   BAUMGARD; DALLAS, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW01LA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
