Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SEVEN SPRINGS, PA
Accident Number:
NYC01FA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2000, 1200 EDT 
Registration:
N3039Y
Aircraft:
Piper PA-32-300
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 3 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to a witness, the airplane did not appear aligned with the runway as it approached.  
It touched down on the runway, but did not seem 'steady'.  The engine revved and the airplane 
became airborne again.  It then touched down off to the left side of the runway, onto the grass.  
The engine revved a second time, and the airplane became airborne, as if it was going to takeoff 
again.  However, it did not clear trees off the right side of the runway.  About the time of the 
accident, the wind was reported as calm at two airports within 35 miles of the accident site.  
Examination of the wreckage did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper recovery from a bounced landing. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
1. (C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
2. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 2 of 6NYC01FA001
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 1, 2000, about 1200 Eastern Daylight Time, a Piper PA-32-300, N3039Y, was 
substantially damaged while landing at Seven Springs Airport (7SP), Seven Springs, 
Pennsylvania.  The certificated private pilot and two passengers were seriously injured, and a 
third passenger was fatally injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an 
instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed for the flight that originated from Wood 
County Airport (PKB), Parkersburg, West Virginia.  The personal flight was conducted under 
14 CFR Part 91.
A witness, who was riding his bicycle along a path adjacent to the runway, saw the airplane 
approach Runway 28.  The airplane did not seem aligned with the runway during the approach.  
It touched down on the runway, but did not seem "steady".  The engine revved and the airplane 
became airborne again.  It then touched down off to the left side of the runway, onto the grass.  
The engine revved a second time, and the airplane became airborne, as if it was going to takeoff 
again.  However, the airplane did not clear trees off the right side of the runway.  After 
impacting the trees, it came to rest at the bottom of a steep drop-off, about 70 feet below the 
runway.
The pilot suffered head injuries, and did not recall the accident.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight: located approximately 40 degrees, 00 
minutes north longitude; and 79 degrees, 19 minutes west latitude.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate, with ratings for single engine land and instrument 
airplane.  His most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class medical 
certificate was issued on June 29, 1999.  
The pilot reported a total flight experience of 692 hours; of which, 71 hours were in the make 
and model accident airplane.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane had been operated for approximately 222 hours since the last annual inspection, 
performed on February 5, 2000.
AERODROME INFORMATION
7SP was located about 1 mile southwest of Seven Springs Borough, Pennsylvania.  The airport 
was 2,907 feet above mean-sea-level.  The single asphalt runway (10/28) was 3,045 feet long, 
and 45 feet wide.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The reported weather at an airport approximately 16 miles north of the accident site, at 1145, 
was:  wind calm; visibility 15 miles; few clouds at 3,000 feet; scattered clouds at 25,000 feet; 
temperature 71 degrees Fahrenheit; dewpoint 46 degrees; altimeter 30.16 inches hg.
The reported wind at an airport approximately 35 miles southwest of the accident site, at 1153, 
was calm.
Page 3 of 6NYC01FA001
The reported wind at an airport approximately 50 miles northwest of the accident site, at 1153, 
was from 170 degrees at 7 knots.  At the same airport, the reported winds aloft at 0800 was 225 
degrees at 10 knots, at 2,736 feet.  
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site revealed three ground scars consistent with tail-strikes.  Two 
of the ground scars were on the runway, and the other was on the grass off to the left side of the 
runway.  Several tire skid marks were observed in the vicinity of the tail-strikes.  A tree branch 
was found near the wreckage.  It was approximately 18 inches long, and contained fresh 45-
degree cuts at both ends.
All major components of the airplane were accounted for at the accident scene.  The left wing 
was separated at the wing root.  The bellcrank was separated from it's attach point, and flight 
control continuity was confirmed from the cockpit area to the bellcrank.  The left aileron was 
deflected upward, and the flap was displaced approximately 180 degrees downward.  Both fuel 
tanks in the left wing were compromised.  Several impact marks were observed on the leading 
edge, consistent with tree-strikes, and the top of the wing was buckled. 
The right wing was also separated at the wing root.  Flight control continuity was confirmed 
from the cockpit area to the wing root, and then from the bellcrank to the right aileron.  Where 
the control cables had separated, the ends of the cables displayed a broom-straw shape, 
consistent with tension overload.  The right aileron was deflected upward, and the flap was 
displaced approximately 90 degrees downward.  Both fuel tanks in the right wing were 
compromised.  Several impact marks were observed on the leading edge, consistent with tree-
strikes, and the top of the wing was buckled.   
The left side of the fuselage displayed impact damage.  Both the horizontal stabilator and 
vertical stabilizer contained impact marks consistent with tree-strikes.  The elevator trim was 
found in a "neutral" to "nose down" position.  Flight control continuity was established from 
the elevator and rudder to the cockpit area.  There was less impact damage along the right side 
of the fuselage.
The cockpit area was intact.  The flap handle and linkage corresponded to a flaps retracted 
setting.  The throttle and propeller levers were in the full forward position, and the mixture was 
mid-range.  The fuel selector was selected to the left main tank position.  The elevator trim 
wheel was in a "nose down" position.  Seatbelts were observed on all six seats, but shoulder 
harnesses were only installed on the front two seats.   
One propeller blade exhibited chordwise scratching, and the other exhibited leading edge 
gouging.  The valve covers were removed from the engine for examination.  When the 
crankshaft was rotated by hand, crankshaft, camshaft, and valve train continuity was 
confirmed.  Thumb compression was attained on all six cylinders.  The spark plugs were 
removed and inspected.  Their electrodes were intact and light gray in color.  When the 
crankshaft was rotated by hand, the right magneto produced a spark at all leads.  The left 
magneto was removed and rotated by hand.  It produced spark at all six towers.
During the examination, fuel was found in the fuel lines, fuel manifold, and the engine driven 
fuel pump.
MEDICAL INFORMATION
Toxicological testing was performed on the pilot by Memorial Medical Center, Johnstown, 
Page 4 of 6NYC01FA001
Pennsylvania.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to a representative from the owner's insurance company on October 
6, 2000.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
40
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/29/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
692 hours (Total, all aircraft), 71 hours (Total, this make and model), 663 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 31 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N3039Y
Model/Series:
PA-32-300 PA-32-300
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32-7940099
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/05/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
222 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2432 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540
Registered Owner:
DAYTON PILOTS CLUB
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
DAYTON PILOTS CLUB
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC01FA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LBE, 1185 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1145 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
355°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 3000 ft agl
Visibility
15 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
PARKERSBURG, WV (PKB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 (7SP)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1100 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
SEVEN SPRINGS AIRPORT (7SP)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2907 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
28
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3045 ft / 42 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal, 2 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 3 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     J GRETZ
Adopted Date:
05/18/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
JEFFREY   HALLIDAY; ALLEGHENY, PA
DAVID   MOORE; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
ROBERT   MARTELLOTTI; VERO BEACH, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC01FA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
