Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sommerville, TN
Accident Number:
ERA15FA066
Date & Time:
12/01/2014, 1930 CST 
Registration:
N8607W
Aircraft:
PIPER PA28
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
VFR encounter with IMC
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to a family member, the noninstrument-rated private pilot was planning to refuel 
the airplane on the evening of the accident. After purchasing fuel, he subsequently departed in 
night instrument meteorological conditions, which included low clouds and mist. A witness 
heard the airplane flying overhead and then sounds associated with increased engine power, 
followed by a loud crash. The airplane impacted a heavily wooded area about 0.75 mile from 
the departure airport and was destroyed by impact forces and a postcrash fire. Examination of 
the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation. Dark night instrument meteorological conditions can lead to spatial disorientation, 
particularly for a noninstrument-rated pilot. In addition, the wreckage distribution and the 
witness observation of increasing engine noise and the wreckage are consistent with the pilot 
losing control of the airplane due to spatial disorientation.
The pilot's toxicology results identified ethanol at 0.109% in muscle tissue and 0.039% in brain 
tissue. Although some of the ethanol may have been produced postmortem, it is likely that 
some was ingested before the accident. In addition, chlordiazepoxide (a prescription 
medication for the treatment of anxiety) and its metabolite, nordiazepam, were detected in the 
liver. It is likely the combined effects of chlordiazepoxide and ethanol significantly impaired 
the pilot's executive functioning, judgment, and decision-making, leading to his decision to fly 
in weather that he was unprepared to manage.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The noninstrument-rated pilot's improper decision to attempt visual flight in instrument 
meteorological conditions, which resulted in an in-flight loss of airplane control due to spatial 
Page 2 of 9ERA15FA066
disorientation. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's impaired decision-making due to 
the effects of ethanol and chlordiazepoxide.
Findings
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Spatial disorientation - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Alcohol - Pilot (Factor)
Prescription medication - Pilot (Factor)
Environmental issues
Clouds - Effect on operation (Cause)
Drizzle/mist - Effect on operation (Cause)
Page 3 of 9ERA15FA066
Factual Information
History of Flight
Takeoff
VFR encounter with IMC (Defining event)
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On December 1, 2014, at 1930 central standard time, a privately owned and operated Piper PA-
28-235, N8607W, collided with terrain after takeoff from Fayette County Airport (FYE), 
Somerville, Tennessee. The private pilot was fatally injured, and the airplane was destroyed. 
Night instrument meteorological conditions prevailed around the time of the accident and no 
flight plan was filed. The personal flight departed FYE about 1915, and was conducted under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the wife of the pilot, she last saw the airplane in their hangar on the night of the 
accident. She believed that her husband was going to taxi over to the fuel pumps to refuel the 
airplane for a trip he was planning. When he did not come home that evening, she contacted 
the local authorities to report that her husband was missing. The local sheriff's department 
searched the airport and did not locate the airplane. The Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) was contacted by the local sheriff's department and an Alert Notice (ALNOT) was issued.
A witness stated that, on the night of the accident, it was dark and misting. He heard an 
airplane flying overhead, and then heard the engine "rev up" before hearing a loud crash. The 
witness said that although he heard a crash, he was not sure what caused the sound and did not 
report it to the authorities. On the following day, after hearing about a missing airplane, he 
contacted the authorities and directed them in the direction of the sound he heard. A search 
ensued and the airplane was located 3/4 mile from FYE, at 0930.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
53, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/27/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 505 hours (Total, all aircraft), 505 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 4 of 9ERA15FA066
The pilot, age 53, held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating. He 
did not possess an instrument rating. The pilot was issued an FAA third-class medical 
certificate on March 27, 2014, with a limitation, "Must wear corrective lenses and possess 
glasses for near vision." At that time the pilot reported no medical problems or use of 
medications. In addition, he listed a total flight time of 505 hours. The pilot's logbook was not 
retrieved and the status of his last flight review was not determined.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N8607W
Model/Series:
PA28 235
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1963
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-10122
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/01/2013, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
2958 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
0-540 SERIES
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The airplane was manufactured in 1963 by Piper Aircraft, as a model PA-28-235, and was 
designated serial number 28-10122. It was powered by a 250-horsepower Lycoming O-540 
series engine, and equipped with a two-bladed, metal, fixed pitch McCauley PFA8069 
propeller. The last annual inspection of the airframe and engine occurred on October 1, 2013, 
at a tachometer time of 2,557.7 hours. A review of FYE fueling records revealed that the pilot 
purchased 39 gallons of 100 Low-Lead aviation gasoline at 1907, on the evening of the 
accident.
Page 5 of 9ERA15FA066
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OLV, 436 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
25 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1850 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
200째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown 
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 400 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
20째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.42 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
1째C / 1째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Mist; Light - Drizzle
Departure Point: 
Sommerville, TN (FYE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1915 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
The most recent weather observation at FYE was recorded about 4 hours after the accident; 
however, a weather observation at the Olive Branch Airport (OLV), approximately 24 nautical 
miles from FYE, at 1850 reported the following weather conditions: wind from 020 degrees at 
9 knots, visibility 4 statute miles with mist, cloud conditions were overcast at 400 feet above 
ground level (agl), temperature 1 degree Celsius, dew point 1 degree Celsius, and altimeter 
setting 30.42 inches of mercury.
Airport Information
Airport:
Fayette County Airport (FYE)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
436 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 6 of 9ERA15FA066
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
35.120000, -89.240000
The airplane crashed in a heavily wooded area adjacent to FYE, and the debris path was on a 
160-degree magnetic heading and was approximately 100 feet in length. Throughout the debris 
path there were several freshly-cut tree limbs. A postimpact fire consumed most of the 
airplane. The propeller was separated from the engine, but was found in close proximity to the 
main wreckage.
Examination of the fuselage revealed the forward cabin area was separated from the aft section 
at the main spar carry through. The forward cabin section was completely destroyed by
fire. The instrument panel and all instruments were destroyed by ground impact and fire. All 
circuit breakers and switches were destroyed. The firewall was separated and the engine was 
partially separated from the firewall. The nose gear was attached at the engine mount and the 
tire assembly was separated from the strut tube. Flight control cables were located within the 
wreckage and displayed overload failure signatures.
The rudder bar was in place and was impact and fire damaged. The T-Bar had the aileron and 
stabilator cables attached. Rudder and stabilator control continuity was verified. The control 
wheels and shafts were destroyed by fire. The stabilator and rudder trim position indicators 
were destroyed. The flap lever was noted to be in the 10-degree position. Trim cable continuity 
was established to the forward cabin area. The engine power and carburetor heat levers were 
destroyed by ground impact and fire. The fuel control valve was impact and fire damaged. The 
fuel tank selector position could not be determined due to valve damage.
Examination of the left wing revealed it was separated and fragmented. The flap and aileron 
were destroyed by fire. The main fuel tank and the tip tank were breached and destroyed by 
fire. The fuel caps were found in the debris field adjacent to the main wreckage. The left main 
landing gear was impact and fire damaged. The stall warning vane switch was separated, lying 
in the debris field, and was free to move up and down. The pitot mast was not located and all 
pitot/static lines were impact and fire damaged. Aileron control cable continuity was 
established through the frayed cable breaks to the fuselage. The flap actuating rod was 
separated from the attachment points.
Examination of the right wing revealed it was destroyed by fire. The flap and aileron were 
separated and fire damaged. The main landing gear was destroyed by fire. Both fuel tanks were 
breached and destroyed fire.
Examination of the left and right stabilator halves revealed they were destroyed by ground fire. 
The stabilator trim tab was attached to a portion of the stabilator fragments. Control cable 
continuity was established forward to the control "T-Bar". A portion of the vertical fin leading 
Page 7 of 9ERA15FA066
edge section with a portion of the rudder attached was in a tree at the initial impact point.
No preimpact airframe anomalies were noted during the examination.
Examination of the engine revealed that it remained partially attached to the firewall by the 
control cables and was laying forward and right side low. The carburetor, left magneto, vacuum 
pump, alternator, and part of the starter were impact separated from the engine. The exhaust 
and induction tubes were impact damaged. The engine was rotated by turning a tool inserted in 
the vacuum pump drive pad. Continuity of the crankshaft to the rear gears and to the valve 
train was observed. Compression and suction were observed from all six cylinders. The No. 3 
intake tube was impact separated and the intake port was packed full of dirt. The Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5 
and 6 top spark plugs were removed and displayed normal signatures when compared to the 
Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug chart. The No. 1 top and Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 bottom spark 
plugs were not removed. The ignition harness was destroyed. The left magneto was impact 
damaged and sparked at all ignition towers when rotated. The right magneto was rotated and 
sparked at all ignition towers when rotated.
Examination of the propeller revealed it was separated from the crankshaft and located about 8 
feet from the engine. Pieces of wood from impact damaged trees with angular cuts and paint 
transfers consistent with propeller strikes were observed along the path. Both propeller blades 
displayed chordwise scoring and one blade was bent forward.
The carburetor was fractured across the throttle bore and separated from the engine. The 
Throttle, mixture and carburetor heat controls were separated and their preimpact positions 
could not be determined. The fuel hose was separated from the carburetor fuel inlet screen 
assembly and the screen was open to the elements. The carburetor was partially disassembled 
and no damage to the internal components was noted. The engine driven fuel pump remained 
attached to the engine. The pump was removed and produced air when operated by hand. No 
preimpact engine anomalies were noted during the examination.
Medical And Pathological Information
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Office of the Medical Examiner, West Tennessee 
Regional Forensic Center, Memphis, Tennessee.
Toxicology testing performed by the FAA's Bioaeronautical Research Laboratory identified 
ethanol at 0.109 gm% in muscle and 0.039 gm% in brain. In addition, chlordiazepoxide and its 
metabolite, nordiazepam, were detected in liver (0.203 ug/g).
Ethanol is a social drug that acts as a central nervous system depressant. After ingestion, at low 
doses, it impairs judgment, psychomotor functioning, and vigilance; at higher doses alcohol 
can cause coma and death. Federal Aviation Regulations, Section 91.17 (a) prohibits any person 
from acting or attempting to act as a crewmember of a civil aircraft while having 0.040 gm/dL 
Page 8 of 9ERA15FA066
(gm%) or more alcohol in the blood. Ethanol may also be produced by microbial action in post 
mortem tissues.
Chlordiazepoxide is a long acting benzodiazepine indicated for the treatment of anxiety 
disorders, the short-term relief of symptoms of anxiety, withdrawal symptoms of acute 
alcoholism, and preoperative apprehension. Generally, treatment for more than 4 months is 
not recommended. It carries the following warning, "Chlordiazepoxide may impair the mental 
and/or physical abilities required for the performance of potentially hazardous tasks such as 
driving a vehicle or operating machinery." In addition, "The concomitant use of alcohol or 
other central nervous system depressants may have an additive effect. PATIENTS SHOULD BE 
WARNED ACCORDINGLY." Chlordiazepoxide is a Schedule IV controlled substance, 
commonly marketed with the name Librium. Nordiazepam is one its psychoactive metabolites.
Additional Information
FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 60-4A, "Pilot's Spatial Disorientation," states, in part: "The 
attitude of an aircraft is generally determined by reference to the natural horizon or other 
visual references with the surface. If neither horizon nor surface references exist, the attitude of 
an aircraft must be determined by artificial means from the flight instruments. Sight, 
supported by other senses, allows the pilot to maintain orientation. However, during periods of 
low visibility, the supporting senses sometimes conflict with what is seen. When this happens, 
a pilot is particularly vulnerable to disorientation. The degree of disorientation may vary 
considerably with individual pilots. Spatial disorientation to a pilot means simply the inability 
to tell which way is "up." The AC notes that a disoriented pilot may place an aircraft in a 
dangerous attitude. The AC recommends that pilots obtain training and maintain proficiency 
in aircraft control by reference to instruments and to "not attempt visual flight rules flight 
when there is a possibility of getting trapped in deteriorating weather."
False visual reference illusions may cause you to orient your aircraft in relation to a false 
horizon. These illusions are caused by flying over a banked cloud, night flying over featureless 
terrain with ground lights that are indistinguishable from a dark sky with stars or night flying 
over a featureless terrain with a clearly defined pattern of ground lights and a dark starless sky.
Page 9 of 9
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eric Alleyne
Adopted Date:
12/15/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Warren Travis; FAA/FSDO; Memphis, TN
Mike Childers; Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Ronald Maynard; Piper Aircraft Inc.; Vero Beach, FL
Publish Date:
12/15/2016
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90444
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
