Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Stockton, CA
Accident Number:
LAX07LA119
Date & Time:
04/01/2007, 1100 PDT 
Registration:
N3424Q
Aircraft:
Cessna 320E
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
While exiting the runway after landing, the right main landing gear collapsed, and the right 
wing struck the runway.  The pilot reported that this was the first flight after an annual 
inspection in which the landing gear had been rigged.  In addition, he had the failed 
components sent to a metallurgical laboratory.  The owner submitted these findings to the 
Safety Board.  The inspection report indicated that the right main landing gear had been rigged 
so that the gear tension terminated prematurely.  This prevented the downlock link from 
reaching its full over center, locked position.  This caused the side loads on the landing gear to 
be transmitted through other landing gear linkage components, instead of through the 
downlock link.  The other components were not designed to carry those loads, and 
consequently failed in overload, resulting in the collapse of the landing gear while taxiing off 
the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The landing gear collapsed during taxi as a result of incorrect rigging of the landing gear by 
other maintenance personnel that prevented the landing gear downlock from functioning as 
designed.
Findings
Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING
Findings
1. (C) LANDING GEAR,GEAR LOCKING MECHANISM - IMPROPERLY SERVICED
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,ADJUSTMENT - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
Page 2 of 5LAX07LA119
Factual Information
On April 1, 2007, at 1100 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 320E, N3424Q, collapsed the right 
main landing gear while exiting runway 29L at Stockton Metropolitan Airport (SCK), Stockton, 
California. The pilot/owner operated the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 as a 
personal flight. The airplane sustained substantial damage. The pilot, the sole occupant, was 
not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area flight that departed 
SCK about 1000. No flight plan had been filed.
According to the pilot, this was the first flight after an annual inspection. He had flown to 
Calaveras County-Maury Rasmussen Field Airport (CPU), San Andreas California, refueled, 
and then flew back to SCK. The pilot noted no mechanical problems with the airplane during 
the flight until he reached SCK. He stated that the landing and landing rollout were normal. 
While slowing down to exit the high speed taxiway, he engaged the left rudder to turn to the 
left, and the right main landing gear collapsed.  The right wing struck the runway, and right 
propeller and right horizontal stabilizer were also damaged. The pilot reported that he exited 
onto the taxiway at 20 miles per hour (mph).  He further reported that during the annual 
inspection the landing gear had been rerigged.
Reported winds at the time of the accident were variable at 3 knots.
TEST AND RESEARCH
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the right main landing gear 
bellcrank (part number 0841225-10) strut attachment bolt (AN4-25A) sheared.  This placed an 
increased load on the remaining main strut attachment clevis ears, which caused the ears to 
fail and the down lock link assembly to collapse.  The FAA inspector stated that his inspection 
was not able to ascertain whether or not the landing gear had been rigged improperly.
The pilot had the landing gear independently inspected. According to the inspection report, the 
right side main landing gear fork bolt was deformed in an outward direction at the fork-to-bolt 
junction.  The right main landing gear down indicator switch had been rigged to a point where 
it made contact at the "earliest possible moment during landing gear extension."  The right 
main landing gear fork bolt had been adjusted to what appeared to be its full outboard limit.  
The right main landing gear outboard push pull tube rod ends had been adjusted to their 
shortest possible length.  The right landing gear lock link end fitting and the right main landing 
gear bellcrank were sent to a metallurgical laboratory that reported that the components had 
failed in overload.  
The aircraft logbook entry indicated that the annual inspection had been completed and 
returned to service in an airworthy condition on April 1, 2007.  The entry stated in part that the 
landing gear had been rigged in accordance with Cessna's service manual.
Page 3 of 5LAX07LA119
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/01/2006
Flight Time:
4046 hours (Total, all aircraft), 23 hours (Total, this make and model), 2959 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N3424Q
Model/Series:
320E 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0024
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/2007, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
0.9 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4128.4 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-B
Registered Owner:
Pechan Family Trust
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
Pechan Family Trust
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5LAX07LA119
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SCK, 33 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1055 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.95 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
San Andreas, CA (CPU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Stockton, CA (SCK)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1045 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
STOCKTON METROPOLITAN (SCK)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
29L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.883333, -121.241667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tealeye C Cornejo
Adopted Date:
06/30/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Timothy L Jarrard; Federal Aviation Administration; Oakland, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5LAX07LA119
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
