Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Oakland, CA
Accident Number:
LAX07LA136
Date & Time:
04/01/2007, 1500 PDT 
Registration:
N81PC
Aircraft:
Cessna T210N
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
While attempting to start the airplane 2 days after an annual inspection, the landing gear 
warning horn sounded upon activation of the master switch.  The pilot checked the landing 
gear and found it in the down and locked position with the squat switches depressed.  He also 
noted that with both of the avionics master switches in the ON position, the landing gear 
warning horn stopped, the instrument panel lights activated, and the landing gear down and 
locked green light illuminated.  He made the return flight home and the following day flew the 
airplane, with the landing gear in the extended position, to an avionics shop.  During the 
inspection, a shorted terminal in the breaker box was found and repaired.  During a return 
flight to the pilot's home base the landing gear system functioned normally.  Five days later, the 
pilot attempted to start the engine.  He realized the battery was dead and got a jump start.  The 
avionics then failed during the takeoff initial climb.  He recycled the avionics master, but power 
to the avionics was not returned.  The pilot returned and landed without problems.  The battery 
was removed, recharged, and then replaced.  The pilot noted that everything functioned 
properly and he decided to continue his flight. During the takeoff roll, the nose landing gear 
collapsed and the airplane slid down the runway, with the left main landing gear eventually 
collapsing.  During an inspection of the aircraft, an FAA inspector noted structural damage to 
the airframe.  Maintenance personnel inspected the landing gear and electrical system and 
found no discrepancies.  They replaced a weak battery and cycled the landing gear several 
times.  They were not able to reproduce the discrepancy encountered by the pilot during the 
accident takeoff roll.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Collapse of the landing gear for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 6LAX07LA136
Findings
Occurrence #1: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
Page 3 of 6LAX07LA136
Factual Information
On April 1, 2007, about 1500 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna T210N, N81PC, experienced a 
collapsed nose landing gear during the takeoff roll from runway 33 at Metropolitan Oakland 
International Airport (OAK), Oakland, California.  The pilot/owner operated the airplane 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight.  The 
airplane sustained substantial damage after one of the wings struck the runway.  The pilot and 
one passenger were not injured.  Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight 
that was originating at the time of the accident on a local area flight; no flight plan had been 
filed.
In the pilot's written report, he stated that on March 22, 2007, an annual inspection had been 
completed.  He flew the airplane to Bryce Canyon, Utah, the following day.  Two days later he 
attempted to start the airplane for the return flight to OAK.  Upon activation of the master 
switch, the gear horn sounded.  He stated that a gear check revealed that the landing gear was 
"down and locked, squat switches depressed."  He checked the circuit breakers and radio 
switches with the master switch ON, and found that having both avionics master switches in 
the ON position stopped the gear horn audio and activated "all instruments as well as [the] 
down and locked green light."  The pilot made the return flight to OAK.
On March 26, 2007, he flew the airplane to Sacramento, with the landing gear in the down 
position.  Airborne Electronic found a shorted terminal in the breaker box, repaired it, and 
returned it to service.  The pilot stated that the return flight to OAK was normal, and the 
landing gear functioned properly.  
On the day of the accident, the pilot attempted to start the engine, however, the battery was 
dead, and he had to get a jump start.  After he started the engine, he departed runway 33.  On 
the takeoff climb out the electronics failed and recycling the master did not return power.  He 
returned to land without any problems.  He removed the battery and took it to Pacific States 
Aviation to have it recharged.  About 4 hours later, he reinstalled the battery and noted no 
additional problems.  The pilot stated that he taxied out, conducted the pre-takeoff checklist 
and was on the takeoff roll from runway 33 when the nose landing gear and eventually the left 
main landing gear retracted.  He reduced the throttle, and the airplane slid about 300 feet 
down the runway.    
The incident was upgraded to an accident on April 24, 2007, after a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector examined the airplane and found structural 
damage to the airframe. 
According to maintenance personnel from Beegles Aircraft Service, Inc., Greeley, Colorado, a 
thorough check of the landing gear and electrical system were conducted, with no 
discrepancies found.  They noted a weak battery, replaced it, and then cycled the landing gear 
several times. They were not able to reproduce the discrepancy that the pilot had encountered 
on the accident takeoff roll.
Page 4 of 6LAX07LA136
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/01/2007
Flight Time:
6500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5000 hours (Total, this make and model), 6400 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N81PC
Model/Series:
T210N 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
21063620
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2007, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2531 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-R
Registered Owner:
John H. Austin
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
John H. Austin
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX07LA136
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OAK, 9 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 25000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
15°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Oakland, CA (OAK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (OAK)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1500 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
METROPOLITAN OAKLAND INTL 
(OAK)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
9 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
33
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3372 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.724444, -122.223333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tealeye C Cornejo
Adopted Date:
03/31/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Glenn Gathright; Federal Aviation Administration; Oakland, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX07LA136
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
