Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sinton, TX
Accident Number:
DFW07LA090
Date & Time:
04/02/2007, 0830 CDT 
Registration:
N606S
Aircraft:
Schilleci RV-6
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The 18,730-hour airline transport rated pilot lost control of the homebuilt airplane while 
executing a GPS instrument approach to Runway 14 at a non-towered airport.  The airport has 
two instrument approaches to Runway 14; a VOR/DME and a GPS.  The published weather 
minimums for the GPS approach to Runway 14 was 500-foot ceiling and one mile visibility.  
One witness stated that the pilot made "two passes" before crashing at the runway's east end, 
and also stated that heavy fog prevailed at the time of the accident.  Another witness said that 
they heard two "loud pops," came outside and saw smoke and a small fire, but no airplane.  
This witness also confirmed that it was foggy at the time.  A post-impact fire consumed most of 
the airframe.  A detailed examination of the airplane failed to reveal any anomalies with the 
airframe, structure, or systems.  The engine was examined, and no mechanical anomalies were 
found.  The examination of the propeller revealed one blade was slightly bent "forward"; the 
other blade did not have the appearance of being bent.   Both blades had leading edge 
polishing.  The propeller signatures are consistent with a propeller absorbing rotational energy 
with power into soft soil or sand.  The flap actuator was found in the extended position, 
corresponding to a flaps "up" position.  The automated weather station, located approximately 
17-miles south of the accident site, reported at 0851; a 5-mile visibility in mist, a scattered sky 
at 10,000 feet and winds from 140 degrees at 6 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's loss of control while performing an instrument approach.  A contributing factor was 
the prevailing fog.
Page 2 of 7DFW07LA090
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CIRCLING (IFR)
Findings
1. WEATHER CONDITION - BELOW APPROACH/LANDING MINIMUMS
2. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - FOG
3. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7DFW07LA090
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 2, 2007, about 0830 central daylight time, a single-engine Schilleci RV-6 airplane, 
N606S, was destroyed upon impact with terrain following a loss of control while executing an 
instrument approach to the Alfred C "Bubba" Thomas Airport (T69), near Sinton, Texas. The 
airline transport pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was fatally injured.  The homebuilt 
airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual.  An instrument flight rules 
(IFR) flight plan was filed for the 116-nautical mile cross-country flight that originated from the 
Kestrel Airpark (1T7), at 0753.  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
personal flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
A Texas Department of Public Safety (DPS) officer, who was in the area approximately 20 
minutes prior to the crash, reported that heavy fog prevailed in the area at the time of the 
accident.  
Another witness, whose residence is near the airport, reported that she heard two "loud pops" 
and came outside; and saw smoke and a small fire, but did not see the airplane.  Additionally, 
she reported that the weather was foggy. 
According to an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector, who responded to the scene, 
witnesses reported that the airplane circled [the airport] a couple of times; and was in-and-out 
of the clouds.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate for airplane multi-engine land, and a 
commercial certificate for single and multi-engine land and sea.  His last first class Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) medical certificate was issued on March 24, 2007.  At the time 
of his last medical examination, the pilot reported a total of 18,730 flight hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Vans RV-6 airplane is an all-metal, single-engine, low-wing airplane, which the builder 
assembles from a kit.  The tailwheel-equipped airplane was configured with 2 side-by-side 
seats.
The airplane was powered by a single Lycoming O-360-A1A reciprocating engine, rated at 180-
horsepower.  The engine was equipped with a Sensenich 2-blade fixed pitch propeller. The 
airplane was equipped for instrument flight, including a two axis auto-pilot system.
The maintenance records for the airplane were not located during the course of the 
investigation.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
At 0851, the automated weather station at KCRP, located approximately 17 nautical miles 
south of the accident site, reported winds from 140 degrees at 6 knots, an altimeter setting of 
29.99 inches of Mercury, temperature 73 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 71 degrees Fahrenheit, 
5 miles visibility in mist and a scattered sky at 10,000 feet.
COMMUNICATIONS
A review of the voice transcript, between N606S and Corpus Christi Airport Traffic Control 
Page 4 of 7DFW07LA090
Tower (ATCT) had N606S cleared for the GPS Runway 14 approach.  No problems were 
reported to the controllers and no emergency or distressed calls were received from the pilot 
prior to the accident.
AERODROME INFORMATION
The Alfred C "Bubba" Thomas Airport (T69) is a public use airport, located near Sinton, Texas.  
The airport does not have a control tower, but has a local area common traffic advisory 
frequency (CTAF).  T69 features two runways.  Runway 14-32 is a 4,050-foot long and 50-foot 
wide asphalt runway.  Runway 03-21 is a 2,800-foot long and 50-foot wide grass runway.  The 
field elevation is 48 feet mean sea level (msl).  The airport has four instrument approaches, a 
VOR/DME and a GPS to Runway 14; and a VOR/DME and a GPS to Runway 32.  The 
published weather minimums for the GPS Runway 14 are a 500-foot ceiling and one-mile 
visibility.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The FAA Inspector examined the wreckage at the accident site.  The inspector reported that all 
major components of the airplane were accounted for at the scene of the accident.  A post-
impact fire consumed much of the cabin area and the remaining wreckage consisted mainly of 
the empennage and wings.  
The initial impact point was a ground scar that exhibited red paint transfer on the taxiway 
consistent with the paint scheme of the airplane.  The ground scar started on the parallel 
taxiway at approximately a 45-degree angle between the runway heading and path to the main 
wreckage.  Pieces of the red, left-wing navigation light, lens was found in the ground scar near 
the initial impact point.  Further along the ground scar were the spinner and propeller; the 
canopy laid just to the left of the ground scar and prior to the main wreckage.  The wreckage 
path continued for a short distance to the main wreckage, which came to rest facing about 90-
degrees from the initial impact point.  The wreckage and impact marks were consistent with 
the airplane being in a steep, left bank or turn upon contact with the terrain.
The wreckage of the airplane was recovered to Air Salvage of Dallas (ASOD) for further 
examination.
On June 27, 2007, at ASOD, engine serial number L-36193-36A was examined under the 
supervision of the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), along with a technical representative 
from the engine manufacturer.
The propeller remained bolted to the propeller hub, but had separated from the engine near 
the crankshaft flange, with a 45-degree shear lip fracture.  An adapter was connected to the 
vacuum pump accessory drive pad and the engine was rotated.  Thumb compression and 
suction were obtained.  Valve train continuity was observed through the accessory gears.  The 
oil suction screen was removed and was observed free of any contaminants.  All of the engine 
accessories were fire destroyed beyond the ability of to test.  The carburetor was badly 
deformed and burned.  The fuel inlet screen was destroyed by fire.  The engine was inverted 
and the bottom sparkplugs were removed.  The bottom sparkplugs were consistent with 
normal operation and in good condition when compared with the Champion Sparkplug Wear 
Guide.  
The examination of the engine did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical anomalies that would 
have prevented normal engine operation.
Page 5 of 7DFW07LA090
The examination of the propeller revealed one blade was slightly bent "forward"; the other 
blade did not have the appearance of being bent.   Both blades had leading edge polishing.  
Flight control continuity was established, and the flap actuator was found in the extended 
position, corresponding to a flaps "up" position.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Autopsies were performed by the Nueces County Medical Examiner, Corpus Christi, Texas.
Toxicological Testing was conducted by, the FAA Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory. 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
18730 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Schilleci
Registration:
N606S
Model/Series:
RV-6 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
60213
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
O-360
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7DFW07LA090
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KCRP
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0851 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 10000 ft agl
Visibility
5 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
140°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Fog
Departure Point: 
Kestrel Airpark, TX (1T7)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
SINTON, TX (T69)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0753 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
SAN PATRICIO COUNTY (T69)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
48 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
14
IFR Approach:
Circling; Global Positioning 
System; VOR/DME
Runway Length/Width:
4323 ft / 55 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Craig R Hatch
Adopted Date:
10/31/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Boyd Kempf; FAA, FSDO; San Antonio, TX
John Butler; Lycoming Aircraft Engines; Arlington, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7DFW07LA090
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
