During cruise flight the engine oil pressure dropped to zero and the engine began to vibrate.  
The pilot elected to shut-down the engine and perform a forced landing to a near by soy bean 
field.  During the landing the left main and nose gear collapsed when they came into contact 
with the soft terrain.  Post-accident investigation revealed that the oil filter base-gasket had 
become extruded from its seat, allowing engine oil to leak out of the engine.  Textron Lycoming 
Engines, Williamsport, Pennsylvania, issued a Mandatory Service Bulletin, number 543A, the 
day prior to the accident.  The service bulletin stated, "Textron Lycoming has received reports 
indicating that operation at high oil temperatures can cause the converter plate gasket on the 
oil filter base to become extruded from its seat, allowing oil to leak out between the plate and 
the accessory housing."  The service bulletin called for the removal and replacement of the 
converter plate gasket at every 50-hour oil change. 
the unsuitable terrain for landing encountered by the pilot and the failure of the oil filter 
converter plate gasket. Factors to the accident were the total loss of oil and the soft terrain 
condition. 
 On September 1, 2000, at 1110 central daylight time, a Piper PA-32R-300, N8304C, operated 
by Safewing Aviation Company, Kansas City, Missouri, sustained substantial damage during 
landing following a loss of engine power and subsequent forced landing near Mason City, Iowa.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The cargo flight was 
operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 135 and was on an instrument flight rules (IFR) 
flight plan.  The pilot, the sole occupant, reported no injuries.  The flight departed Algona 
Municipal Airport, Algona, Iowa, at 1050.
According to the pilot's written statement, "I departed AXA [Algona Municipal Airport] at 
10:50 and was cruising at 4000 ft. [feet] 15 miles west of MCW [Mason City Municipal Airport] 
when the oil pressure dropped below 0 [zero].  The engine started vibrating so I shut it down 
and proceeded to set myself up for an emergency landing."  The pilot reported, "I turned into 
the wind and aligned myself with a soy bean field.  On impact the left main gear collapsed, also 
the nose gear, the left wing was bent backward a few inches.  The soy bean field was muddy 
since it had been raining earlier."
Post-accident investigation revealed that the oil filter base-gasket had become extruded from 
its seat, allowing engine oil to leak out of the engine.
Textron Lycoming Engines, Williamsport, Pennsylvania, issued a Mandatory Service Bulletin, 
number 543A, on August 30, 2000.  The service bulletin stated, "Textron Lycoming has 
received reports indicating that operation at high oil temperatures can cause the converter 
plate gasket on the oil filter base to become extruded from its seat, allowing oil to leak out 
between the plate and the accessory housing."  The service bulletin called for the removal and 
replacement of the converter plate gasket at every 50-hour oil change.
