The airplane sustained substantial damage during a wheels up landing.  The pilot stated, "On 
the downwind leg gear failed to come down during prelanding checklist.  Attempted to recycle 
the gear down lever, with same results."  A FAA on-scene examination revealed that the 
landing gear powerpack's electric motor was defective.   The examination further revealed that 
during the last annual, a kit to delete the automatic extension features of the landing gear 
system was incorrectly installed.  As installed, the kit would not allow an emergency extension 
of the landing gear.  A FAA inspector stated, "Instructions allowed that once the kit was 
installed to perform a landing gear retract check to ensure that the operations of the landing 
gear was satisfactory.  [The airplane operator] failed to perform this portion of the operation." 
the improper servicing of the emergency extension assembly and the gear extension not 
verified by company maintenance personnel.  Factors were the failure of the hydraulic system's 
motor, normal and emergency gear extension not available to the pilot, and the wheels up 
landing performed by the pilot. 
 On September 1, 2000, at 1830 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA28R-200, N1334T, piloted by 
a private pilot, sustained substantial damage during a wheels up landing on runway 18 (5,500 
feet X 100 feet, dry/asphalt) at Clark County Airport (JVY) near Sellersburg, Indiana.  The 
personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the time of the accident.  No flight plan was on file.  The pilot was uninjured.  The local flight 
departed from JVY at 1600.
The pilot stated, "On the downwind leg gear failed to come down during prelanding checklist.  
Attempted to recycle the gear down lever, with same results."  He said, "[An employee] of [the 
airplane operator] contacted me via UNICOM and we discussed options.  After moving to 
another common freq. (122.95), [the employee] suggested other alternatives such as slow flight 
with flaps extended to full, wigging the A/C, pull the circuit breaker to see if the hydraulic 
pressure would bleed off and the gear come down on its own in addition to the emergency 
checklist alternatives.  This all occurred over a period of about 2 hours.  At the end of 
attempting these alternatives, it was decided to gear up land on runway 18.  Neither winds nor 
weather was a factor."
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors performed an on-scene examination of the 
airplane.  The examination revealed that the landing gear powerpack's electric motor was 
defective.   The examination further revealed that during the last annual, a kit to delete the 
automatic extension features of the landing gear system was incorrectly installed.  As installed, 
the kit would not allow an emergency extension of the landing gear.  A FAA inspector stated, 
"Instructions allowed that once the kit was installed to perform a landing gear retract check to 
ensure that the operations of the landing gear was satisfactory.  [The airplane operator] failed 
to perform this portion of the operation."
