About 20 minutes into the cross-country flight, the pilot observed several lightning strikes 
ahead of his flight path. He turned 180 degrees to return to his departure point, and after about 
5 minutes, he observed a storm developing in his flight path. He then decided to fly south 
toward the closest airport. Upon reaching the airport, he determined the winds to be light and 
variable out of the west. On final approach, just before touchdown on runway 23, 'wind started 
to buffet the aircraft.' Full aileron deflection was used to keep the right wing down after 
touchdown. The airplane then drifted off the runway and into the grass. As this was occurring, 
the pilot started to apply 'a little power' to gain more rudder control when 'a large gust of wind 
hit the aircraft causing the right wing to [go] completely over, striking the surface.'  
Subsequently, the airplane nosed over.  The airplane sustained substantial damage to the right 
wing spar, both wing struts, and the rudder.  The wind, 16 minutes after the accident, was from 
260 degrees at 16 knots with gusts to 26 knots. 
The pilot's failure to maintain control during landing. A factor was the wind gusts. 
 On September 1, 2000 at 1538 central daylight time, an Aeronca BL7-AC tail wheel equipped 
airplane, N83866, registered to and operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged following 
a loss of control while landing on Runway 23 at the Hot Springs Municipal Airport, Hot 
Springs, Arkansas.  The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 flight.  The cross-country flight had last departed Conway Field, Conway, 
Arkansas, at 1445.
The pilot reported on NTSB Form 6120.1/2, that he had departed Conway to continue on his 
planned cross-country flight.  He reported the visibility to be about 3-5 miles in "hazy" 
conditions.  About 20 minutes into the flight, he observed several lightning strikes ahead and 
to the north of his position.  He immediately turned 180 degrees to return to Conway, and after 
flying about 5 minutes, it appeared that a storm was developing to the north in his flight path 
toward Conway.  He then decided to fly south toward Hot Springs, which was the closest 
airport, to sit and wait out the weather.  Upon reaching Hot Springs, he made one pass over 
midfield to check the windsock.  The winds appeared to be light and variable out of the west, so 
he entered a downwind for Runway 23.
On final approach, just before touchdown, "wind started to buffet the aircraft."  The pilot had 
to utilize full aileron deflection to keep the right wing down after touchdown.  The airplane 
then started to drift off the runway and into the grass.  As this was occurring, the pilot started 
to apply "a little power" to gain more rudder control when "a large gust of wind hit the aircraft 
causing the right wing to [go] completely over, striking the surface."  Subsequently, the 
airplane nosed over and came to rest "upside down." 
Examination of the wreckage by an FAA inspector revealed damage to the right wing spar, both 
wing struts, and the rudder.
The windsock at Hot Springs was found to be serviceable.  The wind, reported by Hot Springs 
16 minutes after the accident, was from 260 degrees at 16 knots with gusts to 26 knots.
