The airplane was destroyed on impact with trees and terrain during an approach.  The pilot 
and one passenger were fatally injured.  The flight originated on an IFR clearance to VFR 
conditions on top.  The flight acknowledged radar termination but continued to squawk 0106.  
A witness heard a crash about 2210 and said the ceiling was low and overcast.  A front 
passenger stated she thought the pilot was performing an IFR approach and it was a normal 
approach. She said that she saw the runway lights.  She stated that she remembers hitting 
something and the pilot saying, "OH NO, OH NO."  She said that the pilot was using the emap 
GPS.  A rear seat passenger was interviewed.  He stated that during the flight from GRB to D25, 
the airplane was flying above clouds.  He said that he saw runway lights, heard a rumbling or 
growling sound, like "RRRRRahRRRRRahRRRRR."  He and another rear seat passenger both 
stated that the pilot said, "It's not working, it's not working."  He said that the sound occurred 
about 300 feet or about a minute prior to hitting.  The front passenger said that she was not 
aware of the pilot's conversation that the rear seat passengers heard.  The sky condition was 
400 feet overcast.  The airport's NDB and GPS approach landing minima weather section listed 
700 [feet ceiling]-1 [statute mile visibility] and 500-1 respectively.  A clearance was not issued 
to the flight to perform an approach.  The ADF's switch was found in the off position.  The fuel 
selector's sump valve, spring, and screen were found coated with a brown colored media.  
Control continuity was established to all flight surfaces. Control continuity was established to 
the engine.  A Garmin emap handheld GPS was found near the wreckage.  A handheld radio, 
marked, JD-200, was found near the wreckage.  A spray can, marked "HEET Starting Fluid", 
was found in the wreckage.  The FAA CAMI report stated CHLORPHENIRAMINE and 
ACETAMINOPHEN were detected.  The engine was test run and it produced full power.  A 
radio shop witness said that the airplane's installed radio and GPS were inoperative. 
the pilot not maintaining altitude/clearance from the trees during an approach on a dark, low 
overcast night, the pilot's improper use of an IFR procedure without clearance, and the pilot's 
improper in-flight decision to attempt an IFR approach without clearance.  Factors were the 
local weather being below published minimums, the trees, and the dark night. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 2000, at 2210 central daylight time, a Beech K35, N3076C, piloted by an 
instrument rated private pilot, was destroyed on impact with trees and terrain on approach to 
runway 32 at Manitowish Waters Airport (D25), near Manitowish Waters, Wisconsin.  The 
personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.  An IFR to VFR conditions on top clearance was requested 
for the flight.  The clearance was issued and was terminated.  Of the five people on board, the 
pilot and one passenger were fatally injured, two passengers sustained serious injuries, and one 
passenger sustained minor injuries.  The flight originated from Austin Straubel International 
Airport (GRB), near Green Bay, Wisconsin at 2035.
The Green Bay Air Traffic Control Tower's chronological summary of flight listed the following:
    [2028]-N3076C requested IFR clearance to VFR conditions on top northwest 
bound at 6500. N3076C was issued a clearance and told to maintain 3000.
    [2030]-N3076C read back the clearance and was issued taxi to  runway 6.
    [2035]-N3076C called ready for takeoff and was cleared for takeoff  to fly 
heading 360.
    [2037]-Tower controller asked N3076C his destination, replied  Manitowish 
Waters.  Controller issued clearance limit of  Clintonville and was instructed to 
proceed on course.
    [2038]-N3076C was instructed to contact departure control.
    [2041]-N3076C was issued climb to 10,000 and he replied he just  broke out at 
3000 and would climb to 3500. N3076C was questioned if he was canceling his IFR 
and the  reply is not readable.
    [2047]-Controller tried to terminate radar service but no reply.
    [2048]-N3076C acknowledged radar termination but continued to  squawk 
0106.
A witness stated:
At or near the time above [2210 to 2220] my wife [and] me  were in our bedroom with 
the windows open.  We heard a crash.   She asked me if I heard it and I say yes.  We heard no 
aircraft  motor noise at any time.  We are about 6-800 feet from the  center line of the 
approach path.  With the weather as it was  one wouldn't expect an airplane.  Cars hitting 
deer and other  noises are heard quite often so we weren't [concerned].  I did  look 
out at the road [and] woods and seen no fire so we  discounted the noise of the crash.
He further said that the ceiling was low and overcast at the time of the crash.
A relative of the pilot called Green Bay Automated Flight Service Station and reported that the 
flight had not landed at D25.
On September 2, 2000, at about 0723, a Vilas County Deputy was dispatched to locate an 
overdue airplane for the Green Bay Flight Service.  The deputy's report stated:
Dispatch advised that the airplane was due to land at the  Manitowish Waters 
Airport at 11:00 p. m., where they were not  contacted of a confirmed landing.  ... Upon my 
arrival at the  main entrance of the airport (approximately 08:20), Vilas  Dispatch 
advised that the Civil Air Patrol had found a believed  to be survivor (Josiah) from the missing 
plane, wandering in a  grass covered field area, just south of the paved runway to the 
airport.  ... I was directed to the area where Civil Air Patrol  (CAP) was attempting to 
receive a fixed telemetry signal from  the planes emergency transmitter.  We were joined a 
few minutes  later by some members of the Manitowish Waters Fire Department,  where 
we spread out and began a woods search in the area which  CAP directed the search to begin 
in.  The area of the search was  conducted in a heavily wooded area, that was located South 
East  of the main approach to the black-top runway.  With-in a few  minutes of the 
ground search, one of the Manitowish Waters Fire  Department personnel, yelled out that 
he had located the plane  crash site, and there was some survivors that were in need of  
medical assistance.
A passenger was seated in the right front seat and she was interviewed in a local hospital after 
the accident.  She stated that she thought the pilot was performing an IFR approach and that it 
was a normal approach.  She said that she saw the runway lights.  She stated that she 
remembers hitting something and the pilot saying, "OH NO, OH NO."  She said that the pilot 
was using the emap GPS.  She was asked if anything was wrong with the engine and she stated, 
"No." 
A rear seat passenger was interviewed.  He stated that during the flight from GRB to D25, the 
airplane was flying above clouds.  He said that he saw runway lights, heard a rumbling or 
growling sound, like "RRRRRahRRRRRahRRRRR."  He and another rear seat passenger both 
stated that the pilot said, "It's not working, it's not working."  He said that the sound occurred 
about 300 feet or about a minute prior to hitting.
The front passenger said that she was not aware of the pilot's conversation that the rear seat 
passengers heard.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was an instrument rated private pilot.  He held a Second Class Medical Certificate.  
The application for that medical certificate was dated March 2, 2000.  On that application, the 
pilot listed his total pilot time to date as 1,300 hours.  The pilot's flight review was conducted 
on February 15, 2000.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a Beech K35, serial number D-5741.  The airplane was found modified with 
Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) SA1698NM.  STC SA1698NM listed the specifications for 
the installation of a Lycoming IO-540-K1A5 engine and Hartzell propeller.  The airplane 
logbooks were reviewed.  The last recorded annual inspection was dated November 15, 1999.  
The entry for that annual listed the airplane's total time as 5,009 hours and its tachometer time 
as 1,620 hours.  The tachometer read 1,657.01 hours at the accident site.  The airframe logbook 
entry prior to the annual was dated October 15, 1998.  That entry stated, "NOTE!! 2 YR 
TRANSPONDER CHECK IS PAST DUE, SO TRANSPONDER IS NOT LEGAL TO USE EVEN 
FOR VFR. [Mechanics name and his certificate number]"
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 2217, the Lakeland/Noble F. Lee Memorial Field, near Minocqua, Wisconsin, weather was: 
Wind 040 degrees at 3 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition overcast 400 feet; 
temperature 14 degrees C; dew point 14 degrees C; altimeter 30.12 inches of mercury.
AIDS TO NAVIGATION
Two approaches were published for D25.  The approaches are NDB RWY 32 and GPS RWY 32.  
The NDB landing minima section for aircraft approach category A and B straight in approach 
to runway 32 listed a minimum decent altitude (MDA) of 2,300 feet Mean Sea Level (MSL) and 
one mile visibility.  This approach listed a 700 feet ceiling and one mile as its weather 
minimum.  The GPS landing minima section for aircraft approach category A and B straight in 
approach to runway 32 listed a MDA of 2,080 feet MSL and one mile visibility.  This approach 
listed a 500 feet ceiling and one mile visibility as its weather minimums.  A clearance was not 
issued to the flight to perform either of these approaches.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane was found in a wooded area approximately 1,475 feet south of runway 32's 
threshold.  (See appended sketch.)  The airplane came to rest at latitude 46 degrees 6.88 
minutes N and longitude 89 degrees 52.59 minutes W.  Trees were found uprooted and broken 
along a linear path that was about 280 feet long and its magnetic bearing was about 320 
degrees.  The trees along this path were about 60 feet tall.  The airplane's resting heading was 
162 degrees.
An on-scene investigation was conducted.  The forward section fuselage was found deformed.  
This section was crushed upward and rearward.  The cabin area was twisted towards the left. 
The cabin door was found detached from the fuselage.  The upper and right fuselage sections 
were found wrinkled inward in the area aft of the baggage door.  The engine was found 
detached from the fuselage.  The engine remained attached to its control cables.  The propeller 
remained attached to the engine.  One blade was bent rearward and exhibited leading edge 
nicks and chordwise scratches on its back.  The underside of the fuselage exhibited a dark oily 
media when wiped.  The right stabilizer was found with about a five-inch semicircular 
deformation on its leading edge near where the leading edge was found resting on a tree of 
about the same diameter.  The right ruddervator was found attached to its stabilizer.  The left 
stabilizer and its ruddervator were found attached together.  The left ruddervator's trim cables 
remained attached and the ruddervator was found resting on foliage near the empennage.  The 
left wing and aileron, outboard of the landing gear was detached from its inboard section of 
wing.  The left tip tank was detached from that outboard section.  The left flap was found 
attached to the inboard wing section.  The right wing's outboard section found attached and 
deformed rearward and upward.  The right wing's flap and aileron were found attached.  The 
right tip tank was found detached from its wing.  Fuel was found in the left and right auxiliary 
tanks and in the right tip tank.  The left tip tank, and the right and left main tanks were found 
compromised.  Both main landing gear were found in the down and locked position.  The nose 
landing gear was found separated and bent.  The fuel selector was found in the right hand tank 
position.  That fuel selector's sump valve, spring, and screen were found coated with a brown 
colored media.  (See appended photographs.)  The Automatic Direction Finder (ADF) was 
found with the frequency, 364 kilohertz, set.  The ADF's switch was found in the off position.  
The altimeter setting was found at 30.11 inches of mercury.  The airplane's storm scope was set 
to the 25-mile range.  The storm scope's switch was found in the off position.  Control 
continuity was established to all flight surfaces.  Control continuity was established to the 
engine.  The throttle, propeller, and mixture were found in their full forward position.  A 
thumb compression was found at all six cylinders.  The left magneto was found to produce 
ignition sparks.
A Garmin emap handheld GPS was found near the wreckage.  A handheld radio, marked, JD-
200, was found near the wreckage.
Instrument approach charts were found in the wreckage.  The recovered charts were reviewed 
and their covers were found with expired dates.
A spray can, marked "HEET Starting Fluid", was found in the wreckage.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Milwaukee County Medical Examiner performed an autopsy on the pilot on September 3, 
2000.
The FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute prepared a Final Forensic Toxicology Accident Report.  
The report stated:
0.651 (ug/ml, ug/g) CHLORPHENIRAMINE detected in Liver 
CHLORPHENIRAMINE detected in Urine CHLORPHENIRAMINE NOT detected 
in Blood PSEUDOPHEDRINE present in Liver PSEUDOPHEDRINE present in Blood 
PSEUDOPHEDRINE detected in Urine PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE present in Blood 
PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE present in Liver PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE detected 
in Urine DEXTRORPHAN detected in Urine NORDEXTRORPHAN detected in Urine 
DEXTROMETHORPHAN NOT detected in Blood DEXTRORPHAN NOT detected 
in Blood 19.301 (ug/ml, ug/g) ACETAMINOPHEN detected in Urine
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The airplane's engine was sent to Textron Lycoming for a test run.  The engine driven fuel 
pump, number two and five intake pipes, right magneto condenser cover, and both ignition 
harnesses were found damaged.  The engine driven fuel pump produced suction and pressure 
to the touch when the unit was rotated by hand.  Slave units were installed for the damaged 
parts.  A starter and ring gear support assembly, front plug for the crankshaft, oil drain plug, 
vacuum pump pad cover plate and propeller governor pad cover plate were installed for the 
run. The engine was test run.  The engine produced full rated power.  The engine was 
accelerated with throttle slams four times from idle to full throttle.  The engine reached full 
power within two seconds on all four of the throttle accelerations.  The engine was found to be 
able maintain an idle at 627 RPM.  (See appended photographs and Lycoming engine test run 
report.)
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The parties to the investigation included the FAA, Raytheon Aircraft Company, and Textron 
Lycoming.
The aircraft wreckage was released to a representative of the insurance company.
A D25 airport commissioner wrote a letter to the pilot.  The letter stated, "We would also like a 
copy of your aircraft [airworthiness] certificate since you have been observed spraying a 
[starting] fluid into your aircraft and this presents a safety problem at the airport."
A witness, who worked at a Fixed Base Operator (FBO) that repairs avionics, stated:
I talked with [the pilot] the day before his accident.  [The pilot]  came into [our] 
shop with his airplane and wanted a COM-11A & GPS- 100AVD fixed.  I told him the 
COM-11A was not repairable, and the  GPS-100AVD needed to be sent to the factory for 
repair.  I did get  in his airplane to test his GPS and verify it was inop.  [The pilot]  left 
the COM-11A with me but took his GPS-100AVD.  I tried to sell  him another GPS, but he 
declined.  To my knowledge [the pilot] left  our shop without a working Com or a working 
Nav, unless you count  his handheld, which he seemed very proud of!  ... My personal  
experience with [the pilot] is he fixed things only when absolutely  necessary."
The airplane's manual was reviewed.  Excerpts from its Section IV, Normal Procedures, stated:
PREFLIGHT INSPECTION ... 7. LEFT LANDING GEAR: ... d. Fuel Selector 
Valve Sump and Auxiliary Fuel Cell Interconnect  Line - DRAIN; Cover - SECURE
Excerpts from its Section VIII, Handling, [Service] & [Maintenance], SERVICING, stated:
FUEL DRAINS On the standard fuel system open the three snap-type fuel drains  
daily to purge any water from the system.  Each fuel cell drain is  located on the 
bottom of the wing just outboard of the fuselage.   The system low spot drain is at the 
bottom of the fuel selector  valve.  The drain is accessible through a door in the fuselage  
adjacent to the wing.  When optional auxiliary fuel system is  installed, also open the 
snap-type fuel drains on the auxiliary  tanks, and drain on the auxiliary cell interconnect line 
at the  selector valve.
FUEL STRAINERS ... The strainer at the bottom of the fuel selector valve should  
also be removed and cleaned with solvent every 100 hours.
A FBO at the Greater Rockford Airport (RFD) stated:
The owner did not perform preflight inspections before departure.   Two or three 
months ago one of our line service technicians reported  that one of the fuel caps on the 
aircraft was held on or at least  covered with duct tape.
The mechanic, who performed the airplane's last annual inspection, stated:
At the last annual 11-15-99, he had called me at least a month  before and said he 
had a bad oil leak and that his fuel pump was  inop. (later I found out from someone that [the 
pilot] had been  spraying either in the engine to start since he couldn't prime it  with 
the fuel pump inop.)  During the annual we removed the fuel  pump, sent it out for 
overhaul, and reinstalled.  The oil [leak] was  corrected by overhauling both oil coolers and 
replacing all valve  cover gaskets. Previously at the 1998 annual the right aux. and main 
and left main  fuel tanks had water and both main tank fuel drains would not open.   
We installed new main drain valves and cleaned all fuel screens at  that time.  When he 
picked up the plane I asked him if he had been  draining the fuel sumps?  His reply was yes!  I 
then told him that  both main drains were [corroded] shut and I had to replace them.   His 
reply was oh yeh I forgot to tell you about that.  I then gave  him the lecture about how 
important it was to drain the tanks,  especially since the airplane sets outside all the time.  
At the  1999 annual I again drained at least a 1/2 to 1 pint of water  from the fuel tanks, 
cleaned all the fuel screens, and again gave  the lecture on draining sumps. Sometime in 
June or July 2000 [the pilot] called me and asked if I  had a fuel cap that he had lost one on 
the right side.  I told him  since he was already tied down at Rockford to just check with  
Raytheon so he could get a cap right away.  Then the first part of  August 2000 he 
called me at home one night and said he was in  Wisconsin and that the engine seemed 
to not develop full power, so  he aborted the takeoff.  The way he described the problem I 
assumed  the fuel injectors were plugging up.  He then told me since it was  dark, he 
would stay the night and see what it ran like in the  morning.  I never heard from him, so I 
thought he got someone there  to look at it. On August 24 he called and said the starter had 
failed and he had to  prop it the last couple of trips.  On the 25th when he flew over to  
Freeport from Rockford I found out that he never had the rough  engine problem 
from the first part of August looked at, and that it  was still running rough, also the fuel cap 
had never been replaced,  but the opening was covered with duct tape. August 28th I 
installed a new magna flite light weight starter, a  new fuel cap on the right aux tank, 
cleaned the fuel injectors, and  injector servo screen.  Also drained all sumps (the only one 
with  water was the right aux And it was clear water.) and drained sump  screen, about a 1/2 
a fuel tester full of clear water came from this  sump.  Start up and test run ok.  Rechecked all 
sumps after shut  down.  When [the pilot] called and wanted me to fly his airplane to  
Rockford and pick him up, I advised him I would not fly it because  he never had the 
transponder [check] completed like I had told him  to due.  He swore he had [an avionics 
repair FBO at RFD] complete  the inspection and that he had stickers with the sign off, and 
that  he just never put it in the log book.  So I flew the plane to  Rockford, picked him up 
and he flew me back to Freeport.  Everything  operated normal on that trip.
The witness from the avionics repair FBO at RFD stated, "In searching our files, I find no 
record of our shop having performed a VFR or IFR biannual certification from 1996 through 
[October 31, 2001]."
Excerpts, from http://www.cami.jccbi.gov/aam-600/610/600For-DRU.html, stated:
Acetaminophen: Acetaminophen is a common over the counter  
analgesic/antipyretic (Tylenol). It is available in many oral  dosage forms and in 
combination with various decongestants and/or  antihistamines. ...
Chlorpheniramine: Is a common over the counter antihistamine used in  the 
treatment of the common cold and hay fever. ...  Warnings - may  impair mental and/or 
physical ability required for the performance of  potentially hazardous tasks (e.g., 
driving, operating heavy machinery). ...
Dextromethorphan: A cough suppressant, commonly used in over the  counter 
preparations. ...
Dextrorphan: A metabolite of dextromethorphan, with a lesser cough  suppressant 
(antitussive) activity. ...
Nordextrorphan: A metabolite of dextromethorphan, which is used as  an 
antitussive in the treatment of the common cold. ...
Phenylpropanolamine: Is a metabolite of ephedrine and a common over  the counter 
decongestant used in the treatment of the common cold  and hay fever. ...
Pseudoephedrine: Is a common over the counter decongestant used in  the 
treatment of the common cold and hay fever. ...
The Garmin web site, http://www.garmin.com/products/emap/, was reviewed.  The emap gps 
description did not list an aviation database.
Runway 32 was observed.  The runway did not have a Vertical Approach Slope 
Indicator(VASI).  The Airport/Facility Directory was reviewed and it was listed as not having a 
VASI.
