National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Bountiful, UT
Accident Number: WPR09CA105
Date & Time: 02/01/2009, 1200 MST
Registration: N944U
Aircraft: ROBINSON HELICOPTER COMPANY
R44 II
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Low altitude operation/event
Injuries: 1 Minor, 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While en route to her destination, the pilot elected to fly the helicopter up a canyon toward rising terrain.
Soon after making a low pass over a ridge above 8,000 feet mean sea level, the pilot increased collective in order to climb over upcoming higher terrain.
As the collective was increased, the rotor rpm started to drop.
The pilot immediately increased throttle, reversed course to fly downhill, and lowered the collective.
During the turn, the helicopter encountered a quartering tailwind and began to settle toward the snow-covered down-sloping terrain.
Soon thereafter the helicopter contacted the terrain, bounced back into the air, and a main rotor blade severed the tail boom.
The helicopter rotated 180 degrees, impacted the terrain, and rolled over.
According to the pilot there was no evidence of an engine power loss or any anomaly with the flight control system.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper decision to fly at low altitude while maneuvering in mountainous terrain in a canyon and inadvertently exceeding the climb capability of the helicopter.
Contributing to the accident were a high density altitude, mountainous terrain, and a tailwind encountered during the attempted course reversal.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
