Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Raeford, NC
Accident Number:
ERA16LA059
Date & Time:
12/03/2015, 1120 EST 
Registration:
N216PK
Aircraft:
PACIFIC AEROSPACE CORP LTD 
750XL
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing area overshoot
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Skydiving
Analysis 
The commercial pilot of the single-engine turboprop airplane reported that he was preparing to 
release skydivers when he noticed that the engine torque indication was in the red arc. 
Specifically, the gauge was indicating a torque of 70 pounds per square inch (psi) when it 
should have been indicating about 25 psi; the maximum allowed torque indication was 64.5 
psi. The skydivers jumped uneventfully. As the pilot was returning to the airport, the torque 
gauge was indicating 80 psi while the engine was at idle. At that time, the pilot decided to 
perform a precautionary engine shutdown and land with no engine power. During the landing, 
the airplane was fast and touched down about halfway down the 3,402-ft-long asphalt runway. 
The pilot applied heavy braking, but the airplane traveled about 1,000 ft beyond the departure 
end of the runway before coming to rest upright in a field with a collapsed left main landing 
gear.
Two examinations of the engine did not reveal any preimpact anomalies or evidence of 
overtorque. A test of the torque-indicating transducer and gauge also did not reveal any 
anomalies. The examinations did reveal that an automotive-type wiring bundle was used to 
wire the torque transducer to the airplane's electrical system. Although it is possible that the 
wiring bundle could have caused an intermittent faulty torque indication, subsequent testing 
was unable to duplicate the problem. The airplane was manufactured about 10 years before the 
accident, and the torque meter manufacturer upgraded the wiring connectors about 4 years 
before the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 6ERA16LA059
The pilot's failure to obtain the proper touchdown point and speed during a precautionary 
landing with the engine shut down. Contributing to the accident was an erroneous engine 
torque indication, which led the pilot to shut the engine down, for reasons that could not be 
determined during postaccident testing.
Findings
Aircraft
Descent/approach/glide path - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Factor)
Page 3 of 6ERA16LA059
Factual Information
On December 3, 2015, about 1120 eastern standard time, a Pacific Aerospace 750XL, N216PK, 
registered to and operated by Paraclete Aviation LLC., was substantially damaged during a 
precautionary landing at P K Airpark (5W4), Raeford, North Carolina. The commercial pilot 
was not injured. The commercial skydiving flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed for the local flight, which departed 5W4 about 1100.
The pilot reported that the airplane was at 13,000 feet mean sea level (msl) as he was preparing 
to release the skydivers. He then noticed that the torque gauge was in the red arc and indicated 
a torque of 70 psi when it should have indicated about 25 psi; the maximum allowed torque 
indication was 64.5 psi. The pilot notified the skydivers of the anomaly and told them to jump, 
which they did uneventfully. As the pilot was approaching 5W4 for a normal landing, the 
airplane was at 9,000 feet msl and the torque gauge indicated 80 psi while the engine was at 
idle. At that time he decided to perform a precautionary engine shutdown to prevent 
catastrophic engine failure. The pilot further stated that during the landing with no engine 
power, the airplane was fast and touched down about halfway down runway 4, a 3,402-foot-
long asphalt runway. The pilot applied heavy braking, but the airplane traveled about 1,000 
feet beyond the departure end of the runway, before coming to rest upright in a field with a 
collapsed left main landing gear.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
substantial damage to both wings. The airplane was manufactured in 2005 and equipped with 
a Pratt and Whitney PT6A-34 turboprop engine. Subsequent examination of the engine by the 
FAA inspector and a representative from the engine manufacturer did not reveal any preimpact 
anomalies or evidence of overtorque. A "dead weight" test was then performed, to simulate 
pressure from the engine and test the torque indicating transducer and gauge. The test was 
performed satisfactorily and no anomalies were noted with the transducer or gauge.
The operator subsequently performed a second examination of the engine due to a propeller 
strike during the precautionary landing. That examination also did not reveal any evidence of 
overtorque or anything that would have caused a faulty torque indication. The examinations 
did note that an automotive-type wiring bundle was used to wire the torque transducer to the 
airplane's electrical system. Although the results of the "dead weight" were satisfactory, the test 
may not have been able to detect an intermittent wiring anomaly. Additionally, the airplane 
manufacturer reported that the torque meter manufacturer upgraded the wiring about 4 years 
prior to the accident, from spade connectors to overlap connectors.
Pope Army Airfield (POB), Fayetteville, North Carolina, was located about 12 miles northeast 
of the accident site. The recorded weather at POB, at 1118, included wind from 360 degrees at 
10 knots, clear sky, and visibility 10 miles.
Page 4 of 6ERA16LA059
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Miscellaneous/other
Engine shutdown
Emergency descent
Landing area overshoot (Defining event)
Landing
Runway excursion
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
25, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/26/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2015
Flight Time:
379 hours (Total, all aircraft), 42 hours (Total, this make and model), 309 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 63 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 27 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PACIFIC AEROSPACE CORP 
LTD
Registration:
N216PK
Model/Series:
750XL NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2005
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
114
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
18
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/05/2015, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
107 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
4213 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney
ELT:
C126 installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-34
Registered Owner:
PARACLETE AVIATION LLC
Rated Power:
750 hp
Operator:
PARACLETE AVIATION LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ERA16LA059
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
POB, 218 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
12 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1118 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
40째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
360째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.17 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
10째C / -2째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Raeford, NC (5W4)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Raeford, NC (5W4)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1100 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
P K Airport (5W4)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
304 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
4
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3402 ft / 60 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Precautionary 
Landing; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
35.019722, -79.191111 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert J Gretz
Adopted Date:
01/18/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
John Combrinck-Graham; FAA/FSDO; Greensboro, NC
Publish Date:
01/18/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92398
Page 6 of 6ERA16LA059
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
