National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FORT LAUDERDALE, FL
Accident Number: MIA95LA016
Date & Time: 11/01/1994, 1310 EST
Registration: N5715C
Aircraft: CESSNA 402C
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
 Analysis The left main landing gear collapsed on landing rollout.
Examination of the landing gear by the FAA and company maintenance personnel revealed a failure of left landing gear upper barrel and trunion assembly.
Further examination of the components by the NTSB laboratory revealed fractures representative of overstress separations.
There was no evidence of fatigue or other type of preexisting cracking.
Review of aircraft logbooks revealed no recorded history of hard landings, or previous landing gear damage.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the left main landing gear upper barrel and trunion assembly due to overstress separations, resulting in the collapse of the left main landing gear on landing rollout.
Findings Occurrence #1: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR STRUT - FAILURE,TOTAL 2.
LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR STRUT - OVERLOAD 3.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The airline transport-rated pilot and two passengers reported no injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight plan was filed.
The flight originated from Miami International Airport, 25 minutes before the accident.
Examination of the landing gear by the FAA and Airways International Inc, maintenance personnel revealed a failure of the left main landing gear trunnion.
Review of airplane logbooks revealed no recorded history of hard landings, or previous landing gear damage.
Examination of pieces from the left main landing gear upper barrel and trunion assembly was performed by the NTSB materials laboratory.
The examination revealed the fractures were representative of overstress separations.
No evidence of fatigue or other type of preexisting cracking was found.
(For additional information see NTSB Metallurgist's Factual Report No.
95-17).
Components retained for further testing were released to  Mr. Jagdesh Remkhalawam, Aero Parts International, Miami, Florida, on December 13, 1994.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
