National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Marion, OH
Accident Number: IAD05LA051
Date & Time: 04/02/2005, 1630 EST
Registration: N3292S
Aircraft: Cessna 182N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Prior to departure, the pilot received a  weather briefing, which included information about a low-pressure area that contained moisture, advisories for icing,  and information about the freezing level that existed along his planned route of flight.
While en route he was advised by air traffic control of pilot reports of icing, and other aircraft on the assigned radio frequency were reporting ice accretion.
He requested lower altitudes and eventually elected to divert to an alternate airport where he performed an instrument approach.
During the approach, he extended the flaps, and the airplane began descending at a rate that he could not arrest.
The airplane impacted the ground short of the runway, in a wings level attitude and nosed over.
The pilot stated that while in flight, he had observed  ice adhering to the airframe and the windshield.
When an airport employee  arrived at the accident site, he estimated that the airplane's leading edges were covered with 1 to 1.5 inches of ice.
The emergency procedures section of the owners manual revealed that, although flying into known icing conditions is prohibited, the pilot during an unexpected icing encounter, should plan a landing at the nearest airport, be prepared for a significantly higher stall speed, and to leave the wing flaps retracted.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate in-flight planning/decision which resulted in an encounter with icing conditions and the accretion of ice on the airframe.
Also causal was the pilot's improper setting of the flaps in icing conditions in accordance with operating procedures which resulted in a stall/mush.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
PREFLIGHT BRIEFING SERVICE - OBTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) WEATHER EVALUATION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) FLIGHT INTO KNOWN ADVERSE WEATHER - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - ICING CONDITIONS ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 5.
(C) FLAPS - IMPROPER 6.
(C) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND 7.
AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE 8.
STALL/MUSH ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 9.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On April 2, 2005, at 1630 eastern standard time, a Cessna 182N, N3292S, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during an instrument approach to the Marion Municipal Airport (MNN), Marion, Ohio, following an encounter with in-flight icing.
The certificated private pilot and three passengers were not injured.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the flight which departed the Morgantown Municipal Airport (MGW), Morgantown, West Virginia, about 1430, destined for the Toledo Suburban Airport (DUH), Lambertville, Michigan.
The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
At approximately 1130 eastern standard time the pilot received a telephonic weather briefing from the Elkins Automated Flight Service Station.
He was advised of a low-pressure area that was over the state of West Virginia, that was moving to the east, with moisture that stretched across the state of Ohio.
He was also informed "advisories are out there for icing, occasional moderate rime or mixed icing in clouds."
Additionally, he was told that the freezing level at Pittsburgh Pennsylvania was at 6,000 feet, and that "Cleveland is a little bit lower, because I've got minus 4 at 6,000 over Cleveland."
A review of air traffic control tapes revealed that between the hours of 1500 and 1543, after radio communications were first established, the approach controller at the Akron-Canton Terminal Radar Approach Control facility advised the pilot of reports of light clear icing at 4,000 feet.
The pilot responded, "we had a little bit earlier, but it seems to have melted off."
The approach controller queried another aircraft on the frequency as to whether they were accreting any ice.
They replied that they were accreting very light rime ice while at 3,500 feet, and that the temperature was -4 degrees Celsius.
Later in the flight, the pilot was told to climb to 5,000 feet to avoid other air traffic.
He subsequently advised the approach controller, "we're picking up a little ice here, we were ok at 4,000."
The air traffic controller then coordinated a descent for the pilot to 4,100 feet, and after a second request, to 3,100 feet.
About 40 nautical miles south of the Mansfield Lahm Regional Airport (MFD), Mansfield, Ohio, the pilot elected to divert to MFD.
He was told by the approach controller that approximately 3 to 5 inches of snow had accumulated on the runway.
The pilot then asked the approach controller for another airport to divert to and was directed to MNN for the GPS Runway 24 approach.
According to the pilot, while on the approach for runway 24, he extended the flaps at approximately 100 feet above ground level, and the airplane began descending at a rate that he could not arrest.
The airplane impacted the ground about 250 feet short of the runway in a wings level attitude.
During the impact, the nose wheel dug into the ground, and the airplane nosed over, coming to rest inverted, about 100 feet from the approach end of the runway.
During a telephone interview, the pilot stated that during the flight, he observed conglomerate ice adhering to the airframe, the windshield was covered at least 50 percent with ice, and the autopilot kept trimming "nose up."
The director of aviation for MNN stated during a telephone interview, that at the time of the accident, very wet, large snowflakes were falling at the airport.
When he arrived at the accident site, about 5 to 6 minutes after it had occurred, he estimated that the airplane's leading edges were covered with 1 to 1.5 inches of ice.
A review of the emergency procedures section of the owners manual revealed that, "although flying into known icing conditions is prohibited," the pilot during an unexpected icing encounter, should "plan a landing at the nearest airport," "be prepared for significantly higher stall speed," and to "leave wing flaps retracted."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 59, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2950 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 13 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 4980 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-470/TS Registered Owner: Sky Lane Aero Club Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
