Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Magnolia, AR
Accident Number:
CEN11LA005
Date & Time:
10/01/2010, 2100 CDT 
Registration:
N152HS
Aircraft:
MAULE MXT-7-180A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot was on a night cross-country flight when he heard a knocking sound in the engine. He 
immediately proceeded toward the nearest airport, declared an emergency, and noted that the 
oil pressure gauge read "0" and the oil temperature gauge read "high." When the airplane was 
about 5 miles south of the airport, and at an altitude of 1,700 feet, the engine seized. The pilot 
made a forced landing to a field and subsequently collided with a fence, causing substantial 
damage to the airplane. Examination of the engine revealed a large hole in the top of the 
crankcase and that the oil drain line for the No. 4 cylinder was not connected. A review of the 
engine logbook indicated that the No. 2 cylinder had been removed on the day of the accident, 
which would have required the No. 4 cylinder oil drain line to be disconnected. When the 
cylinder was placed back on the engine, the oil drain line was likely not reconnected and 
properly torqued per the manufacturer's maintenance manual.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The mechanic's failure to properly install an oil drain line after he replaced a cylinder, which 
caused the engine to seize in flight due to a lack of lubrication.
Findings
Aircraft
Eng oil dist (airframe furn) - Inadequate inspection (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN11LA005
Factual Information
On October 1, 2010, at 2100 central daylight time, a Maule MXT-7-180-A, N152HS, sustained 
substantial damage during a forced landing after a total loss of engine power near Magnolia, 
Arkansas. The private pilot and a passenger were not injured. The airplane was registered to 
and operated by Henderson State University (HSU), Arkadelphia, Arkansas. Night visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the flight that departed 
Monroe Regional Airport (MLU), Monroe, Louisiana, approximately 2030, and destined for 
Texarkana Regional Airport (TXK), Texarkana, Arkansas. The cross country flight was 
conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as part of HSU's commercial pilot 
curriculum.
According to the pilot, he was at 2,500 feet about 15 miles south of Magnolia Municipal Airport 
(AGO), Magnolia, Arkansas, when he heard a knocking sound in the engine. He immediately 
proceeded toward AGO, declared an emergency, and noted that the oil pressure gage read "0" 
and the oil temperature gage was "high."  When the airplane was about 5 miles south of the 
airport and at an altitude of 1,700 feet, the engine seized. The pilot noted a small clearing and 
landed on a private horse farm.  He said there was no visible moon and it was very dark 
outside, which made it difficult to see the terrain and he subsequently collided with corral 
fencing before coming to a full stop.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector performed an on-scene examination of the 
airplane, which revealed that the nosegear of the airplane collapsed and was pushed aft and the 
top of the fuselage center section was damaged. The firewall, left horizontal stabilizer and 
elevator sustained substantial damage. A large amount of oil was noted on the under side of the 
engine and belly of the airplane.
Examination of the engine revealed there was a large hole in the top of the crankcase and the 
oil drain line for the #4 cylinder was not connected. A review of the engine logbook revealed 
that the #2 cylinder had been removed on the day of the accident, which would have required 
the #4 cylinder oil drain line to be disconnected.  When the cylinder was placed back on the 
engine, the oil drain line should have been reconnected and properly torqued per the 
manufacturer's maintenance manual.
In a written statement, the mechanic that replaced the #2 cylinder said that after he replaced 
the cylinder he performed an engine run and checked for leaks. No leaks were observed.  The 
mechanic placed the cowling back on the engine, completed the 100-hour inspection 
paperwork and returned the airplane back to service.  He stated that all work was performed in 
accordance with the Maule inspection guide, Lycoming direct drive overhaul manual, and a 
4,313-lb torque wrench.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land.  His last Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) first class medical was issued on August 20, 2007.  The pilot 
reported a total of 128 hours, of which, 34 hours were in the Maule.
Page 3 of 5CEN11LA005
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of engine power (total)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
21, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/20/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
150 hours (Total, all aircraft), 150 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MAULE
Registration:
N152HS
Model/Series:
MXT-7-180A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
21095C
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-C4F
Registered Owner:
HENDERSON STATE 
UNIVERSITY
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
HENDERSON STATE 
UNIVERSITY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN11LA005
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ELD, 277 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2053 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.01 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
16°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Shreveport, LA (SHV)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Arkadelphia, AR (M89)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Magnolia Municipal (AGO)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
319 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.152500, -93.219722
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Leah D Yeager
Adopted Date:
05/16/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Sid Lemoine; FAA/FSDO; Little Rock, AR
Publish Date:
05/16/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77490
Page 5 of 5CEN11LA005
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
