Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bainbridge, GA
Accident Number:
ATL06LA114
Date & Time:
08/02/2006, 0847 EDT 
Registration:
N342MN
Aircraft:
Beech D45
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that he was on initial climb from runway 27, at 50 feet and 80 knots, when the 
engine started a "popping" noise and the engine had a partial loss of power. The pilot turned 
the boost pump on, the "popping" noise continued, and he made a right turn towards runway 
14. The airspeed decreased to between 58 to 60 knots. The airplane stalled, collided with the 
ground, and a post crash fire ensued. The  Beech Model D45 Flight Manual states the airplane 
will stall at 71 mph with a 0-degree angle of bank, and at 73 mph with a 20-degree angle of 
bank. The right main fuel tank was consumed by fire. Fuel samples were taken from the header 
tank and the left wing fuel tank. The samples were forwarded to a petroleum laboratory for 
further analysis. Examination of the fuel samples revealed the fuel would not have caused a 
loss of engine power or malfunction. Review of the engine logbook revealed the engine was 
overhauled on May 30, 2006, and the engine has been operated for 15 hours since it was 
reinstalled on the airplane. Examination of the engine revealed the fuel inlet (unmetered 
pressure) line was crossed with the fuel return (to fuel pump) line on the engine fuel pump. 
The fuel lines were repositioned and an engine run was initiated. The engine started and ran 
smoothly at 1,000 rpm. The rpm was increased to 2,200 rpm with no anomalies. The engine 
was not increased to full operating rpm due to damage to the airframe. The engine was shut 
down with the mixture control.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The improper maintenance installation of the fuel inlet line by other maintenance personnel 
resulting in a partial loss of engine power after takeoff due to fuel starvation.
Page 2 of 7ATL06LA114
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
----------
Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO LANDING AREA (EMERGENCY)
Findings
3. AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7ATL06LA114
Factual Information
On August 2, 2006, at 0847 eastern daylight time, a Beech D45, N342MN, registered to a 
private owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, had a partial loss of engine power 
during initial climb, and collided with the ground during a forced landing. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane received 
substantial damage. The private pilot reported minor injuries. The flight originated from 
Decatur County Industrial Air Park, Bainbridge, Georgia, on August 2, 2006, at 0845.
The pilot stated he had just retracted the landing gear during initial climb from runway 27, at 
50 feet and 80 knots when the engine started a "popping" noise and had a partial loss of power. 
The pilot stated he turned the boost pump on, the "popping" noise continued, and he made a 
right turn towards runway 14. The airspeed decreased to between 58 to 60 knots. The airplane 
stalled, and collided with the over run on runway 32. The airplane slid off the over run, down 
an embankment, ruptured the right main fuel tank, collided with a pine grove, and caught fire.
Examination of the airplane by NTSB after recovery showed that both wings had been removed 
from the airplane during the recovery process. A post crash fire damaged the upper and lower 
engine cowlings. The right wing root, right side of the fuselage and right side of the engine 
firewall received fire damage. The left main fuel line from the wing root to the firewall was 
intact and not damaged. The right fuel line to the header tank received fire damage. About 20 
gallons of fuel was removed from the left main fuel tank and approximately one quart of fuel 
was recovered from the header tank. The fuel in the header tank was yellow in color and had an 
odor similar to paint thinner. Fuel samples were taken from the header tank and left wing fuel 
tank. The fuel samples were forwarded to a petroleum laboratory for further analysis. 
Examination of the fuel samples revealed the fuel would not have caused a loss of engine power 
or malfunction.
The upper cowling and lower access panels were removed. The engine driven fuel pump was 
removed and visually inspected. The fuel pump driver coupler was intact and the fuel pump 
rotated freely by hand. The lower ninety-degree angle fitting on the bottom of the fuel pump 
which supplies un-metered fuel to the mixture control unit was cross threaded, removed, 
replaced with a serviceable fitting, and the fuel pump was reinstalled on the engine. The upper 
spark plugs were removed, examined, and no anomalies were noted. The top of the pistons, 
cylinder heads, and valves were examined and no anomalies were noted. The propeller was 
removed and replaced with a slave propeller. The engine was rotated by hand and continuity 
was established to the top and bottom ignition leads on cylinders 2, 4, and 6. The top and 
bottom ignition leads on cylinders 1, 3, and 5 received fire damage and ignition continuity 
could not be established. The ignition harness was removed and replaced with a slave unit. 
Ignition continuity was established to all twelve cylinder leads. The left and right magneto 
timing was inspected. The left magneto was set at 22-degrees before top dead center. The right 
magneto was set at 23-degrees before top center and retimed to 22-degrees before top dead 
center.
Recovery personnel removed the fuel gascolator at the accident site. The fuel screen was 
removed and was free of contaminants. The mixture control fuel inlet screen was removed and 
inspected. The fuel inlet screen was free of contaminants and reinstalled. The fuel manifold 
assembly was disassembled, visually inspected, and found free of contamination. The fuel 
manifold valve was reassembled and reinstalled. The fuel nozzles were removed, inspected, 
Page 4 of 7ATL06LA114
free of obstructions, and reinstalled. The fuel manifold lines were removed, inspected, free of 
contaminants, and reinstalled.
The fuel pressure gauge line, oil pressure gauge line, and manifold pressure lines were 
disconnected at the firewall and capped off. All electrical wiring for the starter and alternator 
received fire damage. The inlet air filter and housing were removed to allow unrestricted 
airflow through the intake manifold. The fuel lines on the left side of the airplane were intact 
and undamaged. A portable fuel tank was plumed into the left main fuel inlet line for the 
engine test run. The forward cockpit boost pump switch was removed and the positive leads 
lines were disconnected and jumped to a 24 volt battery source to run the boost pump for 
priming the engine during the engine start sequence.
The airplane fuselage was placed on a large trailer, strapped down, and moved outside of the 
building for an engine run. A hand held Tru tachometer was used to estimate the engine rpm 
during the engine test runs. Starting fluid was sprayed into the induction inlet and the engine 
was started. The engine ran normal below 1,000 rpm. When the throttle was advanced above 
1,000 rpm the engine would cut out and backfire as stated by the accident pilot. The engine 
was shutdown using the mixture control, and the airplane was moved back inside the building. 
The engine driven fuel pump was removed from the engine, tested, and no anomalies were 
noted.
The engine driven fuel pump was reinstalled on the engine assembly and the routing of the fuel 
lines to the mixture control unit was checked using the Procedures and specifications for 
adjustment of Teledyne Continental Motors continuous flow fuel injection systems of SID97-
3C, Figure 7, on page 37. Examination of the fuel pump revealed the fuel inlet (unmetered 
pressure) line was crossed with the fuel return (to fuel pump) line on the engine fuel pump. 
The fuel lines were repositioned per SID97-3C. The airplane was taken back outside and an 
engine run was initiated. The engine started and ran smoothly at 1,000 rpm. The rpm was 
increased to 2,200 rpm with no anomalies. The engine was not increased to full operating rpm 
due to damage to the airframe. The engine was shut down with the mixture control.
Review of the engine logbook revealed River City Aircraft Engines, San Antonio, Texas, 
overhauled the engine on May 30, 2006. The Hobbs time at the time of the engine overhaul 
was 2046.8 hours, and the engine tachometer time was not entered. The total time on the 
engine prior to its removal was not listed. The engine has been operated for 15 hours since it 
was reinstalled on the airplane.
Review of Beech Model D45 Flight Manual states in paragraph III. Performance that with a 0-
degree angle of bank that the airplane will stall at 71 mph with the gear and flaps in the 
retracted position. The airplane will stall at 73 mph with a 20-degree angle of bank, and at 81 
mph with a 40-degree angle of bank.
Page 5 of 7ATL06LA114
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
76, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
814 hours (Total, all aircraft), 12 hours (Total, this make and model), 784 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N342MN
Model/Series:
D45 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
BG-180
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2006, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8519 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-BA
Registered Owner:
Leon F. Jauert
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
Leon F. Jauert
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ATL06LA114
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KBGE, 141 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0839 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Bainbridge, GA (KBGE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (KBGE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0845 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Decatur Co Industrial Air Park (BGE)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
141 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5002 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
84.637222, -30.971389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Carrol  A Smith
Adopted Date:
01/31/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Martha Farmer; College Park FSDO-11; College Park, GA
Jason Lukasik; Teledyne Continental; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7ATL06LA114
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
