Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
PANAMA CITY, FL
Accident Number:
ATL98LA069
Date & Time:
05/01/1998, 1300 CDT 
Registration:
N4121W
Aircraft:
Piper PA-32-300
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane experienced a catastrophic engine failure, and the pilot executed an emergency 
landing near Panama City, Florida. During the flare, the left wing impacted a utility pole 
causing substantial damage to the airplane. Examination of the engine revealed that the 
crankshaft had fractured at the connection rod thrust surface adjacent to the front fillet radius 
of No. 6 crankpin journal. Metallurgical examination concluded that the crankshaft fractured 
in fatigue at the connection rod thrust surface, adjacent to the front fillet radius of the No. 6 
crankpin journal due to high stress. However, exact cause of the high stress remains 
undetermined. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The engine crankshaft fracturing, leading to total powerplant failure. Contributing to the 
severity of the accident was a utility pole. 
Page 2 of 6ATL98LA069
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (F) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - SHEARED
2. (F) POWERPLANT - FAILURE,TOTAL
3. EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
4. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - HIDDEN OBSTRUCTION(S)
Page 3 of 6ATL98LA069
Factual Information
 On May 1, 1998, about 1300 central daylight time a Piper PA-32-300, N4121W, collided with a 
utility pole during an emergency landing on Highway 20, 12 miles north of Panama City, 
Florida. The airplane was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, 
and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed 
for the local flight. The private pilot and one passenger sustained minor injuries, and the 
airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight originated from Perry, Georgia at 1230.
According to the FAA, the airplane experienced a catastrophic engine failure, and the pilot 
executed an emergency landing onto Highway 20. During the flare, the left wing impacted a 
utility pole causing substantial damage to the airplane.
The pilot stated that 10 minutes before his intended arrival time, the engine began to develop a 
loud noise. The oil temperature, oil pressure, and manifold pressure gauge readings were all 
normal.  The fuel pressure gauge was fluctuating rapidly.  Within a few seconds, the engine 
surged and then lost partial power. As the pilot began to look for a suitable landing site, the 
engine surged again and vibrated briefly.  At 800 feet above the ground, as the pilot 
approached his intended landing site, the engine began to vibrate severely, and the airplane 
became difficult to control. The pilot stated he then brought the mixture control to idle, and the 
propeller stopped. The pilot then noticed a utility pole on the right side of the airplane.  The 
right wing struck the pole, and the airplane struck the ground in a nose down attitude. The 
airplane bounced and struck the ground again.
The investigation found that the engine failure was a result of a broken crankshaft. The 
Crankshaft had 1259.2 hours of service since the last major overhaul was performed with a 
TBO (To be overhauled) of 2000 hours. The  crankshaft was submitted to the Materials 
Laboratory by the FAA through Engineering-Accident Investigation to determine the mode of 
the failure.
Metallurgy Report
Magnetic particle inspection of the crankshaft revealed very distinctive radial heat cracks at the 
connecting rod thrust surfaces, adjacent to the front and rear filler radii of all the crankpin 
journals except No. 6 crankpin journal. These results indicated that radial heat cracks most 
likely occurred after crankshaft separation. 
Visual and macroscopic examination of the part revealed severe corrosion at the seal diameter 
and behind the prop flange.  Examination revealed the crankshaft had broken at the 
connection rod thrust surface adjacent to the front fillet radius of NO. 6 crankpin journal.  
Heavy scuffing was observed at all the connection rod thrust surfaces where heat cracks were 
present.  Examination of the crankshaft fracture surfaces revealed the mode of fracture was 
fatigue as evidenced by the presence of the typical "beach marks" at the crack propagation 
zone.  Severe rubbing and damage were present on the fracture surfaces and the fatigue origin 
area.
Scanning electron microscope (SEM) examination at the fatigue origin revealed smeared 
surfaces due to rubbing with the mating surfaces.   Two additional cracks, which are parallel to 
the main fatigued surface, were present in the vicinity of the fatigue origin area.  One of the two 
cracks revealed no single fatigue origin indicating the area cracked in fatigue initiation from 
multiple origins.  Striations, which are characteristic of fatigue fractures, were not observed in 
Page 4 of 6ATL98LA069
most of the crack propagation zones.
Microscopic examination of the crankshaft at the fatigued area revealed no abnormal 
microstructure except additional cracks and the damaged surface.  The connection rod thrust 
surface near the fatigue origin most likely was damaged as a secondary effect.
The Metallurgical Laboratory concluded that the crankshaft fractured in fatigue at the 
connection rod thrust surface, adjacent to the front fillet radius of No. 6 crankpin journal.  The 
primary cause of the crankshaft failure most likely occurred as a result of being subjected to 
high stress.  However, the exact cause of the abnormally high stress is not known. (See 
attachment for complete Metallurgical Report).
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/22/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
631 hours (Total, all aircraft), 576 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N4121W
Model/Series:
PA-32-300 PA-32-300
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32-40213
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-K1A5
Registered Owner:
DANA P. DICKSON
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
DANA P. DICKSON
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ATL98LA069
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PFN, 21 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1350 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
240°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
PERRY, GA (PXE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (PFN)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1200 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
BUTCH        WILSON
Adopted Date:
05/19/1999
Additional Participating Persons:
RODGER   HOLMSTROM
REGAN H CAMPBELL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ATL98LA069
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
