Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Spanish Fork, UT
Accident Number:
WPR16LA155
Date & Time:
08/01/2016, 1850 MDT 
Registration:
N234AV
Aircraft:
BEECH C 99
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The commercial pilot of the scheduled cargo flight reported that, during cruise flight about 
8,000 ft indicated altitude, he heard a small impact noise and believed that the airplane was 
struck by a bird. There was no loss of directional control, change in control configuration, or 
impact shudder. He continued the flight and subsequently landed without further incident. 
After exiting the airplane, the pilot noticed that about 12 inches of the top of the vertical 
stabilizer was missing, and that there was substantial damage to the rudder.
The separated top of the vertical stabilizer section was not recovered. The fracture surface of 
the upper section of the remaining vertical stabilizer was in a nearly horizontal plane. The skin 
was deformed adjacent to the fracture into curled rolls turning downward and aft. Some areas 
were crushed, consistent with the vertical stabilizer moving forward relative to another object. 
Sliding contact marks were observed at the leading edges, vertical spars, and deformed faces of 
the skin panel adjacent to the fracture. No evidence of any biological or manufactured foreign 
material transfer was observed associated with any of the fracture surfaces either visually or 
under optical magnification. Closer examination identified deposits of particles consistent with 
aluminum alloy 2024 and similar metallic element peaks. Other particles had spectra 
consistent with a low alloy steel, stainless steel, brass, and a nickel-base alloy with iron and 
chromium. The curling deformation to the skin and the deformation through the airplane 
structure was consistent with contact with a stationary object, such as a suspended cable. Given 
the diameter of the impact deformation and the materials found, it is likely that the airplane 
impacted overhead power transmission lines during a portion of the flight that was conducted 
at an altitude much lower than reported. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 6WPR16LA155
An in-flight collision with power lines.
Findings
Personnel issues
Monitoring environment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Wire - Effect on operation
Page 3 of 6WPR16LA155
Factual Information
On August 1, 2016, about 1850 mountain daylight time, a twin-engine turboprop Beech C-99 
airplane, N234AV, collided with an object while in-flight near Spanish Fork, Utah. The 
commercial pilot was not injured. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the vertical 
stabilizer and rudder. The airplane was registered to UAS Trans Services and operated as 
AMF1843 by Ameriflight, LLC as a Title 14
 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 135 scheduled 
cargo flight. Visual meteorological conditions were reported at the time of the accident, and 
company flight following procedures were in effect. The flight originated from Carbon County 
Regional Airport (PUC), Price, Utah about 1830 and was destined for Salt Lake City, Utah. 
The pilot reported that while about 8,000 - 8,500 ft indicated altitude, he heard a small impact 
noise and believed that the airplane was struck by a bird. There was no loss of directional 
control, change in control configuration, or impact shudder. He continued the flight and 
subsequently landed without further incident. After exiting the airplane, the pilot noticed about 
12 inches of the top of the vertical stabilizer was missing, and there was substantial damage to 
the rudder. 
The separated top of the vertical stabilizer section was not recovered. A section of the 
remaining upper area of the vertical stabilizer, rudder and the rudder trim were removed from 
the airplane and sent to the National Transportation Safety Board Materials Laboratory, 
Washington DC for examination. The materials engineer reported that the pieces were 
fractured in a nearly horizontal plane at the upper ends of the submitted pieces. The skin on 
the vertical stabilizer and rudder were deformed adjacent to the fracture into curled rolls 
turning downward and aft. Some areas were crushed consistent with the vertical stabilizer 
moving forward relative to another object. Sliding contact marks were observed at the leading 
edges, vertical spars, and deformed faces of the skin panel adjacent to the fracture. No evidence 
of any biological or manufactured foreign material transfer was observed associated with any of 
the fracture surfaces as observed visually and under optical magnification. Closer examination 
using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS) 
identified deposits of particles consistent with aluminum alloy 2024, and similar metallic 
element peaks. Other particles had spectra consistent with a low alloy steel, stainless steel, 
brass, and a nickel-base alloy with iron and chromium.
History of Flight
Enroute-climb to cruise
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Page 4 of 6WPR16LA155
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
22, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/25/2016
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/25/2016
Flight Time:
1434 hours (Total, all aircraft), 177 hours (Total, this make and model), 845 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 177 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 24 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N234AV
Model/Series:
C 99 NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1986
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
U-234
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/05/2016, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
11300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
34 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
28737.5 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-36
Registered Owner:
UAS TRANSERVICES INC
Rated Power:
750 hp
Operator:
AMERIFLIGHT INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Commuter Air Carrier (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
JIKA
Page 5 of 6WPR16LA155
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KPVU, 4497 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
16 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1850 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
318째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 12000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 14000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
20째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.03 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31째C / 8째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
PRICE, UT (PUC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Salt Lake City, UT (SLC)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1830 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.018333, -111.482778 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Christopher R Shaver
Adopted Date:
09/11/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Jeffery L Smith; FAA Salt Lake FSDO; Salt Lake City, UT
Publish Date:
09/11/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93734
Page 6 of 6WPR16LA155
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
