Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Blythe, CA
Accident Number:
GAA16CA411
Date & Time:
08/01/2016, 0045 PDT 
Registration:
N6728X
Aircraft:
BEECH F33
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis   
The pilot was conducting a night, visual meteorological conditions flight from a rural desert 
airport, and reported that prior to the flight, she did a weight and balance, checked the 
temperature, and did performance calculations.
The pilot reported that after rotation, the airplane was not producing "sufficient power and not 
climbing as anticipated" and the stall warning horn was audible. She lowered the airplane's 
nose, and the stall warning horn silenced. The pilot further reported that she heard "scraping" 
[ground impact] against the airplane, but she could not see the terrain due to the night 
conditions. Subsequently, the airplane impacted the ground off of the airport, which resulted in 
substantial damage to the fuselage.
In a follow up email conversation with the pilot's attorney, the attorney said that the pilot 
reported that the engine was producing power at the time that the aerodynamic stall warning 
horn was audible and just before impact, but noted that the power was not sufficient. 
A photograph of the accident airplane provided by the FAA inspector that responded to the 
accident, showed all three blades exhibited tip curl, torsional twisting and S-bending, 
consistent with the engine producing power at the time of impact.
The airplane performance and weight and balance calculations that the pilot performed prior 
to the accident flight were requested by the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge (IIC), but were not provided. 
The pilot stated she was unaware of any preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with 
the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
It is likely that the pilot exceeded the critical angle of attack during takeoff at night resulting in 
an aerodynamic stall. 
Page 2 of 5GAA16CA411
The Federal Aviation Administration has published the Airplane Flying Handbook FAA-H-
8083-3A (2004). This handbook discusses aerodynamic stalls and states in part:
The key to stall awareness is the pilot's ability to visualize the wing's angle of attack in any 
particular circumstance, and thereby be able to estimate his/her margin of safety above stall. 
This is a learned skill that must be acquired early in flight training and carried through the 
pilot's entire flying career. The pilot must understand and appreciate factors such as airspeed, 
pitch attitude, load factor, relative wind, power setting, and aircraft configuration in order to 
develop a reasonably accurate mental picture of the wing's angle of attack at any particular 
time. It is essential to flight safety that a pilot takes into consideration this visualization of the 
wing's angle of attack prior to entering any flight maneuver.
Stall accidents usually result from an inadvertent stall at a low altitude in which a recovery was 
not accomplished prior to contact with the surface.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to attain adequate airspeed to climb and her exceedance of the airplane's 
critical angle-of-attack during takeoff initial climb at night, which resulted in an aerodynamic 
stall at low altitude. 
Findings
Aircraft
Angle of attack - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Dark - Effect on personnel
Page 3 of 5GAA16CA411
Factual Information
History of Flight
Initial climb
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
60, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/16/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/09/2015
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 2329.5 hours (Total, all aircraft), 513 hours (Total, this make and model), 2132.6 
hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 105.7 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 33.3 hours (Last 
30 days, all aircraft), 1.4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N6728X
Model/Series:
F33 A
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1983
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
CE-1023
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/12/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1951.39 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
C91A installed, activated, 
did not aid in locating 
accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520BB
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5GAA16CA411
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KBLH, 392 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0752 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
169째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
200째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.81 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
32째C / 22째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Blythe, CA (BLH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
LAS VEGAS, NV (HND)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1245 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
BLYTHE (BLH)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
399 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
17
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5800 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.631944, -114.716944 (est)
Preventing Similar Accidents
Prevent Aerodynamic Stalls at Low Altitude
While maneuvering an airplane at low altitude in visual meteorological conditions, many pilots 
fail to avoid conditions that lead to an aerodynamic stall, recognize the warning signs of a stall 
onset, and apply appropriate recovery techniques. Many stall accidents result when a pilot is 
momentarily distracted from the primary task of flying, such as while maneuvering in the 
airport traffic pattern, during an emergency, or when fixating on ground objects.
An aerodynamic stall can happen at any airspeed, at any altitude, and with any engine power 
setting. Pilots need to be honest with themselves about their knowledge of stalls and 
preparedness to recognize and handle a stall situation. Training can help pilots fully 
Page 5 of 5GAA16CA411
understand the stall phenomenon, including angle-of-attack (AOA) concepts and how weight, 
center of gravity, turbulence, maneuvering loads, and other factors can affect an airplane's stall 
characteristics. The stall characteristics may be different in each type of airplane, so learn them 
before you fly.
The stall airspeeds marked on the airspeed indicator (for example, the bottom of the green arc 
and the bottom of the white arc) typically represent steady flight speeds at 1G at the airplane's 
maximum gross weight in the specified configuration. Maneuvering loads and other factors can 
increase the airspeed at which the airplane will stall. For example, increasing bank angle can 
increase stall speed exponentially.
Reducing AOA by lowering the airplane's nose at the first indication of a stall is the most 
important immediate response for stall avoidance and stall recovery. This may seem 
counterintuitive at low altitudes, but is a necessary first step.
See 
http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_019.pdf
 for additional 
resources.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents. Note that this should 
not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations 
(FARs). 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jackie L Vanover
Adopted Date:
01/18/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Patrick W Gates; FAA; Riverside, CA
Publish Date:
01/09/2017
Note:
This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described 
to the NTSB.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93750
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
