National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Bainbridge, GA
Accident Number: ATL06LA114
Date & Time: 08/02/2006, 0847 EDT
Registration: N342MN
Aircraft: Beech D45
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he was on initial climb from runway 27, at 50 feet and 80 knots, when the engine started a "popping" noise and the engine had a partial loss of power.
The pilot turned the boost pump on, the "popping" noise continued, and he made a right turn towards runway 14.
The airspeed decreased to between 58 to 60 knots.
The airplane stalled, collided with the ground, and a post crash fire ensued.
The  Beech Model D45 Flight Manual states the airplane will stall at 71 mph with a 0-degree angle of bank, and at 73 mph with a 20-degree angle of bank.
The right main fuel tank was consumed by fire.
Fuel samples were taken from the header tank and the left wing fuel tank.
The samples were forwarded to a petroleum laboratory for further analysis.
Examination of the fuel samples revealed the fuel would not have caused a loss of engine power or malfunction.
Review of the engine logbook revealed the engine was overhauled on May 30, 2006, and the engine has been operated for 15 hours since it was reinstalled on the airplane.
Examination of the engine revealed the fuel inlet (unmetered pressure) line was crossed with the fuel return (to fuel pump) line on the engine fuel pump.
The fuel lines were repositioned and an engine run was initiated.
The engine started and ran smoothly at 1,000 rpm.
The rpm was increased to 2,200 rpm with no anomalies.
The engine was not increased to full operating rpm due to damage to the airframe.
The engine was shut down with the mixture control.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The improper maintenance installation of the fuel inlet line by other maintenance personnel resulting in a partial loss of engine power after takeoff due to fuel starvation.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING ---------- Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO LANDING AREA (EMERGENCY) Findings 3.
AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 5.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane received substantial damage.
The private pilot reported minor injuries.
The flight originated from Decatur County Industrial Air Park, Bainbridge, Georgia, on August 2, 2006, at 0845.
The pilot stated he had just retracted the landing gear during initial climb from runway 27, at 50 feet and 80 knots when the engine started a "popping" noise and had a partial loss of power.
The pilot stated he turned the boost pump on, the "popping" noise continued, and he made a right turn towards runway 14.
The airspeed decreased to between 58 to 60 knots.
The airplane stalled, and collided with the over run on runway 32.
The airplane slid off the over run, down an embankment, ruptured the right main fuel tank, collided with a pine grove, and caught fire.
Examination of the airplane by NTSB after recovery showed that both wings had been removed from the airplane during the recovery process.
A post crash fire damaged the upper and lower engine cowlings.
The right wing root, right side of the fuselage and right side of the engine firewall received fire damage.
The left main fuel line from the wing root to the firewall was intact and not damaged.
The right fuel line to the header tank received fire damage.
About 20 gallons of fuel was removed from the left main fuel tank and approximately one quart of fuel was recovered from the header tank.
The fuel in the header tank was yellow in color and had an odor similar to paint thinner.
Fuel samples were taken from the header tank and left wing fuel tank.
The fuel samples were forwarded to a petroleum laboratory for further analysis.
Examination of the fuel samples revealed the fuel would not have caused a loss of engine power or malfunction.
The upper cowling and lower access panels were removed.
The engine driven fuel pump was removed and visually inspected.
The fuel pump driver coupler was intact and the fuel pump rotated freely by hand.
The lower ninety-degree angle fitting on the bottom of the fuel pump which supplies un-metered fuel to the mixture control unit was cross threaded, removed, replaced with a serviceable fitting, and the fuel pump was reinstalled on the engine.
The upper spark plugs were removed, examined, and no anomalies were noted.
The top of the pistons, cylinder heads, and valves were examined and no anomalies were noted.
The propeller was removed and replaced with a slave propeller.
The engine was rotated by hand and continuity was established to the top and bottom ignition leads on cylinders 2, 4, and 6.
The top and bottom ignition leads on cylinders 1, 3, and 5 received fire damage and ignition continuity could not be established.
The ignition harness was removed and replaced with a slave unit.
Ignition continuity was established to all twelve cylinder leads.
The left and right magneto timing was inspected.
The left magneto was set at 22-degrees before top dead center.
The right magneto was set at 23-degrees before top center and retimed to 22-degrees before top dead center.
Recovery personnel removed the fuel gascolator at the accident site.
The fuel screen was removed and was free of contaminants.
The mixture control fuel inlet screen was removed and inspected.
The fuel inlet screen was free of contaminants and reinstalled.
The fuel manifold assembly was disassembled, visually inspected, and found free of contamination.
The fuel manifold valve was reassembled and reinstalled.
The fuel nozzles were removed, inspected, free of obstructions, and reinstalled.
The fuel manifold lines were removed, inspected, free of contaminants, and reinstalled.
The fuel pressure gauge line, oil pressure gauge line, and manifold pressure lines were disconnected at the firewall and capped off.
All electrical wiring for the starter and alternator received fire damage.
The inlet air filter and housing were removed to allow unrestricted airflow through the intake manifold.
The fuel lines on the left side of the airplane were intact and undamaged.
A portable fuel tank was plumed into the left main fuel inlet line for the engine test run.
The forward cockpit boost pump switch was removed and the positive leads lines were disconnected and jumped to a 24 volt battery source to run the boost pump for priming the engine during the engine start sequence.
The airplane fuselage was placed on a large trailer, strapped down, and moved outside of the building for an engine run.
A hand held Tru tachometer was used to estimate the engine rpm during the engine test runs.
Starting fluid was sprayed into the induction inlet and the engine was started.
The engine ran normal below 1,000 rpm.
When the throttle was advanced above 1,000 rpm the engine would cut out and backfire as stated by the accident pilot.
The engine was shutdown using the mixture control, and the airplane was moved back inside the building.
The engine driven fuel pump was removed from the engine, tested, and no anomalies were noted.
The engine driven fuel pump was reinstalled on the engine assembly and the routing of the fuel lines to the mixture control unit was checked using the Procedures and specifications for adjustment of Teledyne Continental Motors continuous flow fuel injection systems of SID97- 3C, Figure 7, on page 37.
Examination of the fuel pump revealed the fuel inlet (unmetered pressure) line was crossed with the fuel return (to fuel pump) line on the engine fuel pump.
The fuel lines were repositioned per SID97-3C.
The airplane was taken back outside and an engine run was initiated.
The engine started and ran smoothly at 1,000 rpm.
The rpm was increased to 2,200 rpm with no anomalies.
The engine was not increased to full operating rpm due to damage to the airframe.
The engine was shut down with the mixture control.
Review of the engine logbook revealed River City Aircraft Engines, San Antonio, Texas, overhauled the engine on May 30, 2006.
The Hobbs time at the time of the engine overhaul was 2046.8 hours, and the engine tachometer time was not entered.
The total time on the engine prior to its removal was not listed.
The engine has been operated for 15 hours since it was reinstalled on the airplane.
Review of Beech Model D45 Flight Manual states in paragraph III.
Performance that with a 0- degree angle of bank that the airplane will stall at 71 mph with the gear and flaps in the retracted position.
The airplane will stall at 73 mph with a 20-degree angle of bank, and at 81 mph with a 40-degree angle of bank.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
