Shortly after liftoff from the runway, the engine backfired and lost power. An  eyewitness at the 
airport reported seeing black smoke coming from the airplane during  the attempted takeoff. 
The pilot turned right and selected a field for the emergency landing. After clearing a nearby 
pond, the pilot dumped the load of chemicals, and landed in a field about 300 yards beyond the 
pond. The examination of the airplane failed to disclose a mechanical problem. During the 
examination of the engine, fuel was recovered from the fuel system. Examination of the 
carburetor also failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction or component failure.  A review of 
the weather data disclosed that the temperature was 68 degrees, and the dew point was 66 
degrees.  According to the Icing Probability Curves, conditions were favorable for the formation 
of carburetor ice. 
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. Factors were weather conditions favorable 
for the formation of carburetor ice. 
 On September 1, 1999, at 0845 eastern daylight time, an Aero Commander S2R, N8965Q, 
collided with the ground during an attempted forced landing in a field near Cairo-Grady 
Municipal Airport in Cairo, Georgia. The aerial application flight was operated under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137 with no flight plan filed. Visual weather conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the 
commercial pilot was not injured. The flight departed Cairo, Georgia, at 0844.    
According to the pilot, shortly after liftoff from runway 12 at the Cairo-Grady Municipal 
Airport, the engine backfired and lost power. An eyewitness at the airport reported seeing black 
smoke coming from the airplane during the attempted takeoff. The pilot turned right and 
selected a field for the emergency landing. After clearing a nearby pond, the pilot dumped the 
load of chemicals, and landed in a field about 3000 yards beyond the pond.  The pilot reported 
that during the emergency landing, the landing gear collapsed and the right forward wing spar 
sustained damage.  
The examination of the airplane failed to disclose a mechanical problem. During the 
examination of the engine, fuel was recovered from the fuel system. Examination of the 
carburetor also failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction or component failure.  A review of 
the weather data disclosed that the temperature was 68 degrees, and the dew point was 66 
degrees.  According to the Icing Probability Curves, conditions were favorable for the formation 
of carburetor ice (see attached icing probability curves).
