The student pilot was on his first solo flight.  His first takeoff, and traffic pattern went well.  
The student pilot said that his instructor told him to proceed with another takeoff and landing.  
On final approach, the student pilot said that he thought he was going to land short of the 
runway.  He attempted a go around, but 'applied too much left rudder, thereby heading to the 
grassy area between the runway and the taxiway.  The nose wheel hit the ground and [the 
airplane] skidded to a stop.' Examination of the airplane revealed no anomalies. 
the student pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during an attempted go-around. 
 On September 1, 1999, at 2000 eastern daylight time (edt), a Cessna 150L, N1316Q, operated 
by a solo student pilot sustained substantial damage when during landing the airplane struck 
the ground hard and came to a stop 100 feet left of runway 24 (3800' X 75', ASPH) at the Jack 
Barstow Airport, Midland, Michigan.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of 
the accident.  The instructional supervised solo flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 
91.  No flight plan was on file.  The student pilot reported no injuries.  The local flight 
originated at Midland, Michigan, at 1950 edt.
In his written statement, the student pilot said that he was on his first solo flight.  His first 
takeoff, traffic and pattern went well.  The student pilot said that his instructor told him to 
proceed with another takeoff and landing.  On final approach, the student pilot said that he 
thought he was going to land short of the runway.  He attempted a go-around, but "applied too 
much left rudder, thereby heading to the grassy area between the runway and the taxiway.  The 
nose wheel hit the ground and [the airplane] skidded to a stop."    
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane at the Jack Barstow 
Airport.  The firewall, nose wheel and engine mount were bent upward.  The rear window was 
broken out.  The left wingtip was broken aft.  The left wing rear spar was bent downward.  
Flight control continuity was confirmed.  No anomalies were revealed with the engine, engine 
controls, or other airplane systems.
