Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
San Diego, CA
Accident Number:
LAX07TA051
Date & Time:
12/01/2006, 1035 PST 
Registration:
N26FN
Aircraft:
Learjet 36
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane sustained an in-flight loss of the right elevator during an in-flight upset while 
maneuvering.  The pilot was flying the airplane from the left seat.  The mishap airplane 
rendezvoused with another Learjet to begin a series of profiles for flight testing.  The crew 
noted that the horizon was very difficult to discern.  While maneuvering for the second set of 
data points, the pilot lost sight of the other airplane, and rolled right to remain clear.  His 
vision was  impaired by the glare from the sun, which delayed his recognition of the airplane 
entering an unusual attitude.  The pilot initiated recovery with the airplane in an estimated 70-
degree right bank, 50-degree nose down attitude, and an airspeed of 380 KIAS.  During the 
dive, the crew noted that the airplane was definitely shuddering, but did not recall any rolling 
tendencies or vibration of the control yoke.  The crew conducted a controllability check by 
slowing it to 150 KIAS and lowering the landing gear.  Again the airplane exhibited no unusual 
flight characteristics.  The remainder of the flight and landing were uneventful.  During post 
flight inspection, the aircrew discovered that the right elevator was missing.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control while maneuvering, which resulted in exceeding 
the design stress limits of the aircraft.  Contributing to the accident was the sunglare.
Page 2 of 6LAX07TA051
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - SUNGLARE
2. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) VISUAL/AURAL DETECTION - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. FLIGHT CONTROL,ELEVATOR - SEPARATION
5. (C) DESIGN STRESS LIMITS OF AIRCRAFT - EXCEEDED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6LAX07TA051
Factual Information
On December 1, 2006, about 1035 Pacific standard time, a Learjet 36, N26FN, sustained an in-
flight loss of the right elevator while maneuvering off the coast of San Diego, California.  L-3 
Communications Flight Capital LLC was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The airline transport pilot, the commercial rated second 
pilot, and one passenger were not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.  The 
local public-use flight departed North Island Naval Air Station (NZY), San Diego, about 0930.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The operator submitted a written report.
The pilot was flying the airplane from the left seat.  The airplane rendezvoused with another 
Learjet in W-291, approximately 100 nm west of NZY, to begin a series of flight profiles for the 
testing of a Common Aviation Command and Control System for the Department of Defense.  
Though visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, the crew noted 
that the horizon was very difficult to discern.
The first profile was flown with the airplane 1,000 feet below and slightly in trail of the other 
Learjet.  The run was uneventful except for increasing communications difficulties with the test 
controllers as the flight proceeded down range.  While attempting to reestablish 
communications with the test controllers, the high Learjet began a left-hand orbit.  The pilot 
(of the mishap Learjet) maneuvered to a co-altitude in trail position to maintain sight of the 
other airplane and facilitate the setup for the next profile.  During the maneuver, the pilot lost 
sight of the other airplane, and rolled right to what he perceived was 25,000 feet mean sea level 
(msl), 270 knots indicated airspeed (KIAS), and 90 percent N1, respectively.  Unable to see the 
horizon or the other airplane, he attempted to transition to instrument references.  But his 
vision was still impaired by the glare from the sun, delaying his recognition of the airplane's 
attitude.  The copilot had been heads down in the cockpit, and when he ultimately noted the 
airplane's increasing bank, assumed that the pilot was maneuvering to avoid the other 
airplane.  The pilot initiated recovery with the airplane in an estimated 70-degree right bank, 
50-degree nose down attitude, and an airspeed of 380 KIAS.
The pilot moved the thrust levers rapidly to idle, rolled to a wings level attitude, and began the 
dive recovery.  He noted that the airspeed seemed to stabilize at 380 KIAS, and the pull was 
not abrupt.  Both crew members felt that the pull up was completed smoothly without 
excessive G force.  During the dive, the crew noted that the airplane was definitely shuddering, 
but did not recall any rolling tendencies or vibration of the control yoke.  The crew did not 
recall any unusual noises other than the loud wind noise.  
The equipment operator seated at the midpoint of the cabin noted that the wind noise and the 
shudder continued to increase in intensity until partway through the dive recovery.  At the end 
of this time, he heard a very loud bang and felt a large shudder, after which the airplane's 
shuddering almost immediately ceased.  Everything seemed to return to normal "as if nothing 
happened."
The dive recovery was completed by 16,000 feet msl, and the aircrew noted no unusual 
handling qualities as the airplane slowed to 200 KIAS.  The crew conducted a controllability 
check by slowing it to 150 KIAS and lowering the landing gear.  Again the airplane exhibited no 
unusual flight characteristics.  The remainder of the flight and landing at NZY were uneventful.
Page 4 of 6LAX07TA051
During post flight inspection, the aircrew discovered that the right elevator was missing.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/01/2006
Flight Time:
19581 hours (Total, all aircraft), 12016 hours (Total, this make and model), 16473 hours (Pilot 
In Command, all aircraft), 186 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 27 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/01/2006
Flight Time:
2086 hours (Total, all aircraft), 891 hours (Total, this make and model), 248 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 205 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 52 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX07TA051
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Learjet
Registration:
N26FN
Model/Series:
36 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
011
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/01/2006, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
18300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
12043 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Garrett
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TFE 731-2-2B
Registered Owner:
L-3 Communications Flight 
Capital LLC
Rated Power:
3500 lbs
Operator:
L-3 Communications Flight 
Internata
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
NZY, 26 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
140 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0855 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
36°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.11 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / -9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Haze
Departure Point: 
San Diego, CA (NZY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0930 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
NORTH ISLAND NAS/HALSEY FIELD 
(NZY)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
26 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 6 of 6LAX07TA051
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
31.161667, -119.348056
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard Plagens
Adopted Date:
03/31/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Bill Dickinson; Federal Aviation Administration; San Diego, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
