National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Bar Harbor, ME
Accident Number: NYC02LA023
Date & Time: 11/01/2001, 2145 EST
Registration: N210CJ
Aircraft: Beech 1900C
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 13 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis The first officer landed the airplane upon completion of a night ILS approach.
Just after touchdown, the airplane struck a deer in the vicinity of the left engine.
The deer had been crossing the runway from left to right.
The captain shut down the engine and taxied to the gate.
Post-accident examination of the airplane revealed that the engine firewall was cracked, one propeller blade was bent, and another blade had separated near the hub.
The separated portion of the blade was found about 300 feet from where the collision occurred.
Weather at the time included a 600-foot overcast layer.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A deer, which had been crossing the runway as the airplane touched down.
A factor was the dark night conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) OBJECT - ANIMAL(S) 2.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT Factual Information On November 1, 2001, at 2145 eastern standard time, a Beech 1900C, N210CJ, operating as U.S Airways Express flight 5955, was substantially damaged when it collided with a deer while landing at Hancock County-Bar Harbor Airport (BHB), Bar Harbor, Maine.
The certificated airline transport pilot, the first officer, and the 11 passengers were uninjured.
Night instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The flight was operating on an instrument flight rules flight plan between General Edward Lawrence Logan International Airport (BOS), Boston, Massachusetts, and Bar Harbor.
The scheduled passenger flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
The flight was operated by Colgan Air, Inc.
According to the Director of Safety, the first officer had just completed an ILS RWY 22 approach.
She landed the airplane, and just after touchdown, it struck a deer that was crossing from left to right.
The captain took control of the airplane and stopped it on the runway.
As the airplane slowed to a stop, the left engine began to vibrate.
The captain secured the engine, and after shutdown, noted that one of the composite propeller blades was missing.
After assessing the damage, the captain taxied the airplane to the ramp, where the passengers deplaned uneventfully.
Post-accident examination of the airplane revealed that the engine firewall was cracked, one propeller blade was bent, and another blade had separated near the hub.
The separated portion of the blade was found about 300 feet from where the collision occurred.
Weather at the time included a 600-foot overcast layer.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
