National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Argyle, NY
Accident Number: NYC02LA024
Date & Time: 11/02/2001, 1410 EST
Registration: N36SK
Aircraft: Cessna 172D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that after takeoff, about 150 feet above the ground, the oil access door opened.
The pilot decided to return for a landing, and made a left turn back towards the airport.
During the turn, the airplane lost lift an impacted an alfalfa field about 1/2 mile short of the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control while maneuvering.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On November 2, 2001, about 1410 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172D, N36SK, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain near Argyle, New York.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot stated that he took off from runway 21 at Argyle Airport  (1C3), Argyle, New York.
Shortly after departure, about 150 feet above the ground, the oil access door opened.
The pilot decided to return for a landing, and made a left turn back towards the airport.
The pilot added that due to strong winds, the airplane "lost lift," and it impacted the ground.
The airplane came to rest in an alfalfa field about 1/2 mile from the airport.
The nose gear, propeller, wings, and fuselage sustained substantial damage.
The pilot further stated that he did not experience any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions with the airplane.
The reported wind at an airport about 8 miles northwest of the accident site, at 1353, was from 190 degrees at 14 knots, gusting to 18 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 68, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
