National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Denton, TX
Accident Number: FTW02LA029
Date & Time: 11/03/2001, 1500 CST
Registration: N96LS
Aircraft: Landoll Vans RV 3-A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot had spent most of the day waxing his airplane and decided to fly it once around the pattern.
The engine start-up, taxi, and engine run-up "indications were normal."
While climbing out at 600 feet agl, the engine lost power.
The pilot attempted, unsuccessfully, to restart the engine.
During a forced landing to a field, the airplane impacted small trees and vegetation.
Examination of the engine revealed it was "seized" and contained no oil.
No evidence of an oil leak was found.
The mechanic, who had been servicing the airplane, reported to the FAA inspector that he had drained the oil from the airplane's engine, left the airplane unattended, and had not replenished the oil prior to the accident flight.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to perform a preflight inspection, which resulted in a loss of total engine power due to oil starvation.
A  contributing factor was the lack of suitable training for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
FLUID,OIL - STARVATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 4.
The airplane was owned by N96LS Club LTD of Wilmington, Delaware.
The commercial pilot, operator and sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) that he had spent most of the day waxing his airplane and decided to fly it once around the pattern.
The engine start-up, taxi, and engine run-up "indications were normal."
During climb out after takeoff from runway 17, he had turned crosswind and had climbed to 600 feet when the engine lost power.
The pilot turned downwind, switched fuel tanks, and attempted, unsuccessfully, to restart the engine.
The pilot determined that he could not make it back to the runway and initiated a forced landing, without flaps, to a field.
During the approach, the airplane impacted small trees and vegetation.
Subsequently, the airplane impacted the ground and came to rest upright.
An examination of the airplane, by the FAA inspector who responded to the accident site, revealed that both wing fuel tanks were full of fuel.
Both the left and right wings sustained substantial damage, and the left main landing gear was found separated.
The engine was found "seized," and it contained no oil.
No evidence of an oil leak was found.
The mechanic, who had been servicing the airplane, reported to the FAA inspector that he had drained the oil from the airplane's engine, left the airplane unattended, and had not replenished the oil before the accident flight.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 63, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): Glider Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
