National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Peoria, IL
Accident Number: CHI02LA018
Date & Time: 11/02/2001, 1756 CST
Registration: N5984V
Aircraft: Piper PA-28R-201T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane sustained substantial damage on impact with terrain and an object following a gear collapse during landing roll.
The pilot was uninjured.
A mechanic stated, "When lifted the Right wing the gear fell down and locked.
I jacked the left wing to engage the lock, the left gear was down but, was not locked.
The nose gear would not fall down due to the gear doors were bent, so I used the hydraulic pump to push it down and it locked."
FAA inspectors found that the airplane landed long and touched down on the left side of the centerline.
An inspector stated, "Photographs indicate that the aircraft immediately began a hard right turn.
Shortly before exiting the runway, skid marks show that the right main landing gear started to fold up.
The aircraft came to rest on the east side of the runway with the nose and right main gear retracted.
One runway light was broken off after it was struck with the left wing.
The pilot reported, "As I turned from base to final, I again ordered a pre-landing checklist noting that the gear was showing 3 green lights on the panel.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The gear collapse for undetermined reasons during the landing roll.
A factor was the pilot not using a proper touchdown point by landing long.
Findings Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT USED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE 3.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
The airplane exited the runway, impacted a runway light, and came to rest off the runway's right side.
The personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot was uninjured.
The flight had filed and had activated an IFR flight plan.
The flight had departed from Naper Aero Club Airport, near Naperville, Illinois, about 1710, had cancelled the IFR flight plan while approaching 3MY, and was landing at 3MY at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported: As I turned from base to final, I again ordered a pre-landing checklist noting that the gear was showing 3 green lights on the panel.
I cannot say with certainty what corrective action I took but the aircraft's right wing continued to descend.
Before the wing came in contact with the ground, I was unable to steer the aircraft.
The aircraft began dropping from the nose as the aircraft turned to the right.
The propeller struck the asphalt just prior to the aircraft departure from the runway.
After exiting the runway the aircraft continued to turn approximately 120 degrees from the initial landing direction and come to a stop between the runway and taxiway.
A mechanic at 3MY stated: ...
The aircraft was in the grass between runway 35 and the taxiway.
It was about 2700 feet from the approach end and about 50 feet to the east in the grass.
Peoria Approach was notified.
On Saturday morning (11/3/01) we removed the aircraft from the grass.
When lifted the Right wing the gear fell down and locked.
I jacked the left wing to engage the lock, the left gear was down but, was not locked.
The nose gear would not fall down due to the gear doors were bent, so I used the hydraulic pump to push it down and it locked.
We hooked our tug to the aircraft and put it in a tie down.
Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors examined the airplane.
The inspectors found that the airplane landed long on runway 35 and touched down on the left side of the centerline.
(See appended photographs)  An inspector stated: Photographs indicate that the aircraft immediately began a hard right turn.
Shortly before exiting the runway, skid marks show that the right main landing gear started to fold up.
The aircraft came to rest on the east side of the runway with the nose and right main gear retracted.
One runway light was broken off after it was struck with the left wing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 59, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
