National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ontario, OR
Accident Number: SEA02LA010
Date & Time: 11/02/2001, 1400 MST
Registration: N26WF
Aircraft: Fetherolf Hatz CB-1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The experimental-category amateur-built airplane suffered a broken weld in the right main landing gear during landing, resulting in a separation of the right main gear tire.
The pilot reported that he landed to the north (runway 32) on a 4,529- by 100-foot hard-surface runway.
He reported that he touched down with a light bounce.
He stated that while rolling, there was suddenly a violent pull to the right after hearing a "crunch."
The pilot reported that he applied left brake but that the plane left the runway to the right, went into the dirt and up onto its nose and upper left wingtip.
He reported that the aircraft, including the failed part, had 17.4 hours total time.
The pilot, who had built the aircraft, listed "better construction [technique] by builder" as an owner/operator safety recommendation on his NTSB accident report.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: An improper weld in the landing gear, resulting in separation of the right main landing gear wheel during a normal landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR - IMPROPER/POOR WELD 2.
The airplane subsequently departed the side of the landing runway and nosed down, receiving substantial damage.
The private pilot-in-command of the aircraft, who owned and had built the airplane and was its sole occupant, was not injured in the accident.
Visual meteorological conditions with light and variable winds prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the 14 CFR 91 personal flight from Nampa, Idaho.
The pilot reported that he landed to the north (runway 32) on a 4,529- by 100-foot hard- surface runway.
He reported that he touched down with a light bounce.
He stated that while rolling, there was suddenly a violent pull to the right after hearing a "crunch."
The pilot reported that he applied left brake but that the plane left the runway to the right, went into the dirt and up onto its nose and upper left wingtip.
He reported that the airplane, including the part that suffered the broken weld, had 17.4 hours total time.
The pilot listed "better construction [technique] by builder" as an owner/operator safety recommendation on his NTSB accident report.
The pilot, who also held a repairman/experimental aircraft builder certificate for the accident aircraft, indicated on his NTSB accident report that the aircraft's last inspection was a continuous airworthiness inspection performed on August 3, 1995, 17.4 flight hours before the accident.
A copy of the aircraft's engine log furnished by the pilot contained an entry dated September 15, 2001, for a "conditional inspection" signed by the pilot.
The pilot did not furnish a copy of the aircraft log.
According to the FAA aircraft registry, the accident aircraft received an experimental/amateur-built airworthiness certificate on April 22, 1999.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 60, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
