Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
TRINITY CENTER, CA
Accident Number:
LAX94LA233
Date & Time:
06/01/1994, 0640 PDT 
Registration:
N36025
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-28R-201T
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot said that he heard a grinding noise in the engine followed by a prop overspeed. Then 
the engine suddenly lost all power. ARTCC provided radar vectors to nearest airport and the 
pilot set up for a dead stick approach; however, he was unable to make the runway. The aircraft 
touched down gear up in a ditch, bounced out and onto parking lot, then crashed into a parked 
aircraft. Disassembly of the engine revealed fretting on the  parting surfaces of the number 1 
main bearing saddle. The crankshaft was found fatigue fractured across the number 1 crankpin 
at the interface with the number 2 long cheek. One rod end cap nut was found without a cotter 
pin installed. The second rod end cap nut was found with a shorter than normal cotter pin 
installed. The number 1 connecting rod bearing was found partially swaged out of the rod, with 
fretting observed on the bearing surfaces. The side faces of connecting rod number 1 were 
scored. The engine records revealed that cylinders number 1 and 4 were replaced on May 9, 
1994, 29 hours prior to the accident. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the fatigue fracture of the crankshaft due to improper maintenance installation of the number 1 
cylinder and the inadequate torquing of the case through bolts at that location. 
Page 2 of 6LAX94LA233
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - FATIGUE
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
3. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - FAILURE,TOTAL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH
5. OBJECT - AIRCRAFT PARKED/STANDING
Page 3 of 6LAX94LA233
Factual Information
 On June 1, 1994, at 0640 Pacific daylight time, a Piper PA-28R- 201T, N36025, collided with 
ground obstructions while attempting a forced landing at the Trinity Center, California, 
airport.  The forced landing was precipitated by a total loss of engine power while in cruise 
flight.  The aircraft was operated by Rainbow Air of Long Beach, California, and was rented by 
the pilot for a personal cross-country flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time and an IFR flight plan was filed for the operation.  The aircraft incurred substantial 
damage.  The certificated private pilot incurred minor injuries and the passenger was not 
injured.  The flight originated at the Medford, Oregon, airport on the morning of the accident 
at 0550 as an IFR cross-country flight to Long Beach, California.
The pilot said in his statement that while en route at 11,000 feet, he heard a "grinding noise" in 
the engine followed by a propeller overspeed.  A few seconds later, the engine suddenly lost all 
power.  The pilot said he informed Oakland ARTCC (ZOA) of his problem within 30 seconds of 
the event and they provided vector to nearest airport, which was Trinity Center.  The pilot said 
he set up for a dead stick approach to the airport; however, he was unable to make the runway.  
The aircraft touched down gear-up in a ditch, bounced out and onto the parking lot, then 
crashed into a parked aircraft.
The engine was removed from the airframe for a detailed examination, which was conducted 
on June 9, 1994, at Hillside Aviation in Redding, California.  The examination was conducted 
by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector from the Sacramento, 
California, Flight Standards District Office, with assistance provided by a technical 
representative from Teledyne Continental Motors.  The reports from both the FAA inspector 
and the Teledyne Continental Motors representative are attached as an exhibit to this report.
Disassembly of the engine revealed fretting on the parting surfaces of the number 1 main 
bearing saddle.  The crankshaft was found fractured across the number 1 crankpin at the 
interface with the number 2 long cheek.
The number 1 connecting rod remained on the number 1 crankpin.  One rod end cap nut was 
found without a cotter pin installed in the castlenated nut.  The second rod end cap nut was 
found with a shorter than normal cotter pin installed.  The number 1 connecting rod bearing 
was found partially swaged out of the rod big end, with fretting observed on the bearing 
surfaces.  The side faces of connecting rod number 1 were scored.
The fractured crankshaft was sent to the FAA Manufacturing Satellite Inspection Office in 
Mobile, Alabama, for analysis by the Teledyne Continental materials laboratory under FAA 
supervision.  The metallurgical analysis report completed by Teledyne Continental is attached 
as an exhibit to this report.  In pertinent part, the materials laboratory found that the 
crankshaft fractured at the number 1 crankpin due to a sub- surface initiated fatigue crack.
The engine maintenance records were examined in detail.  The Continental TSIO-360-FB1 
engine, serial No. 281066-R was remanufactured by the Continental factory on June 24, 1991, 
and installed in the accident aircraft on July 4, 1991.  At the time of the accident, the engine 
had accrued 1,015 operating hours since remanufacture.  Engine cylinders number 1 and 4 
were replaced on May 9, 1994, 29 hours prior to the accident.
Page 4 of 6LAX94LA233
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
31, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/30/1993
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
159 hours (Total, all aircraft), 28 hours (Total, this make and model), 84 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 49 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N36025
Model/Series:
PA-28R-201T PA-28R-201
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28R-7803308
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/06/1994, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
68 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4362 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONTINENTAL
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-360-FB1
Registered Owner:
MARVIN R. GRIMMETT
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
RAINBOW AIR
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX94LA233
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dawn
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
30 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
MEDFORD, OR (MFR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
LONG BEACH, CA (LGB)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0550 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
TRINITY CENTER (O86)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2390 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
32
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3200 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JEFF         RICH,
Adopted Date:
12/07/1994
Additional Participating Persons:
PETE   WILHELMSON; SACRAMENTO, CA
MICHAEL   GRIMES; MOBILE, AL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX94LA233
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
