Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
McVeytown, PA
Accident Number:
ERA12LA541
Date & Time:
09/01/2012, 0900 EDT 
Registration:
N70415
Aircraft:
JOHNSTON DOUGLAS S SAFARI
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel exhaustion
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness who spoke with the pilot before the flight reported that the pilot had checked the fuel 
before departure and intended to "make a couple of laps" before proceeding to a local airport to 
purchase more fuel. Another witness observed the helicopter perform two 180-degree turns 
before it descended and impacted the ground. Examination of the accident site confirmed a 
vertical impact, and the helicopter damage was consistent with low or minimal rotor speed at 
the time of impact. Inspection of the fuel system revealed no fuel in the right fuel tank and 
about 2 pints of fuel in the left fuel tank. No contamination was observed in the fuel on board, 
and no obstructions were observed in the fuel system. 
The experimental amateur-built helicopter was constructed from a kit and received its 
airworthiness certificate in 2003. The pilot purchased the helicopter about 4 months before the 
accident through the kit manufacturing company, which was brokering the sale of the 
helicopter for the builder™s estate. The pilot did not hold a pilot certificate and did not register 
the helicopter with the FAA. Examination of the pilot's logbook revealed that about 2 years 
before the accident, he had received 3.2 hours of helicopter instruction. Interviews revealed 
that when the pilot acquired the helicopter, he flew an additional 15 hours with the owner of 
the helicopter kit manufacturing company (in the accident helicopter and another company 
helicopter). However, these flights were limited to hover practice.
It is likely that while the pilot was maneuvering the helicopter at a low altitude, it experienced a 
loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion. At this point, the pilot needed to immediately 
enter an autorotation. However, given the pilot™s limited flight training and his lack of pilot 
certification (he would have had to demonstrate an autorotation in order to become a 
certificated helicopter pilot), he almost certainly was not proficient in performing 
autorotations. The helicopter™s vertical impact with low rotor rpm is consistent with the pilot 
failing to make the control inputs necessary to enter an autorotation. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 7ERA12LA541
The pilot's lack of proficiency and certification, which resulted in his failure to enter an 
autorotation when the engine lost power. Contributing to the accident was the pilot™s 
inadequate fuel planning, which resulted in fuel exhaustion and a subsequent loss of engine 
power. 
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid level (Factor)
Personnel issues
Qualification/certification - Pilot (Cause)
Total experience - Pilot (Cause)
Fuel planning - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 7ERA12LA541
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 2012, at 0900 eastern daylight time, N70415, experimental amateur-built 
Safari helicopter was substantially damaged when it impacted the ground while maneuvering 
in McVeytown, PA. The non-certificated pilot was fatally injured. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the personal, local flight that was conducted under the provisions of 14 
CFR Part 91. 
According to a witness, he observed the helicopter flying away from him, and then made a 180-
degree turn toward the hangar it was kept in. The helicopter then made another 180-degree 
turn and "started to go down." The witness observed a puff of smoke as the helicopter 
disappeared from his view. 
PILOT INFORMATION
A review of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) database revealed the pilot did not hold 
a pilot certificate. 
According to a pilot logbook provided by the pilot's wife, he logged three flights on: August 14, 
2010, August 21, 2010, and October 9, 2010. The total flight time for these flights was 3.2 
hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter was built from a kit, by the previous owner, and received its first airworthiness 
certificate on April 10, 2003. It was equipped with a Lycoming O-320, 160-horsepower engine. 
The accident pilot purchased the helicopter in March 2012; however, there was no evidence 
that he attempted to acquire an airworthiness certificate or register the helicopter with the 
FAA. 
A review of the helicopter and engine logbooks revealed the most recent condition inspection 
was completed on June 30, 2011 by the previous owner/builder. No anomalies were noted in 
the entry, and a tachometer time of 395 hours was noted. 
The tachometer time at the accident site was 442 hours. 
According to the kit manufacturer, they brokered the sale of the helicopter between the 
accident pilot and the widow of the previous owner/builder. After the accident pilot purchased 
the helicopter, the kit manufacturer performed some maintenance on it to assure it was in a 
flyable condition. The work they performed included: replacing the main rotor spindle, and 
performing an annual condition inspection. This work was completed on May 11, 2012. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather recorded at the nearest airport, at 0853, included wind from 280 degrees at 7 
knots, 10 miles visibility, a broken cloud layer at 7,000 feet, temperature 23 degrees C, dew 
point 19 degrees C, and altimeter setting 30.13 inches mercury.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site confirmed the helicopter impacted the ground in a vertical 
attitude with minimal forward speed. Inspection of the main rotor blades and tail rotor blades 
Page 4 of 7ERA12LA541
revealed damage consistent with low or minimal rotor speed (RPM) impact with terrain. Main 
and tail rotor control system continuity was confirmed from the cockpit to the control surfaces. 
Inspection of the fuel system revealed no fuel in the right fuel tank and approximately 2 pints 
in the left fuel tank. A sample of fuel from the left tank was found to be free of contamination 
and consistent with 100LL aviation fuel. The carburetor bowl drain was opened and fuel was 
observed. No obstructions were noted in the fuel system, or the air induction system. The fuel 
selector was in the ON position. 
The engine crankshaft was rotated at the propeller flange and thumb compression and valve 
train continuity was confirmed on all four cylinders. No mechanical anomalies were noted 
during the engine examination. [Additional information regarding the on-scene helicopter 
examination can be found in the FAA Inspector Statement located in the public docket.]
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Mifflin County Coroner performed an autopsy on the pilot on September 1, 2012. The 
cause of death was listed as blunt force trauma.
The FAA Toxicology and Accident Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma conducted 
toxicological testing on the pilot. No drugs or alcohol were noted in the testing. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
A witness who spoke with the pilot prior to the flight reported that the pilot had "five and a half 
inches" of fuel in the helicopter prior to departure. He reported the pilot intended to "make a 
couple of laps," and then they were going to fly to the local airport to purchase more fuel. 
According to the kit manufacturer, when the pilot arrived at their facility to acquire the 
helicopter in May 2012, the owner of the kit manufacturing company flew with the pilot for 
about 15 hours (both in a company helicopter and in the accident helicopter). The purpose of 
these flights was for the pilot to practice hovering the helicopter. Because the pilot did not have 
a pilot's license and was not familiar with this type of helicopter, the company owner told him 
not to lift the helicopter more than 2 feet off the ground, once he arrived home, until he 
received instruction in it. 
According to the pilot's wife, she believed the pilot flew the helicopter for the first time after it 
arrived at their home from the manufacturer's facility, on July 4, 2012. She estimated the pilot 
flew approximately every other weekend since then (three times in July and two in August).The 
pilot's wife believed the flights only included the pilot practicing lifting the helicopter off the 
ground and setting it back down again. He may have circled the field where he kept the 
helicopter, but she believed that would have been the longest duration of a flight. The pilot's 
wife was not aware that he intended to fly the helicopter on the day of the accident.
A review of the Height-Velocity diagram contained in the Safari Helicopter Flight Manual 
revealed that operations below an altitude of 400 feet and below airspeeds of 50 knots should 
be avoided. 
According to the FAA Rotorcraft Flying Handbook, FAA-H-8083-21, the height/velocity (H/V) 
diagram depicts critical combinations of airspeed and altitude should an engine failure occur. 
Operations in crosshatched or shaded areas of the H/V diagram may not allow enough time for 
the critical transition from powered flight to autorotation.
Page 5 of 7ERA12LA541
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Fuel exhaustion (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
None
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
None 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 18 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
JOHNSTON DOUGLAS S
Registration:
N70415
Model/Series:
SAFARI 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
0442N
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/30/2011, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
47 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
442 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
Ken Smith
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
Ken Smith
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ERA12LA541
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
UNV, 1239 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
23 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0853 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 7000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.13 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
McVeytown, PA 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
McVeytown, PA 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
40.451111, -77.826389 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jill M Demko
Adopted Date:
04/10/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Jim Pool; FAA/FSDO; Harrisburg, PA
Publish Date:
04/10/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=84877
Page 7 of 7ERA12LA541
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
