Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Longmont, CO
Accident Number:
CEN12LA655
Date & Time:
09/01/2012, 1130 MDT 
Registration:
N898N
Aircraft:
TL ULTRALIGHT SRO STINGSPORT
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
While conducting maneuvers at 2,500 feet, the airplane began to vibrate violently. The pilot 
aborted the maneuver and retarded the throttle to idle; the engine experienced a total loss of 
power. The pilot executed a forced landing into a field. After the landing, the pilot and the 
designated pilot examiner noticed that two of the propeller blades had separated from the 
propeller hub. An examination of the fractured blades and blade sleeves revealed that blade A 
likely fractured due to progressive cracking at laminate bonds at the interface between the 
wood blade and the metal sleeve. The powdery wood observed in the slots and at the root end 
of the blade shank were indicative of rubbing wood as the cracks progressed. The blade B 
fracture was likely secondary and occurred due to the vibrations associated with the imbalance 
created by the blade A fracture and subsequent separation. The propeller log indicated that 
manufacturer-specified visual inspections and torque checks were not conducted at the 
specified interval of 150 hours but at intervals of about 203, 320, and 250 hours. The delayed 
visual inspections reduced the likelihood of detecting the cracks and the delayed torque checks 
might have contributed to crack growth in the blade.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the wood propeller blades in flight. Contributing to the accident was the 
owner/operator™s failure to complete required inspections on the propeller within the specified 
interval, which reduced the likelihood of detecting the cracks and may have contributed to the 
crack growth. 
Page 2 of 6CEN12LA655
Findings
Aircraft
Propeller blade section - Failure (Cause)
Propeller blade section - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Factor)
Propeller blade section - Inadequate inspection (Factor)
Personnel issues
Scheduled/routine inspection - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 6CEN12LA655
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 2012, about 1130 mountain daylight time, a TL Ultralight SRO Stingsport 
airplane, N898N, conducted a forced landing after two of the propeller blades separated 
inflight near Longmont, Colorado. The airplane sustained substantial damage. The sport pilot 
and the designated pilot examiner (DPE) on board were not injured. The aircraft was 
registered to STING4FUN LLC and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 as an instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight plan. The flight originated from Erie 
Municipal Airport (KEIK), Erie, Colorado at 1100. 
The DPE stated that while the pilot was conducting a steep turn demonstration at 2,500 feet 
above the ground, the engine began vibrating violently. The pilot aborted the maneuver and 
retarded the throttle to idle when the engine experienced a total loss of power. The pilot made 
an emergency landing in a nearby field. After the landing, the pilot and DPE noticed that two of 
the three propeller blades had separated from the propeller hub. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage to the firewall and engine mount. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 43, held a sport pilot certificate at the time of the accident. He received his 
private pilot certificate after the conclusion of the accident flight. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a TL Ultralight SRO Stingsport, two-place, high wing, fixed gear, light sport 
airplane manufactured in 2006. An airworthiness certificate was issued for N889N on March 
10, 2006. It was powered by a Bombardier Rotax engine and equipped with a 3 bladed 
WoodComp wooden propeller. 
Visual inspections of the propeller and propeller hub and bolt torques were checked per the TL 
Ultralight SRO and WoodComp instructions. The inspections were completed on: August 1, 
2009 at a total time of 158.4; August 3, 2009 at a total time of 361.2; August 12, 2010 at a total 
time of 680.9; and September 1, 2011 at a total time of 924.8. 
According to WoodComp, the propeller inspections were required at 150 hour intervals. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An automated weather report at Erie, Colorado, 14 miles north of the accident site, was issued 
at 1134 and reported: wind from 020 degrees and 3 knots, 10 miles visibility, sky clear, 
temperature 29 degrees Celsius (C), dewpoint 3 degrees C, and pressure 30.12 inches of 
mercury. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest upright in a field. The engine mounts and firewall were bent during 
the forced landing. The rest of the airplane was otherwise unremarkable. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Page 4 of 6CEN12LA655
The remaining propeller blade and all three propeller sleeves were examined by the NTSB 
Materials Laboratory, Washington, DC. Each of the propeller blades and corresponding blades 
sleeves were labeled A, B, and C for identification purposes. 
Blade A consisted of an entire blade sleeve and a small amount of fractured wood inside the 
sleeve. A tan powdery substance was noted in the sleeve and in the slots of the sleeve. The 
substance was tested and matched that of the wood propeller. Progressive cracks were evident 
in blade A between the blade and the metal sleeve. 
Blade B consisted of an entire blade sleeve and a section of wood which remained attached to 
the sleeve and also extended out of the sleeve. The blade exhibited cracks in the wood that 
corresponded to the interface between the blade and the sleeve. 
Blade C consisted of an entire blade sleeve and an entire wood blade and exhibited kinked 
fibers in the composite layer and crack features at the blade root near the metal sleeve.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
43
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/06/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Check Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Page 5 of 6CEN12LA655
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
TL ULTRALIGHT SRO
Registration:
N898N
Model/Series:
STINGSPORT 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Special Light-Sport
Serial Number:
TLUSA129
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
STING4FUN LLC
Rated Power:
Operator:
STING4FUN LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KEIK
Distance from Accident Site:
14 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1134 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
200°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
20°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.12 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
ERIE, CO (EIK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
ERIE, CO (EIK)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.217778, -105.010278 (est)
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael J Folkerts
Adopted Date:
04/10/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Terry Rhea; Federal Aviation Administration; Denver, CO
Publish Date:
04/10/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85136
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
