This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Jupiter, FL
Accident Number: ERA17LA263
Date & Time: 08/02/2017, 0720 EDT
Registration: N971SK
Aircraft: SIKORSKY S-97A
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
On August 2, 2017, about 0720, eastern daylight time, a experimental Sikorsky S-97, N971SK, 
experienced a hard landing while hovering at the William P Gwinn Airport (06FA), Jupiter, 
Florida. Both airline transport pilots received minor injuries. The test flight was conducted 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local flight. The aircraft sustained 
substantial damage.
The helicopter was recovered from the accident site and retained for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: SIKORSKY
Registration: N971SK
Model/Series: S-97A NO SERIES
Aircraft Category: Helicopter
Amateur Built: No
Operator: SIKORSKY AIRCRAFT CORP
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: Commercial Space Transp.
Experimental Permit
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Dawn
Observation Facility, Elevation: SUA, 16 ft msl
Observation Time: 0747 EDT
Distance from Accident Site: 18 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 27°C / 25°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: Calm / ,
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 7 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.11 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: Company VFR
Departure Point: Jupiter, FL (06FA)
Destination: Jupiter, FL (06FA)
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 2 Minor
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude: 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Eric Alleyne
Additional Participating Persons: Javier Casanova; Sikorsky Aircraft Corporation; Jupiter, FL
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
