This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Brawley, CA
Accident Number: WPR17LA174
Date & Time: 08/01/2017, 0655 PDT
Registration: N4913X
Aircraft: ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL S 2R
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
On August 1, 2017, about 0655 Pacific daylight time, a Rockwell International S2R, N4913X, 
sustained substantial damage following a partial loss of engine power and subsequent 
emergency landing near Fresno, California. The airplane was registered to and operated by 
Farm Aviation Inc., under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 137 as 
an aerial application flight. The pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the flight which operated without a flight plan. The local flight 
departed from a private airstrip at 0645.
The pilot reported that shortly after takeoff, while conducting a low-level altitude 
reconnaissance of the field, the engine started to lose power. The pilot subsequently initiated a 
forced landing to the field. During the landing, both wings and the engine firewall sustained 
substantial damage. 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: ROCKWELL INTERNATIONAL
Registration: N4913X
Model/Series: S 2R UNDESIGNAT
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: Agricultural Aircraft (137)
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Observation Time: 
Distance from Accident Site:
Temperature/Dew Point: 
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: / ,
Lowest Ceiling: 
Visibility:
Altimeter Setting:
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Brawley, CA
Destination: Brawley, CA
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 None
Latitude, Longitude: 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Maja Smith
Additional Participating Persons:
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
