Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Seagoville, TX
Accident Number:
FTW02FA028
Date & Time:
11/03/2001, 1230 CST 
Registration:
N127RB
Aircraft:
Robinson R22
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The pilot-rated student receiving instruction stated that the objective of the flight lesson was to 
work on confined area and pinnacle landings.  The student stated that he had practiced a 
number of confined area landings in the local area and along a river.  The student added that 
following his last landing/takeoff, the flight instructor took over flying to give him a break.  The 
flight instructor flew the helicopter north of the last few landing areas to review their lesson.  
The flight instructor turned the helicopter south and flew along the river instructing the 
student and commenting on the various landing areas.  The student stated that he was looking 
over his right shoulder at one of the previous landing areas, and looked forward to see wires in 
front of the helicopter.  The student exclaimed, "wires!" and saw the instructor pull up on the 
collective and left on the cyclic.  The helicopter pitched up and rolled to the left; subsequently 
impacting trees and terrain along the left side of the river.  Examination of the accident site 
revealed that there was a set of three unmarked wires; one which remained hanging across the 
river, and two others that were laying on the west bank of the river.  The helicopter came to rest 
on its left side among trees approximately 100 yards from the wires.  The wire that remained 
hanging across the river was approximately 40 feet above the river, and was below the tops of 
the trees along the banks.  Examination of the helicopter revealed that the mast cowling 
displayed two marks and tears perpendicular to the mast. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the flight instructor's failure to maintain clearance with wires while maneuvering along a river.
Page 2 of 6FTW02FA028
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION
2. (C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
Page 3 of 6FTW02FA028
Factual Information
On November 3, 2001, approximately 1230 central standard time, a Robinson R22 helicopter, 
N127RB, was substantially damaged when it impacted wires, trees, and terrain while 
maneuvering near Seagoville, Texas.  The helicopter was registered to and operated by Sky 
Helicopters Inc., of Garland, Texas.  The flight instructor sustained fatal injuries, and the pilot-
rated student sustained serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a 
flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight.  The 
local flight departed Garland, Texas, approximately 1130.  
According to the student, the objective of the flight lesson was to work on confined area and 
pinnacle landings.  The student stated that he had practiced a number of confined area 
landings in the local area and along the Trinity River.  The student added that following his last 
landing/takeoff, the flight instructor took over flying to give him a break.  The flight instructor 
flew the helicopter north of the last few landing areas to review their lesson.  The flight 
instructor turned the helicopter south and flew along the river instructing the student and 
commenting on the various landing areas.  The student stated that he was looking over his 
right shoulder at one of the previous landing areas, and looked forward to see wires in front of 
the helicopter.  The student exclaimed, "wires!" and saw the instructor pull up on the collective 
and left on the cyclic.  The helicopter pitched up and rolled to the left; subsequently impacting 
trees and terrain along the left side of the river.  The student reported that the visibility at the 
time of the accident was approximately 10 miles.
Examination of the accident site, by the NTSB investigator-in-charge and an FAA inspector, 
revealed a set of three unmarked wires, one which remained hanging across the river, and two 
others that were laying on the west bank of the river.  The helicopter came to rest on its left side 
among trees approximately 100 yards from the wires.  The wire that remained hanging across 
the river was approximately 40 feet above the river, and was below the tops of the trees along 
the banks.  One of the tail rotor blades was found separated from the tail rotor hub, and the 
vertical and horizontal stabilizers were separated from the tail boom.  The aforementioned 
items came to rest on the ground and in a tree, respectively, approximately 40 yards prior to 
the main wreckage.  Examination of the helicopter revealed that the mast cowling displayed 
two marks and tears perpendicular to the mast. 
The flight instructor had accumulated a total of 7,171 flight hours, of which 6,976 hours were in 
rotorcraft and 3,800 hours were in the same make and model as the accident helicopter.  
The flight instructor was transported to the hospital, where he died at 1405.  An autopsy 
conducted by the Southwestern Institute of Forensic Sciences, Dallas, Texas, determined the 
cause of death was "multiple blunt force injuries."  A toxicological test performed by the Civil 
Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, detected atropine in the instructor's blood 
and liver.  Atropine is typically administered as part of resuscitative efforts.  
Page 4 of 6FTW02FA028
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/14/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/06/2001
Flight Time:
7171 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3800 hours (Total, this make and model), 7000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 185 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 69 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/01/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/22/2001
Flight Time:
13500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 32 hours (Total, this make and model), 12000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 28 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 18 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6FTW02FA028
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Robinson
Registration:
N127RB
Model/Series:
R22 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2085
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/05/2001, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1370 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
84.6 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1708.5 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-B2C
Registered Owner:
Sky Helicopters, Inc.
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
Sky Helicopters, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
S4HA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
RBD, 660 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
290°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.26 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Garland, TX (T57)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Nicole L Charnon
Adopted Date:
02/20/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Oscar F Thomas; FAA FSDO; Dallas, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
