The captain was taking off on runway 21 with the wind from 330 degrees at 6 knots. After the 
airplane had attained about 120 knots and had traversed about half the 10,000 foot runway, 
the captain aborted the takeoff, when he heard a loud noise and felt a severe vibration. 
Subsequently, the airplane angled off the departure end of the runway and encountered soft 
terrain. It came to rest about 300 feet beyond the end of the runway with the nose landing gear 
collapsed. According to a tire analysis report, the left outboard tire failed in fatigue, followed by 
the left inboard tire, 'as the result of operation in an overdeflected condition.'  The report 
stated, 'Over-deflection is caused by operating the tire overloaded or underinflated.' 
overdeflection of the left outboard main landing gear tire, probably due to underinflation and 
inadequate inspection, which resulted in fatigue failure of the left outboard tire and subsequent 
failure of the left inboard tire. 
 On May 1, 1996, approximately 2140 mountain daylight time, a Rockwell International NA-
265-80, N773W, owned and operated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Forest Service 
Aviation, was substantially damaged when the pilot aborted takeoff at Albuquerque, New 
Mexico.  There were no injuries to the airline transport rated captain and first officer and three 
passengers.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company VFR flight plan had 
been filed.  The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the operator, takeoff was initiated on runway 21 (10,000 ft x 150 ft., concrete).  
Approximately 90 to 100 knots, the aircraft moved to the left of the runway centerline, 
requiring right aileron correction.  When the airplane had achieved approximately 120 knots 
and was about 5,000 feet down the runway, there was a loud noise followed by a severe 
vibration, and the airplane pulled hard to the right.  The captain initiated aborted takeoff 
procedures by applying brakes and reverse thrust.  The aircraft tracked across and departed the 
left side of the runway.  The nose landing gear collapsed and the aircraft came to a halt 300 feet 
beyond the departure end of the runway.
Federal Aviation Administration inspectors reported there was evidence that the left main tires 
blew out at the 3,800-foot mark.  At the 5,000-foot mark, the airplane went onto the right 
shoulder of the runway.  At the 9,800-foot mark, the airplane departed the left side of the 
runway.  In addition to the blown left tires, the right tires were found flattened.  Three runway 
lights were also damaged.
A Sabreliner Corporation report noted that there was no evidence of failure or malfunction of 
the aircraft brakes or thrust reversers.
According to the Aircraft Braking Systems Corporation, all of the wheel flanges fractured in 
tensile overload.  Although some fatigue cracking was noted in several flange segments, "there 
was no fractographic evidence to show that these cracks had initiated the primary fractures."
Goodyear Aviation Products reported the left outboard tire failed in fatigue, followed by the left 
inboard tire, "as the result of operation in an overdeflected condition."  The report added, 
"Over-deflection is caused by operating the tire overloaded or underinflated."
