The flight instructor and student were practicing soft field landings.  The instructor stated that 
the student flared the airplane too high during a landing,  The airplane landed hard on all three 
wheels simultaneously.  After the flight's termination, the student performed the post flight 
walk around inspection.  The instructor did not perform the walk around with the student.  The 
next flight instructor, during the taxi/run up, found that the flight controls would not move 
through their entire range of travel.  Subsequent examination of the airplane showed that the 
firewall was bent and restricted the forward motion of the control yoke. 
The student pilot's premature flare and the flight instructor's failure to perform remedial 
action prior to the hard landing. 
 On May 1, 1996, approximately 1800 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Cessna 172 
airplane, N3795L, registered to and operated by Smith Aero Services of Fairbanks, Alaska, 
experienced a hard landing causing damage to the firewall while performing touch and go 
landings at Fairbanks International Airport, Fairbanks, Alaska.  The instructional flight, 
operating under 14 CFR Part 91, departed Fairbanks for a local flight.  No flight plan was filed 
and visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The certificated flight instructor and the 
student were not injured and the airplane received substantial damage.
During a telephone conversation with the flight instructor on May 24, 1996, she stated 
that during one of the landings the student flared higher than normal and the airplane struck 
the ground in a three point attitude.  She felt that the landing was not unusually hard so they 
continued to perform touch and go landings.  After the flight, the student, who had ten hours of 
total flight time, performed the walk around inspection and did not see any damage.  The flight 
instructor did not perform the walk around inspection with the student.  Approximately three 
days later, another instructor noticed that the control yoke would not move through its entire 
forward range of travel.  Later examination showed that the firewall was bent and the 
surrounding structure was impeding the control yoke's movement.
The flight instructor believes that they did not cause the damage because during the 
remainder of their flight they did not encounter restrictions during the control yoke's 
movements.  However, the company records show that the airplane had not flown since their 
flight. 
The operator was sent an NTSB Form 6120.1/2 on May 28, 1996 and June 11,1996.  The 
flight instructor stated she did not feel this was an accident and she did not complete and 
return the NTSB Form 6120.1/2.
