During the landing rollout the airplane encountered a gust of wind and nosed over.  The pilot 
stated that approaching the airport he had received the local weather information from the 
airport's Unicom, which indicated the wind was from 320 degrees, at 12 knots, with occasional 
28-knot gusts.  The pilot made a straight-in approach and touched down without incident on 
runway 26.  During the rollout, a wind gust was encountered.  The pilot indicated that despite 
his efforts at maintaining airplane control, he lost control and the airplane nosed over on the 
runway.
The pilot's inadequate compensation and his failure to maintain aircraft control.  The gusty 
wind condition was a contributing factor.
On May 1, 2003, about 1400 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 170A, N1607D, nosed over during 
landing rollout at the Twentynine Palms (uncontrolled) Airport, Twentynine Palms, California.  
The airplane, operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged.  Neither the commercial pilot 
nor the passenger was injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed during the personal 
flight that was performed under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  No flight plan was filed.  The 
flight originated fromTehachapi, California, about 1250.  
The pilot reported that approaching Twentynine Palms for landing he had received the local 
weather information from the airport's Unicom operator.  The pilot indicated that the wind was 
from about 320 degrees at 12 knots, with occasional 28-knot gusts.  The pilot made a straight-
in approach and made a wheel landing without incident on runway 26, between 400 and 500 
feet beyond the runway's threshold.  During rollout, the airplane began to weathervane to the 
right.  The pilot stated that he initially maintained directional control by applying rudder and 
left brake.  However, as he lowered the tail he lost control when a wind gust was encountered, 
and the airplane nosed over on the runway.   According to the pilot, during the accident no 
mechanical malfunctions or failures were experienced with the airplane.
