The airplane sustained substantial damage when it stalled on takeoff and impacted terrain.  
The pilot reported observing approaching weather which he described as a squall line 
approximately two miles west of his location.  He also noted that a light rain had started and 
was accompanied by pea-size hail.  Weather conditions reported by the Pine Ridge Airport 
(IEN) automated surface observing system, at 1530, were winds from 340 degrees at 14 knots, 
gusting to 21 knots, 10 miles visibility, and few clouds at 3,300 feet above ground level.  The 
weather report included a notation of thunderstorms in the vicinity and lightening in the 
distance to the west and southwest.  The pilot recalled taking off to the south and had begun 
his initial climb.  He reported that the aircraft started to buffet and he "knew a stall was 
coming."  In his statement the pilot noted the "aircraft stalled on takeoff, not enough altitude 
for recovery."  The aircraft bounced and the right wing and main landing gear impacted the 
terrain.  The aircraft then nosed over.
The pilots failure to maintain adequate airspeed which resulted in a stall.  Contributing factors 
to this accident were the rain, hail, and wind gusts.
On May 4, 2003, approximately 1430 mountain daylight time, a Piper PA-18-150, N9682P, 
owned and piloted by a commercial pilot, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain 
immediately after takeoff from a pasture four miles south of Gordon, Nebraska.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was being 
operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 flight and was not on a flight plan.  The pilot 
reported no injuries.  The intended destination was the pilot's private airstrip in Wounded 
Knee, South Dakota.
The pilot reported observing weather coming in from the west.  He described the approaching 
weather was a squall line approximately two miles west of his location.  He noted that a light 
rain had started and was accompanied by pea-sized hail and intermittent wind gusts.  
The pilot reported taking off to the south and had begun his initial climb.  He reported the 
aircraft started to buffet and he "knew a stall was coming."  The pilot recalled thinking he 
would not be able to clear a rise that was ahead.  In his written statement the pilot noted the 
"aircraft stalled on takeoff, not enough altitude for recovery."  The aircraft bounced and the 
right wing and main landing gear impacted the terrain.  The aircraft then nosed over.
The pilot reported weather conditions at the scene as overcast clouds at 2,000 feet above 
ground level (agl), south winds at 10 knots, gusting to 25 knots.  He also noted light rain and 
hail.
Weather conditions reported by the Pine Ridge Airport (IEN) automated surface observing 
system, at 1530, were winds from 340 degrees at 14 knots, gusting to 21 knots, 10 miles 
visibility, and few clouds at 3,300 feet agl.  The report included a notation of thunderstorms in 
the vicinity and lightening in the distance to the west and southwest.
The pilot reported no malfunctions with the aircraft or engine prior to the accident.
The pilot stated that the accident could have been prevented by waiting for the frontal system 
to pass.
