During the nighttime departure, the airplane accelerated normally, with the engine producing 
full power during the takeoff roll and initial climb.  Upon reaching approximately 300 to 400 
feet above the ground, the engine began to lose power.  The CFI took the flight controls and 
performed a forced landing.  During the landing rollout, the airplane rolled through a shallow 
drainage swale, collapsing the nose and right main gear assemblies.  The airplane rotated to the 
right and came to rest upright.  Examination of the wreckage revealed that the fuel line, which 
ran between the fuel pump and the carburetor, was loose at the connection point on the 
carburetor.  When the electric fuel pump was activated, fuel was observed spraying from the 
connection point.  The airplane had accumulated about 20 hours of operation since a 100-hour 
inspection was performed 10 days prior to the accident.  According to 14 CFR Part 43 Appendix 
D - Scope and Detail of Items (as Applicable to the Particular Aircraft) To Be Included in 
Annual and 100 Hour Inspections, "Each person performing an annual or 100 hour inspection 
shall inspect (where applicable) components of the engine and nacelle group..."
The inadequate 100-hour inspection by maintenance personnel, which resulted in a loose fuel 
line and loss of power.  A factor related to the accident was the dark night conditions.
On May 4, 2003, about 2300 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-180, N55854, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing, after experiencing a partial loss of power while 
departing from the Orange Country Airport, Montgomery, New York.  The certified flight 
instructor (CFI) and student pilot were not injured.  Night visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed the instructional flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the CFI, after completing a 1-hour cross-country flight, the airplane was taxied to 
runway 3, with the intention of practicing takeoffs and landings.  The CFI estimated that the 
fuel on board at the time of departure was approximately 34 gallons, and the fuel selector was 
placed on the right tank because the right fuel gauge was indicating slightly more fuel.
After the student completed the pre-takeoff checklist, the CFI confirmed that the fuel boost 
pump was on, the mixture was full rich, the carburetor heat was off, and the airplane was 
configured for takeoff.  During the departure, the airplane accelerated normally, with the 
engine producing full power during the takeoff roll and initial climb.  Upon reaching 
approximately 300 to 400 feet above the ground, the engine began to lose power.  The CFI took 
the flight controls and immediately executed the emergency checklist, which consisted of 
switching fuel tanks, confirming that the mixture was rich, the fuel boost pump on, and 
applying carburetor heat.  The CFI requested that the student attempt to switch the magnetos, 
which had no effect.  The CFI cycled the throttle several times, which made the engine surge 
briefly, but not produce enough power to maintain altitude.  The CFI advised the student that a 
landing would be made to a field, and instructed him to turn the fuel selector off, turn the boost 
pump off, and pull the mixture to lean.  As the ground came into view, the CFI observed a ditch 
approximately 8 feet deep, and extended the glide so the touchdown point would be beyond the 
ditch.  The airplane touched down clear of the ditch; however, during the landing rollout, the 
airplane rolled through a shallow drainage swale, collapsing the nose and right main gear 
assemblies.  The airplane rotated to the right and came to rest upright.
The wreckage was examined by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector.  He observed that 
the fuel line, which ran between the fuel pump and the carburetor, was loose at the connection 
point on the carburetor.  When the electric fuel pump was activated, fuel was observed 
spraying from the connection point.
Fuel was observed in both wing tanks, and was absent of debris and contamination.
Examination of the gascolator and the fuel line which ran between the fuel selector and the fuel 
pump, revealed an absence of fuel.
Blue stains were observed on the outer skin of the airplane, from the firewall area, extending 
about 4 feet aft.
The airplane had accumulated about 20 hours of operation since a 100-hour inspection was 
performed on April 25, 2003.
According to 14 CFR Part 43 Appendix D - Scope and Detail of Items (as Applicable to the 
Particular Aircraft) To Be Included in Annual and 100 Hour Inspections:
"Each person performing an annual or 100 hour inspection shall inspect (where applicable) 
components of the engine and nacelle group as follows:
(1) Engine section - for visual evidence of excessive oil, fuel, or hydraulic leaks, and sources of 
such leaks.
(2) Studs and nuts - for improper torquing and obvious defects.
(3) Internal engine - for cylinder compression and for metal particles or foreign matter on 
screens and sump drain plugs. If there is weak cylinder compression, for improper internal 
condition and improper internal tolerances.
(4) Engine mount - for cracks, looseness of mounting, and looseness of engine to mount.
(5) Flexible vibration dampeners - for poor condition and deterioration.
(6) Engine controls - for defects, improper travel, and improper safetying.
(7) Lines, hoses, and clamps - for leaks, improper condition and looseness.
(8) Exhaust stacks - for cracks, defects, and improper attachment.
(9) Accessories - for apparent defects in security of mounting.
(10) All systems - for improper installation, poor general condition, defects, and insecure 
attachment.
(11) Cowling - for cracks, and defects."
