According to family members, the uncertificated person operated his airplane from a private 
airstrip about 1/4 mile from the accident site. Shortly after take off the airplane collided with 
the ground. A  witness reported a loud noise, and thought a car had crashed. The sheriff 
department dispatched deputies to the scene and discovered the downed airplane. 
Examination of the downed airplane revealed that the flight controls were conected and moved 
freely. The fuel tanks were not breached and fuel was found in both wing tanks. The  
uncertificated pilot did not report any problems with the airplane prior to the accident.
The pilot's failure to maintain airspeed which resulted in an inadvertent stall, and subsequent 
collision with the ground.
On May 4, 2003, at 1900 eastern daylight time, a homebuilt, unregistered airplane, operated 
by an uncertificated pilot, collided with the ground while attempting to takeoff from a private 
grass airstrip in Summerville, Georgia. The personal flight was operated under the provision of 
Title 14 CFR Part 91 and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan was filed. The airplane was substantially damaged and the uncertificated pilot 
received serious injuries. The flight departed Summerville, Georgia, at 1857 on May 4, 2003.
According to family members, the uncertificated pilot operated his airplane from a private 
airstrip about 1/4 mile from the accident site. At the approximated time of the accident, a 
witness reported a loud noise and thought a car had crashed. The sheriff department 
dispatched deputies to the scene and discovered the downed airplane. 
The wreckage distribution  covered an area of 40 feet long and 30 feet wide along a magnetic 
path of 230 degrees. Examination of the downed airplane revealed that the right wing had 
crush damage with pieces of tree bark embedded into the leading edge. A broken tree with 
pieces of bark missing was located two feet away from the right wing. The flight controls were 
connected and moved freely. The fuel tanks were not breached and fuel was found in both wing 
tanks. 
The uncertificated pilot did not report any problems with the airplane prior to the accident.
