The pilot reported he was operating the airplane about 100 feet above the ground when he 
initiated a downwind turn.  He said that during the turn, the airplane encountered a 
downdraft, which pushed the airplane closer to the ground.  He immediately applied full 
power, but the engine did not appear to produce full power, and the airplane continued to 
descend.  He said due to the airplane's low altitude, he was unable to select a better landing 
area than a nearby frozen river.  The airplane landed hard on the ice, damaging the wings, 
fuselage, and landing gear.  The pilot indicated that he believed that the engine did not produce 
full power due to carburetor ice, which had accumulated since he had been operating the 
engine at a reduced power setting without carburetor heat.
The pilot's failure to use carburetor heat, which resulted in the accumulation of carburetor ice, 
a partial loss of engine power, and a subsequent forced landing.  Factors contributing to the 
accident are a downdraft, the pilot operating the airplane at a low altitude, the presence of 
carburetor icing conditions, and the lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing.
On May 3, 2003, about 1200 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Piper PA-18-160 airplane, 
N8240P, sustained substantial damage when it collided with the frozen surface of a river 
during a forced landing following a partial loss of engine power.  The accident occurred about 
80 miles northwest of Skwentna, Alaska.  The airline transport certificated pilot and the sole 
passenger were not injured.  The Title 14, CFR Part 91 personal flight operated in day visual 
meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  The flight departed from an airstrip near 
Wasilla, Alaska, about 1030, and the destination was the area of the accident site.
The pilot contacted the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) on May 7.  He related that he and a 
passenger were on a pleasure flight, and that he had been flying about 100 feet above the 
ground at a reduced power setting.  He said he had initiated a 90 degree downwind turn, and 
hit a "sinker," which pushed the airplane towards the ground.  He immediately applied full 
power, but the engine did not seem to respond with maximum power.  The pilot indicated he 
did not have sufficient altitude to select a more desirable forced landing spot other than the 
frozen river nearby.  He said he leveled the wings, and the airplane hit hard on the ice,  
damaging the fuselage, wings, and landing gear.  When asked by the IIC if he was aware of why 
the engine did not seem to respond with maximum power, the pilot stated that he thought the 
engine had accumulated carburetor ice since he had been flying at a reduced power setting 
without the application of carburetor heat.
