During cruise flight at 4500 feet mean sea level, the airplane collided with a flock of geese and 
began to vibrate violently. The pilot made the decision to land the airplane and located a field 
for landing. Upon initial touchdown on the field, the pilot realized that the field was marshy, 
and rough, and attempted a go-around. The pilot stated he applied full power, but the airplane 
struggled to climb as the engine produced "2200 RPM, compared to the normal 2500 takeoff 
RPM." He noticed a clearing to the left of the airplane, and while turning in the direction of the 
clearing, the landing gear and left wing clipped the trees. The airplane came to rest on the 
ground about 30 feet beyond the trees, inverted. The pilot transmitted distress calls over the 
Columbus Approach frequency and the National Guard frequency. A nearby Air National 
Guard helicopter was directed to the accident location and airlifted the pilot to a nearby 
hospital. Examination of the airplane revealed the right and left wing spars were buckled. No 
mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by the pilot prior to the accident.
The in-flight collision with birds that resulted in a  partial loss of engine power, and subsequent 
in-flight collision with trees while maneuvering for an emergency landing.
On May 3, 2003, at 1745 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 150G, N2938J, registered to Romanair 
Incorporated and operated by a private pilot, collided with a flock of geese while in cruise flight 
and conducted an emergency landing into a field near Montgomery, Alabama. The personal 
flight was operated under the provision of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and visual flight rules. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane was substantially 
damaged and the pilot received minor injuries. The flight departed Columbus Airport, 
Columbus, Georgia, at 1449, on May 3, 2003.
According to the pilot, during cruise flight at 4500 feet mean sea level, the airplane collided 
with a flock of geese and began to vibrate violently. The pilot made the decision to land the 
airplane and located a field for landing. A traffic pattern approach to land was made, and the 
pilot set the flaps at 20 degrees and slowed to 70 knots. Upon initial touchdown on the field, 
the pilot realized that the field was marshy, and rough, and attempted a go-around. The pilot 
stated he applied full power, but the airplane struggled to climb as the engine produced "2200 
RPM, compared to the normal 2500 takeoff RPM." He noticed a clearing to the left of the 
airplane, and while turning in the direction of the clearing, the landing gear clipped a tree. The 
left wing collided with another tree sending the airplane into a severe yaw to the left. The 
airplane came to rest on the ground about 30 feet beyond the trees, inverted.  The pilot 
transmitted distress calls over the Columbus Approach frequency and the National Guard 
frequency. A nearby Air National Guard helicopter was directed to the accident location and 
airlifted the pilot to a nearby hospital. 
Examination of the airplane revealed the right and left wing spars were buckled. No 
mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by the pilot prior to the accident.
