The pilot lost control of his twin engine airplane and collided with terrain while returning to 
the departure airport after reporting an engine problem.  Shortly after takeoff, about 4,000 feet 
msl, the pilot reported to ATC that he had an engine problem and would return to the airport.  
The radar plot reveals a steady descent of the airplane from 4,000 feet msl to the accident site, 
approximately 2 miles from the designated airport.  Ground witnesses reported that they saw 
the airplane flying very low, about 500 feet agl, seconds prior to the accident apparently 
heading toward the departure airport.  The witnesses reported consistent observations of the 
airplane "wobbling," then going into a steep knife-edge left bank before it dove into the ground.  
Witnesses at the airport said that the pilot sought out help in getting his radios operating prior 
to takeoff, telling the witness, "its been four and a half months since I've been in an airplane, I 
can't even figure out how to put the radios back in."  No fueling records were found for the 
airplane at the departure airport.  The last documented fueling of the airplane was on October 
31, 2002, with the addition of 56.2 gallons.  Witnesses reported that the airplane did not take 
on any fuel immediately prior to the flight on May 4th.  The flight was the first flight since the 
airplane received its annual inspection 2 months prior to the accident, and, it was the pilot's 
first flight after 4 months of inactivity.  It is a common practice for maintenance personnel to 
pull the landing light circuit breakers during maintenance to prevent the fuel transfer pumps, 
which are wired through the landing light system, from operating continuously.  The fuel 
transfer pumps move fuel from the forward part of the main fuel tank to the center baffle area 
where it is picked up and routed to the engine.  It is conceivable that these circuit breakers 
were not reset by the pilot for this flight.  Wreckage examination revealed a post accident fire 
on the right wing of the airplane and no fire on the left wing.  Additionally, only a small amount 
of fuel was identified around the left wing tanks after the accident, and no hydraulic 
deformation was observed to the left main tank or the internal baffles.  The landing gear 
bellcrank indicates that the landing gear was in the down position.  The engine and propeller 
post impact signatures indicate that the left engine was operating at a low power setting (wind 
milling), while the right engine and propeller indicate a high power setting.  Disassembly and 
inspection of the internal propeller hub components showed that the left propeller was not 
feathered.  The left engine is the critical engine and loss of power in that engine would make 
directional control more difficult at slower speeds.  The airplane owners manual states that 
Page 2 of 11LAX03FA147
"climb or continued level flight at a moderate altitude is improbable with the landing gear 
extended or the propeller wind milling."  The single engine flight procedure delineated in the 
manual dictates a higher than normal altitude for a successful single engine landing approach. 
The failure of the pilot to properly configure the airplane for a one engine inoperative condition 
(including his failure to feather the propeller of the affected engine, retract the landing gear, 
and maintain minimum single engine speed).  Factors related to the accident were fuel 
starvation of the left engine, due to an inadequate fuel supply in the left tanks, inoperative fuel 
transfer pumps, and the pilot's decision to takeoff with out fueling.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 4, 2003, at 1453 Pacific daylight time, the pilot of a Cessna 411 twin engine airplane, 
N1133S, lost control and collided with terrain approximately 2 miles east of the Corona 
Municipal Airport, Corona, California.  The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the 
provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant, received fatal 
injuries.  The airplane was destroyed.  Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan had been filed.  The flight originated from the Corona airport around 1430, and was 
en route to Santa Monica, California.
According to Air Traffic Control (ATC) communications, and family members, the purpose of 
the flight was to deliver the airplane to Santa Monica Propeller for maintenance on one of the 
airplane's propellers.  The pilot checked in with Southern California Approach (SoCal 
Approach) and requested flight following to Santa Monica.  Approximately 3 minutes after 
checking in with SoCal approach, the pilot reported having engine difficulties and was 
returning to Corona.  SoCal approach assisted the pilot with vectors to Corona Airport.  SoCal 
approach lost radar contact with the airplane approximately 3 miles to the east of Corona 
Airport.  So Cal approach advised loss of radar contact then instructed the pilot to change to 
the airport advisory frequency, which the pilot acknowledged.
The airplane flew over several witnesses who were within 1/2 mile of the accident site.  They 
reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge (IIC) that they 
observed the airplane flying "very low," about 300 to 500 feet msl.  The airplane was heading 
toward the Corona airport.  The witnesses reported consistent observations of the airplane 
"wobbling," then going into a steep knife-edge left bank before it dove into the ground.  The 
wreckage was immediately located by police and fire rescue crews who extinguished a fire on 
the right side of the airplane. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot obtained his third-class medical certificate on March 25, 2002.  His medical was valid 
with no limitations.
Examination of the pilot's logbook and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records 
revealed the pilot received his commercial pilot certificate, single engine land, and instrument 
ratings through military competency on May 4, 1960.  He received his multiengine land rating 
on May 17, 1999.  The pilot had accumulated about 4,899 total flight hours with approximately 
412 hours in the Cessna 411. 
In the Riverside Automated Flight Service Station re-recording of the pilot requesting a 
weather brief, the pilot can be heard to say in a side conversation while he was waiting for a 
briefer, "Thank you very much for coming and helping I,...its been four and a half months since 
I've been in an airplane, I can't even figure out how to put the radios back in." 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The twin engine, low wing airplane was powered by two Teledyne Continental GSTIO-520-C 
engines.  The airplane's serial number was: 411-0202.  The airplane and engines underwent 
their last annual inspection on March 19, 2003, at an aircraft total time of 4,915 hours, and 
86.5 hours since the last inspection in 2002.  The total time since the last engine overhaul was 
503 hours on the right engine and 563 hours on the left engine.
An aircraft logbook entry dated March 19, 2003, indicated the aircraft annual inspection was 
completed; however, the left propeller did not comply with AD 95-24-05 RI: "The propeller 
must be inspected by a certified person.  Completion of AD 95-24-05RI will make the aircraft 
airworthy."
The mechanic who performed the last annual inspection provided copies of his discrepancy 
notes pertaining to the accident airplane to the Safety Board IIC.  In those documents it is 
noted that the left propeller was leaking red dye.
According to Corona Aircraft Sales, the airplane had been placed on their sales lot to be sold.  
The airplane had not been flown since the completion of the annual inspection.
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL AND RADAR DATA
Review of the Air Traffic Control (ATC) communications re-recording and radar plot data 
revealed that the pilot had been in communications with Southern California Approach.  Upon 
initial contact with SoCal approach the airplane was observed by the controller to be heading 
east, away from Santa Monica.  When the controller queried the pilot, the pilot said his GPS 
indicated he was heading the correct direction.  The controller informed the pilot that he was 
heading east when Santa Monica was to the west, and gave the pilot an appropriate heading 
towards his stated destination.  Approximately 3 minutes 15 seconds after initial contact with 
SoCal approach, and at an altitude of 4,000 feet, the pilot reported an "engine cutting out" and 
intended to return to Corona airport.  The SoCal approach controller observed the airplane 
descend in altitude, assisted the pilot with vectors to Corona Airport, and expressed concern 
about the airplane's ability to maintain altitude.  The pilot reassured the controller that he 
could maintain altitude.  Approximately 3 miles east of Corona airport the controller reported 
that radar contact was lost and to switch to the airport advisory frequency.  The pilot 
acknowledged this last communication. 
Radar and radio communication re-recordings and data files were obtained from Southern 
California TRACON and a plot was generated by a private vendor for the Cessna Aircraft 
Company.  A copy of the plot and communication transcripts is attached to this report.  It 
shows the aircraft departing Corona airport, climbing to 4,000 feet, turning back towards 
Corona, and continuously descending until radar contact is lost at about 700 feet agl and 85 
knots ground speed.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was located in a construction site on a small plateau approximately 30 
feet above River Road to the east.  The dirt plateau falls away into a drainage culvert 
approximately 75 feet below to the north.  The construction site was barren of all trees and  
brush.  The plateau had an approximate 20-degree slope downwards to River Road.  The 
wreckage location was recorded with a global positioning system as latitude north 33 degrees 
53.794 minutes, longitude west 117 degrees 34.275 minutes at an elevation of 590 feet.
All major components of the airplane were present at the accident site.  The airplane was 
oriented on a bearing of 310 degrees magnetic.  The airplane was laying upright with the 
landing gear collapsed underneath the fuselage.  The nose, flight deck, and instrument panel of 
the airplane were completely destroyed.  The engine control quadrant; throttle, propeller, and 
mixture control levers were all found parallel, in the full forward position.  The circuit breaker 
panels had pulled apart.  Most circuit breakers were popped or broken, posts sheared, and 
extended out of position. 
The right wing exhibited fire damage outboard of the right engine.  The entire right engine was 
twisted 90 degrees along its longitudinal axis so that the engine cylinders were directed 
vertically.  The crankshaft propeller flange exhibited torsional shearing and the propeller was 
not attached to the engine.  The right wing leading edge and fuel tip tank were crushed aft to 
the wing spar and thermally damaged.  The right aileron was consumed by fire but the aileron 
spar was attached to its respective hinge points.  The right aileron flight control cables were 
present and attached to the aileron bellcrank and push rod, which connect to the aileron.
The right side of the fuselage was split along an upper longitudinal rivet line and laying open 
from aft of the upper corner of the emergency exit to the leading edge of the horizontal 
stabilizer.
The last outboard quarter of the right horizontal stabilizer had a 20-degree bend upward.  The 
rudder had skin wrinkles along the rivet line that extends horizontally from the upper hinge.  
The left horizontal stabilizer and elevator displayed no apparent damage.  
The left side of the fuselage was split aft horizontally along a lower rivet line from the bottom 
corner of the main cabin door.  The top half of the split cabin door was jarred open.  The 
bottom half of the cabin door was detached, and found laying on the ground 3 feet in front of 
the doorframe location, but remained attached to the airplane by its chain handrail.
The left wing was attached to the fuselage.  The engine had detached from the firewall and was 
laying on top of the wing with a pivot point at the outboard intersection of the nacelle and wing 
leading edge.  The propeller remained attached to the engine.  The section of the wing outboard 
of the nacelle exhibited leading edge crushing and deformation.  This section was also twisted 
about the wing spar upward approximately 110 degrees and passed through the vertical plane.  
The wing tip fuel tank was detached and located 30 feet from the wing tip.  The wing tip tank 
had a softball sized hole in the forward section.  Dirt beneath the tip tank hole had a slight 
gasoline odor.  Neither the wing tip tank nor the interior baffle of the tank exhibited any 
evidence of hydraulic deformation.
The left propeller blades exhibited aft bending and slight chordwise scratches.  The spinner was 
crushed aft without torsional twisting and with folds that paralleled the aft face of the spinner. 
The right propeller was located approximately 7 feet from the right wing tip in line with the 
lateral axis of the airplane.  The spinner, hub, and blades were buried about 12 inches into the 
ground, which formed a cratered area 4 feet across.  The blades exhibited chordwise scratching 
and trailing edge buckling, forming a sinusoidal type bend.
Witnesses reported seeing the airplane flying very low, approximately 500 feet agl, towards 
Corona airport
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Riverside County Sheriff-Coroner conducted an autopsy on the pilot.  According to the 
coroner's report, the pilot died of multiple blunt force traumatic injuries and no preaccident 
anomalies were noted.
A toxicology test for ethanol and drugs were negative.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Airframe:
The flap drive gears attached to the flap motor were observed at the aft sprocket with flap drive 
chain running to the left wing showing 2-3 chain links extended on top.  The forward sprocket 
with the flap drive chain running to the right wing showed 2 chain links extended from the 
bottom.  The Cessna 411 service manual states that this corresponded to the flaps retracted 
position.
Control cables were traced from the elevator, rudder, and aileron control surfaces to the 
cockpit control column and rudder pedals.  The control cables were found attached to their 
respective control arms and control surfaces.  The elevator trim actuator was measured 
extended 1.25 inches.
The two fuel selector valves for the left and right main fuel tanks corresponded to the cockpit 
fuel selector positions, which were set at the left and right main fuel tank positions.  
Approximately 4 ounces of fuel was collected from the left fuel selector valve.  One bead of 
water was present.  Approximately 2 ounces of fuel was collected from the right fuel selector 
valve with no water evident.  Approximately 1/8 ounce of fuel was observed in the left engine 
fuel manifold valve.  No fuel was found in the right engine fuel manifold valve.  All fuel filler 
cap rubber o-rings were present and displayed a degree of flexibility with no apparent cracks.
Both fuel pumps, the auxiliary fuel pump, and fuel transfer pump from each main tank were 
removed and examined.  The right wing fuel pumps were thermally damaged by fire and not 
functional but electrical connections were observed intact on both units. The left wing fuel 
pumps appeared to be in good condition with intact electrical connections and were tested for 
operation. The left auxiliary pump and fuel transfer pumps were wired with an external power 
source and tested using water as a working fluid.  The purpose of the test was to determine if 
the fuel pumps were capable of operating.  The left auxiliary pump operated and produced 
approximately a flow rate of 2.4 gallons per minute.  The left fuel transfer pump operated and 
produced a flow rate of approximately 0.3 gallons per minute. 
A Cessna service letter dating June 27, 1967, directed the installation of wing tip tank fuel 
pumps intended to maintain a constant fuel supply at the wing tank fuel outlet at all times.  
This letter alerted the owners of possible fuel starvation during steep descents.  The Cessna 411 
service manual states that the purpose of these fuel transfer pumps "is to transfer fuel from the 
forward end of the main tanks to the center baffle area where it is picked up and routed to the 
engine by either the engine-driven pump or the auxiliary fuel pump."  These pumps are 
powered from the landing light circuits.  The mechanic who performed the aircraft's required 
annual maintenance mentioned that in order to keep the fuel transfer pumps from running 
continuously when power was on the airplane the mechanics would pull the landing light 
circuit breakers while performing maintenance.  
The landing gear actuator upper bellcrank was aligned with the lateral axis.  Per the Cessna 411 
service manual, this position corresponds to the landing gear down position. 
Engine control cables remained attached to their respective control arms, and the cables were 
traced to the appropriate engine component attach points.
Engines:
Both the left and right engines were sent to Teledyne Continental Motors, Mobile, Alabama, for 
teardown and evaluation under the supervision of the Safety Board IIC.  According to Teledyne 
Continental technicians, both engines exhibited normal operating signatures.  All spark plugs 
were clean with no mechanical deformation.  The spark plug electrodes were gray in color, 
which corresponded to normal operation according to the Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug 
AV-27 Chart.  The magnetos were bench tested and produced sparks on all leads in firing 
order.  Investigators manually rotated the engines.  The engines rotated freely and the valves 
moved approximately the same amount of lift in firing order.  Investigators obtained thumb 
compression on all cylinders in firing order.  The fuel pump rotors turned freely, were 
unfractured with inner diaphragms, and rubber seals unbroken.  The plunger in the fuel 
distribution valve moved freely, the rubber diaphragm was unbroken, and investigators did not 
observe any contamination.  The oil sump screens were clean and open.  The engines oil filters 
were examined and contained no metal debris.  The governor screens were clean.  The oil 
screen filters were clean.  The fuel nozzles were open and the screens were clean. 
Propellers:
Both propellers were sent to McCauley Propeller Systems, the manufacturer, for examination 
under supervision of investigators from the Safety Board.  McCauley engineers concluded the 
following: 
1.All propeller damage was the type associated with impact forces.
2.Feather stop mechanisms of each propeller we undamaged indicating mechanisms were 
not engaged at impact.
3.Counterweight impact marks found on the hub sockets of both propellers indicate that 
both propellers were operating near the low pitch range at impact.
4.Damage to the right propeller was extensive and included the break-up of the crankshaft 
flange indicating power at impact.
5.Left propeller overall damage was significantly less than that of the right propeller 
indicating lower energy (power) at impact. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
 
Fueling Information:
No fueling records were found at the Corona airport.  The last location of the airplane prior to 
its arrival at Corona was Bermuda Dunes, California.  Bermuda Dunes records show the 
airplane as fueled on October 31, 2002, taking on 56.2 gallons.   Witnesses reported that the 
airplane did not take on any fuel immediately prior to the flight on May 4th..
Single Engine Flight Operations:
The "Airplane Flying Handbook" (FAA-H-8083-3) discusses the identification and the effects 
caused by a failure of the critical engine in a multiengine airplane.
"In most U.S. designed multiengine airplanes, both engines rotate to the right (clockwise) 
when viewed from the rear, and both engines develop an equal amount of thrust.  At low 
airspeed and high-power conditions, the downward moving propeller blade of each engine 
develops more thrust than the upward moving blade.  This asymmetric propeller thrust or P-
factor, results in a center of thrust at the right side of each engine as indicated by lines D1 and 
D2 in Figure 14-2.  The turning (or yawing) force of the right engine is greater than the left 
engine since the center of thrust (D2) is much farther away from the centerline (CL) of the 
fuselage because it has a longer leverage arm.  When the right engine is operative and the left 
engine is inoperative, the turning (or yawing) force is greater than in the opposite situation of 
an operative left engine and an inoperative right engine.  In other words, directional control is 
more difficult when the left engine (the critical engine) is suddenly made inoperative."
The Cessna 411 Owners Manual (aircraft s/n 411-0161 and on) states:
"MINIMUM CONTROL SPEED.  The twin-engine airplane must reach the minimum control 
speed (103 MPH) before full control deflections can counteract the adverse rolling and yawing 
tendencies associated with one engine inoperative and full power operation on the other 
engine."
 "RECOMMENDED SAFE SINGLE-ENGINE SPEED.  Although the airplane is controllable at 
the minimum control speed, the airplane performance is so far below optimum that continued 
flight near the ground is improbable.  A more suitable recommended safe single-engine speed 
is 105 MPH, since at this speed altitude can be maintained more easily while the landing gear is 
being retracted and the propeller is being feathered."
 "ENGINE INOPERATIVE APPROACH
(1)Approach at 120 MPH with excessive altitude.
(2)Landing Gear - EXTEND when within gliding distance of field.
(3)Wing flaps - DOWN when landing is assured
(4)Decrease speed below 110 MPH on if landing is assured
(5)Minimum Single-Engine Control Speed - 103 MPH"
In a section addressing supplementary information concerning engine failures the owners 
manual states "climb or continued level flight at a moderate altitude is improbable with the 
landing gear extended or the propeller windmilling."
The wreckage was released to the owner on August 8, 2003.   
