Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Dodge City, KS
Accident Number:
CEN10LA068
Date & Time:
12/06/2009, 1415 CST 
Registration:
N108L
Aircraft:
BEECH V35
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Flight instrument malf/fail
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that the pitot heat system was working during preflight. He obtained a full 
weather briefing from flight service, and checked the weather via the internet before departing.  
While airborne at 6,000 feet to 6,500 feet mean sea level he encountered instrument 
meteorological conditions and turned on the pitot heat.  Sometime later, the airplane 
encountered moderate icing conditions.  The airspeed indicator stopped working and the pilot 
diverted from his route of flight to an alternate airport.  While over the runway on landing 
approach, the airplane stalled and landed hard, substantially damaging the airplane.  Ice was 
found at the impact site, on the airplanes surfaces, and in the pitot tube. Inspection of the pitot 
tube revealed the pitot heat was not functioning at the pitot tube. On the day of the accident 
there were two AIRMETs for moderate icing in effect for the pilot™s route of flight and altitude.  
The pilot could not recall being informed of the icing conditions during his weather briefing 
and his briefing from flight service could not be located.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the pitot heat system in icing conditions resulting in an inoperative airspeed 
indicator which led to an inadvertant stall while on final approach. Contributing to the accident 
was the pilot's decision to fly into known icing conditions.
Findings
Aircraft
Pitot/static anti-ice - Failure (Cause)
Airspeed - Attain/maintain not possible
Personnel issues
Info processing/decision - Pilot (Factor)
Environmental issues
Conducive to structural icing - Effect on equipment
Page 2 of 5CEN10LA068
Factual Information
On December 6, 2009, at 1415 central standard time, a Beech V35 airplane, N108L, was 
substantially damaged during landing at Dodge City Regional Airport (DDC), Dodge City, 
Kansas. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed. The commercial pilot and passenger 
were not injured.  The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 with an Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) flight plan.  The 
cross-country flight originated at the Anoka County-Blaine Airport (ANE), Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, and was en route to Dalhart Municipal Airport (DHT), Dalhart, Texas.  
The pilot obtained a telephone weather brief from flight service, filed an IFR flight plan, and 
checked the weather on the internet prior to departing ANE.  The pilot stated that during 
preflight inspection the pitot heat was checked and was working.  The pilot departed ANE 
under visual flight rules and climbed to 6,500 feet mean sea level (MSL).  After about one and a 
half hours of flight the pilot encountered IFR conditions, obtained an IFR clearance, and 
descended to 6,000 feet MSL.  The pilot reported the airspeed indicator stopped working so he 
elected to divert to DDC, which was the nearest airport with an ILS approach.  While over the 
runway on landing approach the airplane ﬁfell straight downﬂ and landed hard.
There are three types of AIRMETs for different weather conditions, each represented by a 
phonetic letter. AIRMETs ZULU (Z) indicate widespread areas of moderate icing.  There were 
two AIRMET ZULU™s in effect for the pilot™s intended route of flight from 0845 to 1500.  One 
indicated moderate ice below 15,000 feet MSL, and the other indicated moderate ice below 
10,000 feet MSL.
On the Safety Board Form 6120.1, Accident/Incident Report, the pilot marked Automated 
Report as his source of weather information, Telephone/Computer as the method of briefing, 
and Full for briefing type/completeness.  The pilot noted on the Safety Board Form 6120.1 that 
an Airmen's Meteorological Information (AIRMET) for instrument meteorological conditions 
(IFR) was in effect at the time of the accident and he told the investigator he could not recall 
being briefed on the icing conditions.  Investigators were unable to obtain a copy of the actual 
briefing provided to the pilot to verify what he had been briefed.
Beechcraft Bonanza V35, V35A (D-7977 thru D-9068) and V35B (D-9069 thru D-9947) Pilot™s 
Operating Handbook (POH/AFM, P/N 35-590118-31B4) states:
ŁSection II Œ Limitations, Page 2-12
WARNING
FLIGHT IN ICING CONDITIONS IS PROHIBITED
ŁSection IV Œ Normal Procedures, Page 4-20
ICING CONDITIONS
Flight in Icing Conditions Is Prohibited
ŁSection X Œ Safety Information, Page 10-6
Don™t fly in possible icing conditions
Examination of the airplane revealed all three landing gear collapsed, both wing spars bent, 
and the left main gear penetrated the top of the left wing.  Ice was found on the surfaces of the 
Page 3 of 5CEN10LA068
airplane and on the ground near the impact point.  Initial post accident inspection of the pitot 
heat system showed the pitot heat switch was in the on position and ice was found in the pitot 
tube.  Power was applied to the airplane, but no heat was detected at the pitot tube.  The pitot 
tube was removed from the airplane by investigators and electrical power was applied directly 
to the unit.  No heat was detected from the pitot tube.  The airspeed indicator was examined 
and found to work normally. An examination of the remaining systems revealed no anomalies.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Other weather encounter
Structural icing
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Flight instrument malf/fail (Defining event)
Approach-IFR final approach
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
77, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/12/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
9926 hours (Total, all aircraft), 7157 hours (Total, this make and model), 9827 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 58 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 29 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5CEN10LA068
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N108L
Model/Series:
V35 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
D-8300
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/10/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5842 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO 520 SERIES
Registered Owner:
BLADOW HARRY E
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
BLADOW HARRY E
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DDC, 2594 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1427 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Overcast / 500 ft agl
Visibility
2 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.91 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-7°C / -8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Minneapolis, MN (ANE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Dalhart, TX (DHT)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1055 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Dodge City Regional Airport (DDC)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2594 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
14
IFR Approach:
ILS
Runway Length/Width:
6899 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Page 5 of 5CEN10LA068
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.763056, -99.965556 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Daniel Baker
Adopted Date:
07/22/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Henry Rochon; FAA; Witchita, KS
Publish Date:
07/22/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75144
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
