Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SKWENTNA, AK
Accident Number:
ANC97LA025
Date & Time:
02/01/1997, 1427 AST 
Registration:
N7235D
Aircraft:
Piper PA-22
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The noninstrument-rated private pilot and two passengers were on a cross country flight on 
top of an overcast at 10,000 feet msl when the pilot radioed FAA air traffic controllers for 
assistance.  The pilot told controllers he thought he was a few miles from Anchorage, Alaska, 
his intended destination, but he was actually about 124 miles northwest of Anchorage.  The 
pilot was asked if he could turn towards and cross a nearby mountain range to reach VFR 
conditions.  He indicated he did not have enough fuel left, and that he was presently flying 
through the tops of the overcast.  During his communications with the controllers, the pilot 
noted a marked disparity between his wet compass and his gyro driven heading indicator; he 
also said his only electronic navigation instrument aboard, a loran, was not reliable.  Radio 
contact was lost with the pilot, and soon thereafter, an ELT was heard. The airplane was 
discovered crashed in a near vertical position on a glacier. Postaccident inspection disclosed no 
mechanical anomalies with the airplane and a functional loran.  About five to six gallons of fuel 
was remaining in the left wing fuel tank. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's continued VFR flight into instrument meteorological conditions, and subsequent 
failure to maintain control of the airplane.  Factors associated with the accident are the pilot's 
inadequate weather evaluation, his becoming lost/disoriented, and spatial disorientation. 
Page 2 of 7ANC97LA025
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. WEATHER CONDITION - CLOUDS
2. (F) WEATHER EVALUATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) BECAME LOST/DISORIENTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
4. (C) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (F) SPATIAL DISORIENTATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7ANC97LA025
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 1, 1997, about 1427 Alaska standard time, a wheel equipped Piper PA-22 airplane, 
N7235D, was destroyed when it collided with terrain about 45 miles northwest of Skwentna, 
Alaska.  The private certificated pilot and two family members/passengers aboard were fatally 
injured.  The personal, 14 CFR Part 91, cross country flight departed Port Alsworth, Alaska, 
about 1200, en route to Merrill Field, Anchorage, Alaska.  A visual flight rules flight plan was 
filed.  
The pilot contacted the Kenai FAA Flight Service Station (FSS) about 1113 and requested a 
weather briefing for a route of flight from Port Alsworth, to Merrill Field, via Lake Clark pass.  
The FAA specialist briefed the pilot, issuing information which included  the current conditions 
of low fog and stratus over Cook Inlet and the Kenai Peninsula, with pockets of IFR weather.  
The forecast was for improving weather, with VFR conditions along the route of flight after 
1200. The pilot filed a VFR flight plan, and asked the FAA FSS specialist to open the flight plan 
for him at 1200, the time the pilot estimated he would be airborne.  On the flight plan, the pilot 
estimated his time en route as 2-1/2 hours, and his total fuel on board as three hours.
The pilot radioed the Anchorage Air Traffic Approach Control facility about 1350 and requested 
assistance in determining his position.  He indicated he was on top of  an overcast, and 
believed he was near Fire Island, a few miles from Anchorage.  The pilot was not instrument 
rated, and his airplane was not equipped with a transponder, or for flight in instrument 
meteorological conditions.  With the assistance of approach controllers and flight service 
station specialists, the pilot's position was tentatively determined at 1415 to be in the vicinity of 
Mt. Russell, located about 53 statue miles  northwest of Skwentna, or about 124 miles 
northwest of Anchorage. 
Attempts were made to help orient the pilot and direct him to an area of better weather.  The 
pilot indicated he did not believe his loran navigation unit was working properly, and he noted 
a large disparity between his wet (magnetic) compass and his DG (directional gyro-heading 
indicator). At one point, he noted his DG was 340 degrees, and his compass was reading 180 
degrees. At 1413 the pilot was asked if he could see the ground at all.  He responded: "ah no 
that's a negative", and later, at 1414, "okay ah yeah I can't see anything now I'm not exactly sure 
where we are but we need to do something quick."  At 1415 the pilot radioed he was: "...at ten 
one right now right at the cloud tops going through some right now."  A FSS specialist 
contacted the pilot at 1419 and advised of VFR conditions on the west side of the Alaska Range 
near Mc Grath, and offered a heading to fly that direction.  The pilot responded he didn't have 
enough fuel to fly over the range, noting he had about 1/2 hour left.    Radio contact with the 
pilot was lost about 1424 (see attached FAA air traffic control transcripts of radio 
communications). 
At 1521, an emergency locator transmitter signal was received from the accident airplane in the 
vicinity of the Dall Glacier, about 45 miles northwest of Skwentna.
Rescue personnel reached the accident site on February 5, after numerous weather delays.  The 
crash location was approximately 2,700 feet msl on the Dall Glacier, geographic coordinates 
North 62.37.60, West 152.03.66.  The accident site is approximately 116 statue miles northwest 
of Merrill Field, the pilot's intended destination.   
Page 4 of 7ANC97LA025
Rescuers discovered the airplane in a near vertical position.  The front portion of the airplane 
was imbedded  in snow and ice up to approximately the leading edge of the wings.  
An FAA inspector and a representative of Piper Aircraft went to the crash site.  They discovered 
all major components of the airplane were located with the airplane at the crash site.  Control 
continuity was established from the flight control surfaces to the cabin floor near the control 
column, where cabin crushing precluded further investigation.  The airplane's fuel selector 
handle was positioned to the left wing tank.  The left wing tank held an estimated 5 to 6 gallons 
of gasoline.  The right wing had a trace of fuel.  The airplane was not equipped with any 
electronic navigational aids other than a loran.  It did have an  artificial horizon, and a heading 
indicator installed.  No evidence of any preimpact mechanical anomaly with the airplane was 
discovered during their examination.
PILOT INFORMATION
Bradley W. Johnson was the 27 year old pilot-in-command.  He held a Private Pilot certificate 
with an airplane single engine land rating.  His pilot and medical certificates indicated he was 
prohibited from flying at night.
At the time his pilot's certificate was issued on March 3, 1992, his application noted 81 total 
flight hours, with 61 hours of instruction.  His last FAA Class 3 Medical Certificate was issued 
on April 18, 1995.  On his last application for a medical certificate, the pilot indicated his total 
flight time was 90 hours, with zero hours flown in the last six months.  
No pilot records were made available to the FAA or NTSB investigators.  Based on the number 
of hours noted on the pilot's last medical application, and the amount of time the accident 
airplane was flown since its last annual inspection, the pilot's total flight time was estimated to 
be approximately 120 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The area outlook for Cook Inlet and the Susitna Valley, valid until 1800 local, noted scattered 
clouds at 2,000 feet, broken at 10,000 feet, with tops to 14,000 feet, and a few layers above the 
tops to flight level 200. Until 1200, isolated ceilings below 1000 feet and visibility below three 
miles were forecast.  
The nearest airport to the accident site with weather reporting capabilities was at Talkeetna, 
Alaska.  Talkeetna is located about 65 miles east of the accident site.  Reported cloud bases and 
visibility for Talkeetna at 1357 was: few clouds at 800 feet, ceiling 1,500 broken, 3,000 feet 
overcast; visibility, seven miles in light snow.  A special weather observation at 1437 recorded: 
ceiling 800 feet broken, 1,500 feet overcast; visibility 2 miles in light snow and mist.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Medical Examiner's Office of the State of Alaska, 
5700 East Tudor Road, Anchorage, Alaska.  The cause of death was noted as blunt impact 
injuries.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Apollo brand Loran found in the accident airplane was removed and taken to Northern 
Lights Avionics in Anchorage for testing.  The unit functioned normally when the power was 
applied, and the memory displayed numerous stored waypoints, including Anchorage 
International Airport, and Merrill Field. 
Page 5 of 7ANC97LA025
The FAA inspector who participated in the on scene investigation, interviewed two air taxi 
pilots who had been flying in the vicinity of Cook Inlet and the Alaska Range on the day of the 
accident.  Both pilots noted convective cloud activity throughout much of the afternoon hours.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
27, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/18/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
100 hours (Total, all aircraft), 20 hours (Total, this make and model), 80 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N7235D
Model/Series:
PA-22 PA-22
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
22-5061
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/24/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
36 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3780 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-A1A
Registered Owner:
JOEL NATWICK
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
BRADLEY W. JOHNSON
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ANC97LA025
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
0 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 10000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
PORT ALSWORTH, AK 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
ANCHORAGE, AK (MRI)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1200 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JAMES      D LABELLE
Adopted Date:
05/04/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
FRANK L MCGARR; ANCHORAGE, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7ANC97LA025
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
