Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SPICEWOOD, TX
Accident Number:
FTW00FA001
Date & Time:
10/02/1999, 1146 CDT 
Registration:
N7542K
Aircraft:
Cessna P210N
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to pilot-rated witnesses, the aircraft was 'very fast on final approach.'  They added 
that the airplane floated for approximately 1/3 of the runway length and then flared.  During 
the flare, the airplane ballooned about 50-75 feet, and continued to lose speed as it traveled 
down the runway.  With about 1/3 of the runway length remaining, the airplane's right wing 
dropped, and the witnesses heard power being added as the airplane began an 'uncoordinated 
turn' to the west.  The witnesses stated that the airplane appeared to be 'near a stall' when they 
lost sight of it, and they heard 'full power being applied' just prior to the sound of impact.  One 
of the witnesses, who had flown with the pilot, stated that he cautioned her to be careful with 
the application of power, because the engine was recently overhauled and a mechanic told him 
to limit the manifold pressure (MP) until the engine was broken in.  The maintenance records 
contained break-in procedures for a previous overhaul, which instructed the pilot not to exceed 
30' of MP on takeoff, except in an emergency.  No anomalies with the aircraft or engine were 
noted during the post-accident examinations. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's delayed application of full throttle during a go-around, which resulted in a slow 
airspeed and inadvertent stall/spin.  A factor was the pilot's habit of only applying partial 
power during takeoff. 
Page 2 of 8FTW00FA001
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR)
Findings
1. AIRSPEED - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. GO-AROUND - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) THROTTLE/POWER CONTROL - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) HABIT INTERFERENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (C) STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 8FTW00FA001
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 2, 1999, at 1146 central daylight time, a Cessna P210N airplane, N7542K, impacted 
terrain following a go around at the Spicewood Airport, Spicewood, Texas.  The private pilot, 
who was the owner of the airplane, and his passenger were fatally injured.  The airplane was 
destroyed by impact damage and fire.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight 
plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The cross-
country flight originated from the Red Bird Airport near Dallas, Texas, approximately 1040. 
According to pilot-rated witnesses, located at the airport, the aircraft was "very fast on final 
approach" for runway 17.  They added that the airplane floated for approximately 1/3 of the 
runway length and then flared.  During the flare, the airplane "ballooned about 50-75 feet and 
continued to lose speed as it traveled down the runway."  With about 1/3 of the runway length 
remaining, the airplane's right wing dropped, and the witnesses heard power being added as 
the airplane began an "uncoordinated turn" to the west.  The witnesses stated that the airplane 
appeared to be "near a stall" as it continued its turn to the northeast.  The airplane disappeared 
behind trees and buildings, and the witnesses started running towards the airplane.  Just prior 
to the sound of impact, the witnesses heard the sound of "full power being applied" to the 
engine.  
One of the pilot-rated witnesses said that she had flown with the pilot a week prior to the 
accident, and he cautioned her to be careful with the amount of throttle she applied, because 
the engine had just been overhauled, and "the mechanic had told him to not give it over so 
many inches of manifold pressure, until it was broken in."  
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The private pilot held an airplane single-engine land rating.  According to his friends and 
family, he had obtained all the training necessary for the airplane instrument rating.  The 
pilot's logbook was located in the wreckage; however, it sustained heavy fire damage.  
According to the last entry, dated September 12, 1999, the pilot had obtained 548.4 total flight 
hours, of which 294.4 hours were in the accident airplane.  The pilot's logbook contained an 
endorsement for the instrument rating dated May 12, 1998.  An Airman Certificate and/or 
Rating Application (FAA Form 8710-1) for an instrument airplane rating was located, and 
indicated that as of May 18, 1998, the pilot had obtained 505 hours total flight time, of which 
253 hours were with an instructor.  The FAA did not have any record of the pilot completing a 
practical examination for the instrument airplane rating.
AERODROME INFORMATION
The Spicewood Airport is located on the south side of Lake Travis.  The Airport Facility 
Directory indicates that there are trees located on the approach end of runway 17 and that it 
has a right hand traffic pattern.  The runway is 3,000 feet long and 30 feet wide.  Located on 
the south end of the runway, is a flat, mowed, grass area approximately 1,800 feet long, void of 
obstructions.  The field elevation is 830 feet.  Friends of the pilot stated that the pilot landed at 
Spicewood on four other occasions.  One witness stated that in the past, during approaches to 
Spicewood, the pilot had to accomplish three go-arounds as a result of high airspeed.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Page 4 of 8FTW00FA001
The 1980 model airplane was painted white with blue, black and gray stripes.  According to a 
sale advertisement for the accident airplane (last revised September 16, 1999), the airplane had 
a total airframe time of 2,536 hours and the engine had 1,535 total hours.  The airplane was 
modified with full de-ice boots, a heated windshield plate, a hot propeller, AM/FM stereo 
cassette with jacks, and speed brakes.  The airplane had also been modified with auxiliary fuel 
tanks, located in the wing tips and the baggage area, to hold a total fuel capacity of 150 gallons 
of 100LL fuel.  The avionics included a color weather radar, a global positioning system, 
graphic engine monitor, an encoding altitude alert system, a fuel computer, and an 
autopilot/flight director system.  
Review of the engine maintenance records revealed that on June 24, 1994, all six cylinders 
were removed and replaced with cylinders that were reworked by Ram Aircraft Corporation.  
Included in the maintenance manual for the Ram cylinders was an overhaul manual 
supplement that included a section titled "TSIO-520 Break-In Procedures."  In that section it 
states that during, "Takeoff Roll:  Apply MP slowly until 30" MP - Do not exceed 30" and 2700 
RPM except in an emergency."  It states again at the end of that section that in an, "Emergency:  
Use maximum available power if needed."  The break-in procedures were applicable to the 
initial break-in flight, which they recommend be a minimum of 2 hours.  
According the Cessna P210N Pilot's Information Manual, the takeoff power settings are 36.5 
inches of manifold pressure, and 2,700 RPM.  Under the section titled "Balked landings," it 
states that 36.5 inches of manifold pressure and 2,700 RPM should be used.
Review of the aircraft's maintenance records revealed that the last annual inspection was 
completed on April 7, 1999, at an aircraft total time of 2,521.3 hours.  The maintenance records 
indicate that during the annual inspection, another "top overhaul" was completed on the 
engine.  According to the engine maintenance records, all six cylinders were removed and 
replaced with overhauled cylinders. 
The NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) estimated that the airplane had 125 gallons of fuel on 
board at the time of the accident, and was within its weight and balance limits.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1153, the weather observation facility at Austin, Texas (located 23 miles east of the accident 
site), reported the wind from 180 degrees at 10 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, scattered 
clouds at 2,800 feet agl, temperature 81 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 63 degrees Fahrenheit, 
and an altimeter setting of 29.99 inches of mercury.
Witnesses at the airport reported the wind from 150 degrees at 10 knots with gusts to 15 knots.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest within one mile of the airport in a heavily wooded area, in a dry 
stream bed against steep terrain.  The slope of the ravine was estimated by the NTSB IIC to be 
about 25 degrees, increasing to a 50 degree slope near the main wreckage area.  The 317-foot 
impact and wreckage energy path was along a 50 degree magnetic course and followed the 
down slope of the terrain.  Fresh tree breaks and cuts were noted above the wreckage at a 
higher terrain.  Numerous 1 to 3-inch diameter tree limbs were found along the wreckage path.  
The limbs were cut in 6-inch sections. Approximately 150 feet uphill from the main wreckage 
area, was the weather radar pod, which was mounted on the right wing.  Downhill from the 
radar pod was a 5-foot outboard section of the right wing tip with the auxiliary fuel tank 
Page 5 of 8FTW00FA001
installed with fuel remaining inside the tank.  Approximately 15 feet uphill from the main 
wreckage area was the propeller piston.  
The entire airplane was consumed by fire.  Examination of the landing gear and flap actuators 
indicated that the landing gear was in the extended position and the flaps were extended 30 
degrees.  The propeller blades were separated from the hub, and the hub was found fractured 
and melted.  The propeller governor was attached and the speed lever was found in the low 
pitch/high rpm position.  The engine was heavily fire damaged on the left and rear sides.  The 
left side rocker arm covers were melted away.  The turbocharger was intact and remained 
attached to the engine.  The compressor and turbine sections of the turbocharger were free to 
rotate by hand.  The turbochargers waste gate valve was in the full open position.  All the 
accessories remained attached and sustained heavy fire damage.
The engine was shipped to the manufacturer's facility for a teardown inspection.   
PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Travis County Medical Examiner's Office.  
Toxicology tests revealed that the pilot had 20.5% Carbon Monoxide detected in his blood.  
Tests for drugs and alcohol were negative.  According the medical examiner, the pilot "came to 
his death as a result of extensive body burns and smoke inhalation sustained...in an airplane 
crash."
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Continental TSIO-520-P engine, serial number 517692, was examined on December 9, 
1999, at the manufacturer's facility under the supervision of an FAA inspector.  The left side 
induction system was melted by the fire, and the #4 cylinder head was separated from the 
cylinder barrel due to impact damage.  The engine oil pump gears were heat damaged and 
rusted, but were intact.  The pistons, piston rings, and piston pins appeared to have "normal 
operational signatures."  The crankcase bearings exhibited "normal operational signatures;" 
however, the #2 and #3 main bearings displayed shifting marks in their saddles.  The 
connecting rods were free to rotate on the crankshaft.  The crankshaft counterweights were 
intact and were free and unrestricted.  The camshaft and lifters exhibited "normal operational 
signatures" free from spalling and camshaft lobe wear.  No anomalies were noted that would 
have prevented operation of the engine.  See the enclosed engine manufacturer's report for 
more information.
The aircraft was released to the owner's representative on May 1, 2000.
Page 6 of 8FTW00FA001
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
69, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/16/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
548 hours (Total, all aircraft), 294 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N7542K
Model/Series:
P210N P210N
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
P21000405
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/07/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
21 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2542 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-P
Registered Owner:
WERNER H. SUESSMANN
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
WERNER H. SUESSMANN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8FTW00FA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
AUS, 541 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
23 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
110°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2800 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
DALLAS, TX (RBD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (88R)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1040 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
SPICEWOOD (88R)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
830 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
17
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
3000 ft / 30 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
NICOLE       LUPINO
Adopted Date:
11/30/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
FAYE S MAKARSKY; SAN ANTONIO, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8FTW00FA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
