The pilot said he was 'breaking in a new engine' and he did not reduce power fast enough. The 
airplane landed long on runway 18, which was 6,299 x 150 feet, asphalt, porous friction course 
overlay. He said he realized he was not going to be able to stop the airplane on the runway that 
remained, and also realized he did not have sufficient speed to abort the landing. Heavy 
braking caused the left tire to blow out, and the airplane departed the end of the runway. The 
left main landing gear collapsed when the airplane traversed a large dip at the end of the 
runway, and the airplane slid to a halt approximately 100 feet beyond. Airport officials 
reported finding 1,400 feet of skid marks. A light and variable wind was reported at the time of 
the accident. The pilot attributed the accident to his error in judgment. His recommendation: 
'Always land near the threshold, leaving as much runway as possible. Pretty basic.' 
the pilot's misjudgment of distance and speed, while approaching to land; his failure to attain a 
proper touchdown point for landing; and his failure to go around, while there was sufficient 
runway remaining.  A related factor was the uneven terrain, which was encountered beyond the 
end of the runway. 
 On May 1, 1998, approximately 1030 mountain daylight time, a Piper PA-24-400, N8536P, 
was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain while landing at Jackson, Wyoming.  
The private pilot and commercial-rated passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan had been filed for the personal flight being 
conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight originated at Provo, Utah, approximately 
0900.
The pilot had recently purchased the airplane from the passenger that was in the airplane.  In 
his accident report, the pilot indicated he was "breaking in a new engine" and he did not reduce 
power fast enough.  The airplane landed long on runway 18 (6,299 ft. x 150 ft., asphalt, porous 
friction course overlay).  The pilot said he realized he was not going to be able to stop the 
airplane on the runway that remained, and also realized he did not have sufficient speed to 
abort the landing.  Heavy braking caused the left tire to blow out, and the airplane departed the 
end of the runway.  The left main landing gear collapsed when the airplane traversed a large 
dip at the end of the runway, and the airplane slid to a halt approximately 100 feet beyond.  
Airport officials reported finding 1,400 feet of skid marks.
The pilot attributed the accident to "poor judgment" and his error.  His recommendation:  
"Always land near the threshold, leaving as much runway as possible.  Pretty basic."
Later examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed a wrinkled and dented left 
wing, a torn left flap, damaged elevator and both wing tips, two main tires blown out, and a 
collapsed landing gear.
A light and variable wind was reported at the time of the accident.
