The flight instructor (CFI) and student pilot reported that during an instructional flight, the 
airplane encountered a severe downdraft that it was unable to out climb, while in the traffic 
pattern. This occurred after the flight departed from runway 17 to practice takeoffs and 
landings in the traffic pattern. The CFI reported that after turning crosswind, while the engine 
was still operating at full takeoff power, the airplane encountered a severe downdraft, which 
resulted in a rate of descent that exceeded 1,000 feet per minute. The CFI turned the airplane 
away from high tension power lines as he maneuvered the airplane towards a plowed field to 
the east-southeast of the airport. The CFI reduced power before the airplane impacted the 
ground in a landing attitude with the flaps retracted. The operator stated that virga and dust 
devils were observed in all quadrants near the time of the accident. An FAA inspector also 
observed signs of downdrafts and virga while en route to the accident site. On a previous flight, 
the operator experienced 'strong up and downdrafts due to the highly unstable weather 
pattern.'  The density altitude was calculated by the investigator-in-charge to be 5,600 feet. 
the pilot's inaccurate weather evaluation, subsequent encounter with a severe downdraft, and 
failure (or inability) to compensate for the wind (downdraft) condition.  The high density 
altitude was a related factor. 
 On May 1, 1998, at 1430 central daylight time, a Cessna 150M airplane, N459U, was destroyed 
upon impact with the ground following an encounter with a downdraft while in the traffic 
pattern near Levelland, Texas.  The flight instructor sustained minor injuries and the student 
pilot was not injured.  The airplane was owned by a private individual and was being operated 
by Levelland Aviation of Levelland, Texas, under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the instructional flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  The local 
flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the operator, the airplane departed from runway 17 to practice takeoffs and 
landings in the traffic pattern.  The flight instructor reported that after turning crosswind, 
while the engine was still operating at full takeoff power, the airplane encountered a severe 
downdraft, resulting in a rate of descent exceeding 1,000 feet per minute, which the flight 
instructor stated that the airplane was not capable of out climbing.  The flight instructor turned 
the airplane to avoid the north-south high tension power lines to the east of the airport, as he 
maneuvered the airplane towards a plowed field to the east-southeast of the airport.  
The flight instructor further stated that he reduced the engine power prior to impacting the soft 
plowed field perpendicular with the 14-inch high rows.  The airplane impacted the ground on a 
northeasterly heading in the landing attitude with the flaps in the retracted position.  The nose 
landing gear collapsed and the airplane nosed over coming to rest in the inverted position.
The operator stated that virga and dust devils were observed on all quadrants near the time of 
the accident.  While responding to the accident site, the FAA inspector also observed numerous 
clouds which were producing virga and downbursts by evidence of the dust and dirt being 
blown in localized areas, below or adjacent to the cloud formations.
In a previous flight, the operator also experienced "strong up and downdrafts due to the highly 
unstable weather pattern."  The density altitude was calculated by the investigator-in-charge at 
5,600 feet.
The 20 year old flight instructor, who is a citizen of India, had accumulated a total of 400 flight 
hours.  The 88 hour student pilot receiving instruction was a citizen of Saudi Arabia.  The 
operator stated that both were very proficient in the English language.   
Examination of the wreckage by the FAA inspector revealed that the engine assembly, with the 
propeller still attached, separated from the airframe.  The nose landing gear was torn off the 
fuselage and the vertical fin was crushed.  The tail section of the airplane separated from the 
fuselage aft of the cockpit.  
The 1976 model Cessna was equipped with shoulder harnesses for both occupants, and they 
both reported wearing them at the time of the accident.  The airplane's ELT was found in the 
armed position, and was activated by the ground impact.
