The 10-hour student pilot reported that they had performed several autorotations and normal 
approaches to sites chosen by the instructor.  He was flying the helicopter and the instructor 
was following on the controls.  They were performing a normal landing approach when both he 
and the flight instructor were startled to see electrical power transmission lines in front of 
them.  The instructor took control of the helicopter and he recalled flying under one group of 
power lines that he viewed high on the windshield.  The instructor then made a pull-up and the 
rotor impacted a second group of wires and the helicopter fell approximately 60 feet to the 
ground landing on its left side.  The student reported there were no mechanical problems with 
the aircraft prior to impacting the wires.  The operator reported that the instructor flew in this 
practice area almost daily and was well aware of the presence of the power lines.  The student 
was Japan and spoke limited English. 
The failure of the pilot to observe in a timely manner and maintain clearance from electrical 
power transmission wires and her improper maneuver to avoid the obstruction. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 1, 1998, at 1402 hours Pacific daylight time, a Robinson R22, N8365D, was destroyed 
when it impacted power transmission lines approximately 65 feet above ground level and then 
impacted the ground at Irwindale, California.  The commercial licensed flight instructor was 
fatally injured and the student pilot was seriously injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
existed for the local area instructional flight which departed from Bracket Field, La Verne, 
California, at 1315. 
The 10-hour student pilot reported that, prior to the accident, they had performed several 
autorotations and normal approaches to sites chosen by the instructor in the Santa Fe flood 
control basin.  He was flying the helicopter and the instructor was following on the controls.  
They were performing a normal approach when both he and the flight instructor were startled 
to see wires in front of them.  He said that the instructor took control of the helicopter.  The 
student recalled flying under one power line that he viewed high on the windshield and then 
the instructor made a pull-up and the rotor impacted a second group of wires.  The student 
reported there were no mechanical problems with the aircraft prior to impacting the wires. 
A witness who observed the accident from the freeway transition road northwest of the 
accident site reported that the aircraft was travelling toward her (northwest) and was 
descending as though intending to land.  When the helicopter struck the wires there were 
brilliant white flashes and then the aircraft fell to the ground.
Another witness who was driving northbound on the 605 freeway observed the helicopter 
approach from his right on a westerly heading prior to impacting the wires.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot/flight instructor received her commercial rotorcraft rating on January 23, 1997, and 
her flight instructor certificate (rotorcraft/helicopter) on February 6, 1997.  She learned to fly 
at California Helitech, the operator, and subsequently became a flight instructor there on 
March 10, 1997.  She had since accumulated approximately 570 hours as a flight instructor at 
California Helitech.  According to the operator she routinely, almost daily, flew in the practice 
area of the Santa Fe flood control basin and was very well aware of the presence of the power 
transmission wires.
According to the pilot's logbook, and the operator's records for the 2 days prior to the accident, 
the pilot had flown 175 hours in the previous 90 days, 93 hours in the previous 30 days, 28 
hours in the previous 7 days, and approximately 4 hours in the previous 24 hours.  According 
to the operator, the accident flight was her second flight of that day; the previous flight and the 
accident flight each being about 1 hour in duration.  According to her logbook, her last day off 
the job (no flying time logged) was Sunday, April 26, 1998.
The operator reported that the student pilot was visiting from Japan for a brief time and was 
taking flight instruction to determine if he wanted to return at a later date to complete training 
for his pilot's license.  He arrived in the United States on April 25, 1998, and was scheduled to 
return to Japan on May 4, 1998.  His return was delayed by events surrounding the accident.  
He had no prior flying experience and his ability to converse in the English language was 
limited.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The hourly weather observation taken 16 minutes before the accident at El Monte airport, 5 
miles southwest of the accident site, was clear skies, 7 miles visibility, and surface wind from 
the south at 6 knots.
An initial responder at the accident site reported that smoke from the fire was drifting to the 
north.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The aircraft impacted in a level, arid area at the northern end of the Santa Fe flood control 
basin southeast of the intersection of the 605 and 210 freeways.  The accident site is at latitude 
34 degrees 07.82 minutes north, and longitude 117 degrees 57.37 minutes west (GPS).  All of 
the wreckage was present within a 300-foot area and there was a postimpact fire.  
The site is in proximity of two sets of high voltage power transmission cables that are aligned 
from northeast to southwest.  The northern most of the two sets passes approximately 60 feet 
south of the accident site and the second set approximately 135 feet south.  The helicopter did 
not impact the second (southern) set.  
The northern set of wires, identified by a Southern California Edison Company spokesman as 
the Antelope-Mesa line, consists of three 605 ACSR (aluminum conductor, steel reinforced) 
type conductors with 220 kilovolt potential between wires (phases).  Each conductor is 
approximately 1 inch in diameter and, according to the Edison lineman, consists of 30 strands 
of aluminum wire around a 19-strand steel core cable.  The three conductors hang suspended 
from towers approximately 90 feet tall using ceramic insulators and are approximately 75 feet 
above ground level at the tower.  The three conductors are lined abreast of one another with 
23-foot lateral separation.  In addition to these three conductors there are two ground wires 
which run from the top of each tower.  The ground wires are spaced laterally in between the 
power conductors that hang approximately 15 feet below them.  At the accident site, in between 
towers, the lower (power conductor) wires sagged to approximately 65 feet above ground level.
Near the accident site there are five wires; three power conductors approximately 65 feet agl 
spaced 23 feet apart and two ground wires above them approximately 15 feet and laterally in 
between the lower power conductors.  The center wire of the lower three was severed, and the 
southern of the three had impact damage to several strands but did not break.  The northern 
most of the three power conductor wires, nearest the fuselage wreckage, did not exhibit 
evidence of impact when viewed from the ground using binoculars.  Similarly, the two ground 
wires above did not exhibit any impact marks.  The individual wires of the center conductor, at 
the point of failure, were splayed out over approximately the last 18 inches of each end of the 
cable.  The individual ends of the aluminum wires exhibited "necking" to a reduced diameter at 
the point of separation, and several individual wires had "hooks" in the ends which 
approximated the contour of the leading edge of the main rotor blades.
The fuselage, with the main rotor system still attached but minus the tailboom and antitorque 
rotor, was lying on its left side about 60 feet north of the broken center conductor, headed 
approximately 025 degrees (magnetic).  A postcrash fire consumed the cockpit area.  The fire 
damaged the engine accessory area, main rotor mast area, and part of one main rotor blade.  
The fuselage exhibited crushing damage to the left side.  The left skid was broken in two places 
and the right skid was intact although separated from the forward cross tube assembly.  There 
were no electrical arc marks noted on the fuselage.
The main rotor blades remained attached to the hub and the hub remained attached to the 
mast.  Both blades exhibited electrical arcing and burn-through in the skin at numerous 
locations along the aft surface of the leading edge "D section" starting approximately 1 foot in 
from one blade tip and extending to the other tip's trailing edge.  The hub showed evidence of 
arcing on the inner surfaces in proximity of the blade flapping hinges.  One blade (s/n 6639A) 
was straight and was laying on the surface, and was fire damaged where it passed in proximity 
of the cockpit area fire.  This blade had a 1-inch radius dent in the forward upper surface of the 
rotor spar about 1 foot from the tip that was accompanied by electrical arcing.  A scrape mark 
on the leading edge of the rotor over the 3-foot span inboard of the dent exhibited a braided 
appearance.  The other blade (s/n 6643A) was bent in two locations and folded under the rotor 
mast.  This blade exhibited burn-through along its span with a burn mark at the tip of the 
trailing edge.
The tail boom, tail rotor drive shaft, and tail rotor assembly were located in pieces over 
approximately a 150-foot radius to the northwest through east of the fuselage wreckage.  The 
tail rotor, tail rotor gearbox, and aft 3 feet of the tailcone were located approximately 50 feet 
northwest of the fuselage.  The tail rotor blades remained attached and did not exhibit 
chordwise striations.  The tail boom, when laid together, exhibited a dent in the left side 
extending from the upper front to lower rear at the mid-length of the tailcone.  The dent was 
accompanied by yellow paint transfer and the radius of the dent was approximately equal to 
the diameter of the main rotor leading edge.
The flight control push-pull tubes in the cockpit area were consumed by fire; however, the rod 
end bearings were located with the tube end fittings in place.  At the swashplate all control rod 
ends were intact except one drive link rod end which exhibited bending in the threaded area 
where it separated.  Aft of the cockpit the antitorque push-pull tubes were broken in several 
locations.  The breaks exhibited bending and were at stations corresponding to locations where 
the tail boom separated.  The tail rotor antitorque pitch change mechanism was intact.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Los Angeles County Coroner's Office and the 
FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute performed a toxicological analysis.
The aircraft wreckage was released to Mr. Jerry Wallace, representing the insurer, on June 4, 
1998.
