The pilot experienced a lost of  engine power and he made a forced landing in an a field There 
were no injuries to the pilot, and the aircraft was substantially damaged after colliding with a 
fence during the landing roll. Examination of the engine revealed that the number 3 main 
bearing had spun, the crankshaft was broken at the number 3 cheek, and the crankcase 
exhibited fretting at the case mating surfaces, consistent with improper through-bolt torque. 
The engine had undergone a top overhaul 197.4 hours prior to the failure of the crankshaft. 
Improper maintenance procedures used to overhaul the engine, which led to the crankshaft 
failure.  Contributing to the severity of the accident was the fence. 
 On May 1, 1998, about 1230 central standard time a Bellanca BL17-30A, N6645V, collided 
with a fence during an emergency landing near Gainesville, Florida.  The airplane was operated 
by the pilot under Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The private pilot and sole occupant was not injured and 
the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight originated in Jonesboro, Arkansas, about 
1000 central standard time, with an intended destination of Destin, Florida.
According to the pilot, during cruise flight the propeller "quit pulling as if it was disengaged".  
Repeated attempts to reengage the prop failed. The pilot had contacted Eglin approach on 
125.6 a few minutes  earlier to obtain clearance through Eglin's airspace. While on that 
frequency the pilot declared an emergency, and gave the controller his approximate position. 
He then made a forced landing in a nearby field, and collided with a wire fence. 
On May 15, 1998, an engine teardown was conducted at the Bay Minette Airport by Clark 
Aviation Inc. The teardown was witnessed by the FAA, the airplane owner, and Clark Aviation 
personnel. The engine oil pan was removed and metal fragments were found. The rod bolts 
were found loose as evidenced by shifting, and galling of the rod bearings, except for one which 
was found torqued to 400 ft. lbs., factory manuals recommend 300 ft. lbs. of torque for rod 
bolts. Additionally, the crankcase had fretting at the mating surfaces. The crankshaft was found 
broken at the number 3 cheek, and the number 3 main bearing had spun. 
The engine's recommended overhaul time was 1700 hours, a top overhaul was accomplished at 
1359.7 hours on 08/16/93, and the engine had accumulated 1557.1 hours at the time of the 
accident.
