The pilot was on a cross country flight from Austin, Texas, to Benton, Kansas.  After 5  hours 
and 45 minutes of flight the engine lost power.  The pilot selected an open field in which to 
make a forced landing.  The airplane contacted a hedgerow during touchdown.  Post accident 
inspection revealed the left fuel tank was empty and the right fuel tank contained 7/8 of a 
gallon of fuel. 
the pilot's failure to assure an adequate fuel supply to complete the flight by refueling the 
airplane en route resulting in fuel exhaustion.  A factor was the hedgerow which was contacted 
during the landing and the dark night conditions. 
 On May 2, 1998, at 2130 central daylight time, a Cessna 150H, N6977S, was substantially 
damaged during a forced landing in a field in Augusta, Kansas, following a loss of engine 
power.  The private pilot was not injured.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual 
meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  The flight departed from the Executive 
Airpark Airport, Austin, Texas, at 1545 cdt, with a planned destination of Benton, Kansas.
The pilot reported that he had the airplane refueled prior to departing from Austin.  The 
airplane holds 39 gallons of fuel.  The pilot reported that when nearing Augusta, Kansas, the 
fuel gauges were indicating that the left tank was empty and the right tank was 1/8 full.  He 
stated that he had his destination airport in site and was descended through 5,000 feet when 
the "...engine stopped running."  The pilot stated that he circled a private airstrip which was on 
his sectional chart, but decided not to land there because of the darkness and nearby houses.  
He stated that he instead decided to land in an open field near the airstrip.  The pilot stated 
that as he approached touchdown the airplane contacted a hedgerow appeared in the landing 
lights "...causing the damage in what would have otherwise been an uneventful landing."
Post accident inspection of the airplane revealed the left fuel tank was empty and the right fuel 
tank contained 7/8 of a gallon of fuel.
