National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Norman, OK
Accident Number: FTW03LA002
Date & Time: 10/02/2002, 1850 CDT
Registration: N9623C
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The 11-hour student pilot reported that this was his first supervised solo, and that the first two touch-and-go landing were "normal."
On his third approach to a full-stop landing to runway 17, airspeed was approximately 62 knots and the visual approach slope indicator indicated the airplane was too low.
The pilot increased power to get back on his approach path, but passing the numbers for runway 17 he noticed he was about 20 feet high and the nose of the airplane seemed a little high.
After the pilot lowered the nose the airplane touched down hard and began skidding to the left.
The pilot attempted to regain control of the airplane, but overcorrected by intermittently applying brakes.
The airplane traveled off the runway at approximately a 90 degree angle, coming to rest in an upright position in a culvert.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control.
A factor was the inadequate flare.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
PROPER GLIDEPATH - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) FLARE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On October 2, 2002, approximately 1850 central daylight time, a Piper PA-28-161 single- engine airplane, N9623C, was substantially damaged following a loss of directional control while landing at the University of Oklahoma Westheimer Airport, Norman, Oklahoma.
The airplane was owned and operated by the University of Oklahoma.
The student pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight.
The local flight originated from the Westheimer Airport, at 1840.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) the 11-hour student pilot reported that this was his first supervised solo flight, and that his first two touch- and-go landings were "normal."
The student pilot stated that on his third approach to runway 17, the airspeed was approximately 62 knots, and the visual approach slope indicator (VASI) was indicating that the airplane was too low.
"To gain altitude I increased power, which put me back on path."
The pilot reported that after passing the numbers on runway 17 he was about 20 feet high and noticed that the nose of the airplane seemed a little high.
He then pitched the nose down to keep from "floating."
After touching down "hard" the airplane began skidding to the left.
The pilot stated that he attempted to regain directional control of the airplane with the rudder pedals, but "apparently overcorrected."
The pilot reported that he was intermittently applying brakes, but was already off the runway moving toward a culvert.
The pilot further stated that he continued to try to gain directional control of the airplane, but was never able to fully recover control.
After coming to rest upright in a shallow culvert, the pilot placed the mixture control to idle-cutoff and exited the airplane.
Maintenance personnel who worked for the University reported that the left wing and left main landing gear were damaged, both propeller blades were bent, and the lower part of the firewall sustained structural damage.
At 1854, the University of Oklahoma Automatic Weather Observing System reported sky clear, visibility 10 statute miles, wind 140 degrees at 9 knots, temperature 84 degrees F, dew point 72 degrees F, and an altimeter of 29.92 inches of Mercury.
Student Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 35, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
