National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Chicago, IL
Accident Number: CHI03LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/2002, 1040 CDT
Registration: N22RJ
Aircraft: Mooney M20J
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The airplane collided with the terrain following a loss of control while landing.
The pilot reported they approached the airport from the north for a landing on runway 18.
He stated the winds were fine until they were approximately one mile out from the airport at which time they became gusty.
The pilot reported he flew the approach with flaps down and at an airspeed of 80 knots.
He reported that on touchdown, the airplane bounced and veered to the left.
He applied power to go-around; however, the airplane continued to veer left.
The left wing contacted the ground, and the airplane spun around coming to rest on a northerly heading.
An airport weather observation taken 10 minutes prior to the accident reported the wind condition as 240 degrees at 10 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for wind, and his failure to maintain directional control.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 1.
(C) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The private pilot and his pilot rated passenger were not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.
The flight originated from Madison, Wisconsin, at 1000.
The pilot reported they approached the airport from the north over Navy Pier.
He stated the winds were fine until they were approximately one mile out from the airport at which time they became gusty.
The pilot reported he flew the approach with flaps down and at an airspeed of 80 knots.
He reported that on touchdown, the airplane bounced and veered to the left.
He applied power to go-around; however, the airplane continued to veer left.
The left wing contacted the ground, and the airplane spun around coming to rest on a northerly heading.
A weather observation taken at CGX, 10 minutes prior to the accident, reported the wind condition as 240 degrees at 10 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
