National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Coldwater, MI
Accident Number: CHI03LA002
Date & Time: 10/02/2002, 1912 EDT
Registration: N633KF
Aircraft: Tanner Kitfox
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The experimental amateur-built airplane received substantial damage during a forced landing.
The instructional flight experienced a total loss of engine power during the eighth takeoff in a series of touch and go landings.
The airplane was climbing through 200 feet above ground level when the engine quit and a left 90-degree turn was executed so as to land in a grassy area.
An engine restart was not attempted.
Examination of the wreckage confirmed flight control continuity, electrical continuity of the ignition system, engine continuity, and engine compression.
Fuel was found in both engine carburetors, oil was found within the engine, and coolant was present in the coolant tank.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The low altitude at which an undetermined loss of engine power occurred following takeoff.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS Factual Information On October 2, 2002, at 1912 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Tanner Kitfox, N633KF, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a takeoff from runway 03 (3,500 feet by 75 feet, asphalt) at Branch County Memorial Airport, Coldwater, Michigan.
The airplane experienced a total loss of engine power during climb.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The certified flight instructor (CFI) and pilot were uninjured.
The local flight originated at 1800.
The CFI stated that they were performing touch and go's and at 200 feet above ground during the eighth takeoff, there was a total loss of engine power.
They then made a left 90-degree turn to a grassy area without attempting to restart the engine.
He stated that the airplane impacted at a high sink rate.
Examination of the wreckage was performed by the Federal Aviation Administration.
The airplane was resting inverted about 220 feet west of the centerline and 300 feet from the approach end of runway 21.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
The fuel shut off valve was in the on position.
The airplane was powered by a Rotax 582LC, serial number 3916612, engine with a total time since overhaul of 232.7 hours and 6 hours were since its last inspection.
The engine contained oil and coolant water was present in the coolant tank.
Fuel was present in the fuel tank and in both carburetor bowls.
The engine was rotated by hand and thumb compression and continuity were confirmed.
Electrical continuity of the engine was confirmed upon examination of the ignition system.
The spark plugs did not contain debris.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
