National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: San Antonio, TX
Accident Number: FTW03LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/2002, 1745 CDT
Registration: N4269B
Aircraft: Maule M-7-235C
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The 266-hour private pilot attempted to land on runway 30 with the winds from 160 degrees at 14 knots.
He stated that while retracting the flaps on the rollout " a right cross wind gust lifted my right wing," which lifted his right main gear off the ground.
The pilot initiated corrective action to level the wings and applied additional right rudder to realign to the runway.
The pilot was unable to recover from the downwind landing and the airplane collided with a 3-foot wall following the loss of control.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to compensate for the existing winds conditions.
A contributing factor was the prevailing tailwind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
OBJECT - WALL/BARRICADE Factual Information On October 1, 2002, approximately 1745 central daylight time, a Maule M-7-235C single- engine tailwheel equipped airplane, N4269B, was destroyed when the airplane impacted a wall during landing at the Twin Oaks Airport (T94), near San Antonio, Texas.
The instrument rated private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The local flight originated from the Twin Oaks Airport, at 1715.
The 266-hour pilot reported on the Pilot/Operator Accident Report Form (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) that he arrived at the airfield at approximately 1700 hours and observed the local weather and winds for approximately 10 minutes.
He stated that the winds appeared mild and variable from approximately 120 degrees at 7 knots.
The pilot added "I did not observe any gusts throughout the observation period."
The pilot initiated a takeoff from runway 12, surveyed the conditions and proceeded to enter the traffic pattern to land on runway 30.
The pilot stated, "I conducted one pass over the runway to test the conditions and ascertained the wind conditions were mild, no turbulence."
During the landing on runway 30, the pilot reported touch-down at 62 mph with the tail wheel touching momentarily before the mains.
"There was a very small bounce and the mains settled to the ground."
While on roll out, with flaps retracted, the pilot stated, "A right crosswind gust lifted my right wing.
The lifting was rapid and intense, lifting the gear off the ground, with the tail still grounded."
The pilot initiated corrective action to level the wings and applied additional right rudder to realign to the runway.
The pilot was unable to recover.
The airplane veered left, exited the runway, crossed a drainage ditch, and impacted a three-foot wall.
The impact ruptured the engine oil pan and initiated an engine fire, which consumed the airplane.
Runway 30 was reported to be a 2,078-foot by 30-foot wide asphalt runway.
The pilot was reported to have accumulated a total of 33 hours in the same type and model of aircraft.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 47, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
