National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Edgartown, MA
Accident Number: NYC03LA003
Date & Time: 10/01/2002, 1050 EDT
Registration: N8071Z
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-181
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Arriving in the airport area, the pilot determined that the wind was favoring runway 06.
While on approach to runway 06, severe turbulence and a wind shift was encountered.
After crossing the threshold of the runway, the airplane appeared to be landing with a tailwind, and the pilot initiated a go-around.
During the go-around, as the pilot pulled back on the control yoke, the airplane continued to descend towards the ground.
The airplane struck a tree, touched down in a grass field located beyond the departure end of the runway, and came to rest upright.
The recorded weather at a nearby airport, about the time of the accident, included winds from 250 degrees at 16 knots, gusting to 21 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate in-flight evaluation of the landing facilities wind conditions, and inadequate airspeed resulting in a stall/mush.
A factor related to the accident was the tailwind condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 2.
(C) WEATHER EVALUATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 5.
OBJECT - TREE(S) ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: Factual Information On October 1, 2002, about 1050 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-181, N8071Z, was substantially damaged during a go-around from the Katama Airport, Edgartown, Massachusetts.
The certificated commercial pilot and passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, upon arriving in the airport area, he determined that the wind was favoring runway 06; a 2,700-foot long, 50-foot wide, turf runway.
While on approach to runway 06, severe turbulence and a wind shift was encountered.
After crossing the threshold of the runway, the airplane appeared to be landing with a tailwind, and the pilot initiated a go- around.
During the go-around, as the pilot pulled back on the control yoke, the airplane continued to descend toward the ground.
The airplane struck a tree, touched down in a grass field located beyond the departure end of the runway, and came to rest upright.
The pilot additionally reported he did not experience any difficulties with the engine or airframe during the flight.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed substantial damage to the lower empennage section of the airplane.
The examination did not reveal any mechanical anomalies with the engine or airframe.
The recorded weather at a nearby airport, at 1053, included winds from 250 degrees at 16 knots, gusting to 21 knots.
The recorded winds at 0953 were from 260 degrees at 12 knots, gusting to 19 knots.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
