National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Marmaduke, AR
Accident Number: FTW03LA004
Date & Time: 10/02/2002, 1430 CDT
Registration: N155HF
Aircraft: Air Tractor AT-400
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis During the aerial application flight, two fields were being sprayed from east to the west with a set of power lines running north and south between the fields.
The pilot would fly the airplane over the power lines and then descend to spray the field.
During the accident swath descent to spray the east field, the airplane struck the ground.
The pilot and local authorities reported that the winds were "strong" from the southwest.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control.
A contributing factor was the towering cumulus in all quadrants.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - THUNDERSTORM,OUTFLOW 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On October 2, 2002, at 1430 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-400, agricultural airplane, N155HF, sustained substantial damage following a loss of control during an aerial application flight near Marmaduke, Arkansas.
The airplane was owned and operated by Kuntz Aviation of Carthage, Mississippi, under Code of Federal Regulations Part 137.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant, received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.
The flight originated at an unknown time.
The pilot and local authorities reported that the winds were "strong" from the southwest.
During the aerial application entry to the cotton field a gust of wind struck the airplane and the airplane struck the ground.
Subsequently, the airplane skidded approximately 39 feet, the left main landing gear collapsed, and the airplane skidded an additional 366 feet before coming to rest upright in the cotton field.
The empennage separated from the airframe and the left wing was damaged.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Form (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) the operator reported that two fields were being sprayed from east to the west with a set of power lines running north and south between the fields.
The pilot would fly the airplane over the power lines and then descend to spray the field.
During the accident swath descent to spray the field,  the airplane struck the ground.
Towering cumulus clouds were reported in all quadrants.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
