Page 1 of 2ERA15LA293
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Georgetown, KY
Accident Number:
ERA15LA293
Date & Time:
08/01/2015, 2100 EDT 
Registration:
N257CQ
Aircraft:
BEECH C90B
Injuries:
2 Serious, 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On August 1, 2015, about 2100 eastern daylight time, a Beechcraft King Air C90B, N257CQ, 
experienced a loss of engine power during cruise flight and subsequently impacted terrain near 
Georgetown Scott County Airport Œ Marshall Field (27K), Georgetown, Kentucky. The 
commercial pilot and one passenger sustained serious injuries and the two other passengers 
sustained minor injuries. The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings and the 
fuselage. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument rules flight plan was 
filed for the flight that departed the James M Cox Dayton International Airport (DAY), Dayton, 
Ohio, about 2023 with an intended destination of Lake Cumberland Regional Airport (SME), 
Somerset, Kentucky. The airplane was owned and operated by Absher Air LLC as a personal 
flight in accordance with the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to an interview the FAA inspector conducted with the pilot, a fuel crossfeed light 
illuminated, the pilot reset the indication, and the right engine immediately lost power while in 
cruise flight. He further reported that the autofeather system feathered the right engine 
propeller. The pilot could not recall feathering the left engine; however, due to the injuries the 
pilot sustained, the inspector suspended the interview until a later date.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the airplane impacted the 
ground in a right wing low attitude. The airplane slid about 174 feet, impacted an embankment, 
became airborne, and then came to rest on airport property, about 238 feet from the initial 
impact location. According to FAA and local police photographs, the airplane came to rest 
upright, on the belly of the aircraft, parallel to an airport taxiway. The left engine propeller was 
found in the feathered position, separated from the engine flange, and was in the vicinity of the 
wreckage. All four propeller blades exhibited S-bending and chordwise scratching along the 
propeller face. The right engine propeller blade was in flat pitch; however, only one propeller 
blade was bent aft and no other damage was observed on the other three right engine propeller 
blades.
Preliminary information revealed that the flight originated at Red Lake Airport (CYRL), Red 
Lake, Ontario, Canada, earlier in the afternoon, flew to Duluth International Airport (DLH), 
Duluth, Minnesota, where fuel records indicated the airplane was fueled with 140 gallons of Jet 
A fuel with prist. The flight departed DLH about 50 minutes later and then landed in DAY, 
Page 2 of 2ERA15LA293
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
prior to departing to SME. According to personnel at the three fixed base operations (FBO) 
facilities at DAY, the airplane was not fueled at DAY prior to departure. One FBO facility 
reported that security video captured the airplane taxiing onto the FBO ramp and the engines 
being shut down. Several people exited the airplane and were let out through the security gate 
to the parking lot. Subsequently, four people returned to the aircraft and it taxied out.
The aircraft and engines were retained by NTSB for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N257CQ
Model/Series:
C90B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
ABSHER AIR LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KLEX, 989 ft msl
Observation Time:
2054 EDT
Distance from Accident Site:
14 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 15°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
6 knots / , 340°
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Departure Point: 
DAYTON, OH (DAY)
Destination: 
SOMERSET, KY (SME)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious, 2 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious, 2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
38.228333, -84.436389 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Shawn Etcher
Additional Participating Persons:
Wayne M Cummings; FAA/FSDO; Louisville, KY
Jan Smith; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Earl Chapman; Transportation Safety Board of Canada (Acc Rep); Gatineau, QC
Leslie Ederer; Pratt and Whitney (Tech Advisor to the Acc Rep); Longueuil,
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
