During an instructional flight, the airplane stalled after the 750-hour flight instructor 
performed an abrupt pull-up to avoid colliding with powerlines while maneuvering.  Witnesses 
at the airport reported that the airplane had been operating in the closed traffic pattern, 
performing touch-and-go landings on runway 14.  They added that they heard the engine 
power being reduced from full power to idle and observed the airplane make a left turn and 
descend toward the south end of the airport.  Instead of making a right turn for a downwind 
landing on 32, the airplane continued straight ahead, crossing perpendicular to the runway.  
The witnesses then heard an increase in engine power and observed the airplane enter a climb.  
The 15-hour student pilot receiving instruction told a witness that he saw the powerlines 
crossing their flight path, and 'they pulled up hard and barely missed them.'  The witnesses 
reported that after clearing the powerlines, 'the left wing of the airplane dropped and the 
airplane appeared to stall and spin toward the ground.' 
The flight instructor's inadvertent stall while performing an evasive maneuver to avoid 
colliding with powerlines. 
 On August 1, 1999, at 1957 central daylight time, a Cessna 150L airplane, N444UF, was 
substantially damaged following a loss of control while maneuvering in the traffic pattern at 
the Coulter Field Airport, near Bryan, Texas.  The flight instructor sustained minor injuries and 
the student pilot was not injured.  The airplane was owned by Preiss Enterprises, Inc., and 
operated by United Flight Systems, Inc., both of College Station, Texas.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight for which a flight plan was 
not filed.  The local flight departed from the Easterwood Field Airport (CLL), near College 
Station, Texas, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.  
The 750-hour flight instructor reported to the operator that "the engine started sputtering and 
lost power while the airplane was abeam the departure end of the runway while on a left 
downwind for runway 14."  The flight instructor stated that he intended to land the airplane on 
a short taxiway perpendicular to the approach end of runway 32.  During his approach to the 
taxiway, engine power was reestablished, and he elected to initiate a climb to return to home 
base.  The flight instructor added that the engine lost power again during climb out, "and the 
airplane stalled."  The airplane impacted on the shoulder of a highway, went through a fence, 
and came to rest in a field in the inverted position.
Pilot/witnesses standing outside the terminal building at the airport reported that the airplane 
had been operating in the closed traffic pattern, performing touch-and-go landings on runway 
14.  They stated that when the airplane was established on a left downwind, abeam the south 
boundary of the airport, they heard the sound of the engine go from full power to idle.  They 
observed the airplane make a left turn and descend toward the south end of the airport.  The 
pilots commented that they expected the airplane to make a right turn and land downwind on 
runway 32.  They reported that the flaps were extended to about 10 degrees.  
The witnesses added that the airplane continued to descend perpendicular to the runway, and 
crossed the approach end of the runway at an estimated altitude of 150 feet agl.  When the 
airplane was just a few feet above the ground, the witnesses heard the sound of an increase to 
what sounded like full takeoff power.  The airplane initiated a climb until it reached the 
southwest boundary of the airport, which was paralleled by a 25-foot-tall powerline.  At 
powerline level, the airplane abruptly assumed a nose high attitude and cleared the powerlines.  
After clearing the powerlines, "the left wing of the airplane dropped and the airplane appeared 
to stall and spin toward the ground."  The airplane "fell almost vertically with the engine still 
running at full power." 
The 15-hour student pilot told one of the witnesses that he observed the powerlines in their 
flight path, and they "pulled up hard and barely missed them."      
Examination of the airplane by the operator revealed spar damage to both wings and structural 
damage to the vertical stabilizer and engine firewall.  The operator estimated that the airplane 
had approximately 18 gallons of fuel on board at the time of the accident.  The 1973 model 
airplane was not equipped with shoulder harnesses for either occupant.  The flight instructor 
sustained minor facial injuries during the accident.
