The pilot obtained a standard weather briefing, and then filed a flight plan.  He then received a 
weather update from flight service approximately 5 minutes before executing the flight.  During 
the update, the briefer indicated that scattered thunderstorms in the Hagerstown area were 
moving east towards Frederick.  The pilot calculated that he would arrive at his destination 
prior to the thunderstorms, so he departed.  While approaching his destination, the pilot 
noticed the sky to the north of his position was 'very dark.'  He also experienced an increase in 
turbulence.  The pilot checked weather with Frederick UNICOM, and was advised the winds 
were 4 knots.  With the approaching thunderstorms, the pilot expedited his turn from base to 
final, and executed a 'normal' landing.  As the airplane rolled out it became airborne and 
started to drift to the right.  The airplane touched down, exited the runway, and the landing 
gear collapsed when it struck a sign.  The pilot shut off both magnetos, secured the throttle, 
and exited the airplane.  The pilot stated, 'I think I encountered a gust and simply lost control.' 
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control.  Contributing factors were gusty wind 
conditions and the sign. 
 On August 1, 1999, at 1440 eastern daylight time, a Piper J3C-65, N70894, was 
substantially damage during landing, when it departed the right side of runway 23 at Frederick 
Municipal Airport, Frederick, Maryland.  The certificated commercial pilot was not injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight that originated from 
Haysfield Airport, Clarksville, Maryland.  A visual flight rules flight plan was filed, and the 
flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report Form, the pilot obtained a 
standard weather briefing, and then filed a flight plan.  He then received a weather update 
from flight service approximately 5 minutes before executing the flight.  During the update, the 
briefer indicated that scattered thunderstorms in the Hagerstown, Maryland area were moving 
east towards Frederick.  The pilot calculated that he would arrive at his destination prior to the 
thunderstorms, so he departed Haysfield.  While approaching his destination, the pilot noticed 
the sky to the north of his position was "very dark."  He also experienced an increase in 
turbulence.  The pilot checked weather with Frederick UNICOM, and was advised the winds 
were 4 knots.
With the approaching thunderstorms, the pilot expedited his turn from base to final for 
runway 23.  He then executed a "normal" landing.  As the airplane was rolling out it became 
airborne and started to drift to the right.  The airplane touched down, exited the runway, and 
the landing gear collapsed when it struck a sign.  The pilot shut off both magnetos, secured the 
throttle, and exited the airplane.
The pilot added, "I think I encountered a gust and simply lost control."
