The pilot stated that he flew a straight-in approach, and touchdown was normal.  Then, the 
airplane veered to the right, off the side of the runway, and into a ditch.  Examination of the 
wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, and a local mechanic, did not reveal 
any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.  A Maryland State Police trooper observed skid 
marks, left on the runway by all three landing gears.  According to the trooper, the main gear 
skid marks were oriented 20 degrees to the right of the runway centerline, before the nose gear 
touched down. 
The pilot-in-command's failure to maintain aircraft control while landing. 
 On August 1, 1999, about 2115 Eastern Daylight Time, a Beech A36, N6357Y was substantially 
damaged while landing at Carroll County Regional Airport (W54), Westminster, Maryland.  
The certificated airline transport pilot and three passengers were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that originated from Martin State Airport, 
Baltimore, Maryland.  No flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR 
Part 91.
The pilot stated that he flew a straight-in approach to Runway 34 at W54.  The touchdown was 
normal, then the airplane veered to the right.  He was unable to control the airplane, and it 
went off the right side of the runway, into a ditch.  The pilot further stated that he was not sure 
if the loss of control was pilot error or a mechanical problem.  During the morning hours, on 
the day of the accident, air was added to the right tire.  Subsequently, the pilot flew with a 
student before the accident flight.  The student pilot reported that the left rudder pedal had to 
be depressed to taxi the airplane along a straight line.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, and a local 
mechanic, did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.  The inspector observed 
damage to the propeller, landing gears, and webbing along the longeron.
An on-site examination was conducted by the Maryland State Police.  According to the trooper, 
all three landing gears left skid marks on the runway.  The trooper stated that the main wheel 
skid marks were oriented 20 degrees to the right of the runway centerline, before the nose gear 
touched down.  The skid marks continued for approximately 505 feet, off the right side of the 
runway and onto the grass.  
The reported winds, at an airport approximately 30 miles from the accident site, at 2054, were 
from 280 degrees at 8 knots.
