The pilot stated that while landing at his destination, the first approach to land on Runway 27 
was high, and a go-around was performed.  The second attempt to land on the runway was 
long, and the airplane floated about halfway down the runway, before touching down hard.  
The airplane then bounced into the air, and settled back to the ground, touching down hard a 
second time.  The airplane bounced several more times, until the pilot added full power, and 
executed a go-around.  The pilot climbed the airplane to about 3,000 feet above the ground, 
and returned to his departure airport.  The pilot did not notice any vibrations during the return 
flight, and the airplane performed normally, except for a slightly slower airspeed.  Examination 
of the airplane revealed damage to the main gear, the main cabin floorboards, buckling of the 
firewall, and 2-inch rearward curling of the propeller 
The pilot's improper flare and improper recovery from a bounced landing. 
 On August 1, 1999, about 1110 Eastern Daylight Time, a Cessna 172R, N2746C, was 
substantially damaged while landing at the Delaware Airport (33N), Cheswold, Delaware.  The 
certificated private pilot and the passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight that originated at the Brandywine 
Airport (N99), West Chester, Pennsylvania, conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot stated that while landing at 33N, the first approach to land on Runway 27, a 
3,715-foot long asphalt runway, was high, and a go-around was performed.  The second 
attempt to land on Runway 27 was long, and the airplane floated about halfway down the 
runway, before touching down hard.  The airplane then bounced into the air, and settled back 
to the ground, touching down hard a second time.  The airplane bounced several more times, 
until the pilot added full power, and executed a go-around.  The pilot climbed the airplane to 
about 3,000 feet above the ground, and returned to N99.  The pilot did not notice any 
vibrations during the return flight, and the airplane performed normally, except for a slightly 
slower airspeed. 
Examination of the airplane at N99 by a Federal Aviation Inspector revealed damage to 
the main gear, the main cabin floorboards, buckling of the firewall, and 2-inch rearward 
curling of the propeller blades. 
The winds reported at an airport located 5 miles to the southeast, at 1045 were, 300 
degrees at 8 knots.
