This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Enumclaw, WA
Accident Number: WPR18LA098
Date & Time: 03/04/2018, 1558 PST
Registration: N207PC
Aircraft: RAYTHEON AIRCRAFT COMPANY
A36
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On March 4, 2018, about 1558 Pacific standard time, a Raytheon Aircraft Company A36 
airplane, N207PC, was substantially damaged following a loss of engine power and forced 
landing about 3.5 nautical miles northeast of Enumclaw, Washington. The private pilot, the 
sole occupant of the airplane, was seriously injured. Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the personal cross-country flight, which was being operated in accordance Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. An instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed and 
active at the time of the accident. The flight had departed Yuma International Airport, Yuma, 
Arizona, about 1100 mountain standard time, with the reported destination being Snohomish 
County Airport, Everett, Washington.
The pilot reported that as he was descending through 10,000 ft mean sea level while in IFR 
conditions, he noticed that the manifold pressure (MP) had dropped to 10 inches Hg; his 
attempts to restore power to a normal MP level were unsuccessful. The pilot stated that about 
10 to 15 seconds later he heard what he thought was a cylinder blow. He then heard the same 
type of noise several more times, followed by oil covering the windscreen and smoke entering 
the cockpit/cabin area. He then closed off the air coming in from the engine and opened the 
left cockpit side window, which cleared the smoke. The pilot opined that he was then vectored 
by air traffic control toward a grass airstrip, however, being unable to make it to the airstrip, he 
elected to land in a field. Unable to make the selected field, the pilot subsequently landed in a 
grove of trees before coming to rest on the ground. There was no postcrash fire. The pilot 
mentioned that the propeller continued to windmill throughout the entire event.
The airplane will be recovered to a secured storage facility for further examination.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: RAYTHEON AIRCRAFT
COMPANY
Registration: N207PC
Model/Series: A36 A36
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: SEA, 433 ft msl
Observation Time: 1553 PST
Distance from Accident Site: 24 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 6°C / 3°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Thin Overcast / 800 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 6 knots / , 160°
Lowest Ceiling: Overcast / 800 ft agl
Visibility: 5 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.21 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: IFR
Departure Point: Yuma, AZ (NYL)
Destination: Everett, WA (PAE)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Serious
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude: 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Thomas Little
Additional Participating Persons: Roy Dunn; Federal Aviation Administration; Renton, WA
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
