This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Pampano Beach, FL
Accident Number: ERA18LA102
Date & Time: 03/01/2018, 1051 EST
Registration: N54476
Aircraft: PIPER PA 32-300
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On March 1, 2018, about 1051 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-32-300 airplane, N54476, 
operated by Pompano Senior Squadron Flying Club Inc., was substantially damaged when it 
struck terrain during an attempted go-around at Pompano Beach Airpark (PMP), Pompano 
Beach, Florida. The private pilot and the pilot-rated passenger were not injured. The flight was 
operated in accordance with Title 14
 Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91 as a personal flight. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a visual flight rules flight plan was filed for the 
flight that was destined for Marsh Harbor International Airport (MYAM), Marsh Harbor, 
Bahamas.
The pilot reported that after departing from runway 28 at PMP, and while climbing through 
800 ft. mean sea level (msl), the engine's manifold pressure was dropping and the engine 
sounded irregular. The pilot-rated passenger told the pilot to "immediately turn back." After 
turning back towards PMP, the pilot informed air traffic control that they needed to make an 
emergency landing. The controller then cleared the flight to land on runway 28.
The pilot stated that the airplane touched down less than one-third of the way down the 3,502-
ft-long runway, and there appeared to be a "substantial quartering tailwind," which resulted in 
a high ground speed. In addition, he reported that although he had the throttle lever pulled 
back, it appeared the engine was developing full power. The pilot-rated passenger reported that 
the speed was increasing, and they bounced several times on the runway. The pilot pulled the 
mixture control to cutoff and stated that it didn't appear to shut off the engine, so he pushed 
the mixture to full rich and pushed up the throttle lever for another takeoff.
The pilot added that during the takeoff attempt, he made an immediate sharp turn to the right 
after takeoff so they would stay over the airport. The airplane climbed briefly, continued 
turning to the right and lost altitude, striking the airport ramp in front of a hanger about 1,000 
ft northwest of the departure end of runway 28. The airplane impacted two fences before 
coming to a rest upright.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
that the outboard section of both wings were sheared off, the landing gear was separated, and 
the engine was partially separated from the firewall.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate. His most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was 
issued on February 14, 2018. At the time of that examination he reported 370 total hours of 
flight experience.
At 1053, the weather conditions recorded at PMP included few clouds at 2,600 ft above ground 
level, wind from 150° at 8 knots, and visibility 10 statute miles. The temperature was 26° C, 
and the dew point was 19° C. The altimeter setting was 30.06 inches of mercury.
The wreckage was retained for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: PIPER
Registration: N54476
Model/Series: PA 32-300 300
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: POMPANO SENIOR SQUADRON
FLYING CLUB INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: PMP, 19 ft msl
Observation Time: 1053 EDT
Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 26°C / 19°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Few / 2600 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 8 knots / , 150°
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.06 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: VFR
Departure Point: Pampano Beach, FL (PMP)
Destination: Marsh Harbour, FN
(MYAM)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 2 None
Latitude, Longitude: 26.248611, -80.118056
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Lawrence A Mccarter
Additional Participating Persons: Francis Lauderborn; FAA; Miramar, FL
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
