National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Factual Report
Location: Deport, TX
Accident Number: CEN18LA113
Date & Time: 03/02/2018, 1625 CST
Registration: N3733X
Aircraft: AERO COMMANDER 100-180
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Fuel starvation
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On March 2, 2018, about 1625 central standard time, an Aero Commander 100-180, N3733X, 
sustained substantial damage when it hit a tree during a forced landing to a field after a total 
loss of engine power near Deport, Texas. The pilot received minor injuries. The airplane was 
owned and operated by the pilot under the provisions of the 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the flight, 
which was not operated on a flight plan. The flight departed from the Cox Field Airport (PRX), 
Paris, Texas, about 1600 on a local flight.
The pilot reported that he attempted to fly his airplane the day before the accident, but he had 
maintenance problems and decided not to fly. He reported that there had been an extended 
period of rain in area and his airplane was parked on the airplane ramp during that time. 
During the preflight inspection, he sumped the fuel twice with about 4oz of water in the 
samples. The airplane had not been flown since January 28, 2018, and the battery was 
"completely dead." The battery was charged enough to get the engine started and he taxied to 
the run-up area. During the magneto checks, the engine "died," and he needed assistance to get 
the engine running again. While waiting for the assistance to arrive start the engine again, he 
decided to recheck the fuel system. He reported that he sumped thirty 8oz bottles of water 
from the fuel system before he saw clean blue fuel. After getting the engine started again, he 
taxied back to the ramp and tied the airplane down. He reported that the right wing was 
sloping to the west (right wing down). 
On the day of the accident flight, a mechanic charged the battery. During the preflight 
inspection, the pilot sumped the fuel system and found a small amount of water during the first 
check, but it was clear on the second check. During the run-up, the airplane operated normally, 
and he departed.
The pilot reported that after flying for about 25 minutes, he executed a left turn at a 45° bank 
angle. He stated that about 1 minute after leveling off at 500 ft above ground level, the engine 
sputtered once and stopped producing power. His attempt to restart the engine was 
unsuccessful. He executed a forced landing to a field but was unable to stop the airplane before 
hitting trees during the landing roll. 
The pilot reported that on the day of the accident, he purchased gasket material and made 
"additional gaskets for the fuel cap hoping that if water got in that way this might stop it." He 
reported that there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane 
that would have precluded normal operation. 
An FAA inspection of the airplane's filler neck and cap showed large amounts of rust. 
Pilot Information  
Certificate: Private
Age: 71, Male
Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied: Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): None
Restraint Used: Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s): None
Second Pilot Present: No
Instructor Rating(s): None
Toxicology Performed: No
Medical Certification: Class 3 Without
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam: 11/04/2016
Occupational Pilot: No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time: 170 hours (Total, all aircraft), 73 hours (Total, this make and model), 120 hours (Pilot In
Command, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: AERO COMMANDER
Registration: N3733X
Model/Series: 100-180
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Year of Manufacture: 1968
Amateur Built: No
Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 5041
Landing Gear Type: Tricycle
Seats: 4
Date/Type of Last Inspection: 08/10/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 2450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time: 
Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming
ELT: C91  installed, activated, did
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series: O-320-AA2B
Registered Owner: On file
Rated Power: 180 hp
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: PRX, 547 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 9 Nautical Miles
Observation Time: 1635 CST
Direction from Accident Site: 320°
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 7 knots /
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual: /
Wind Direction: 110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual: /
Altimeter Setting: 30.26 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 18°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration: No Precipitation
Departure Point: Paris, TX (PRX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Destination: Paris, TX (PRX)
Type of Clearance: None
Departure Time: 1600 CST
Type of Airspace: Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Minor
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude: 33.520000, -95.337778
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): James P Silliman
Additional Participating Persons: Chuck Kuykendall; FAA North Texas FSDO; Irving, TX
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=96819
