The pilot departed on a local flight and did not return. The wreckage was located the following 
day. Examination of the wreckage revealed the airplane collided with trees and terrain 
spinning to the left. Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assembly and 
accessories revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. All 
components necessary for flight were present at the crash site. 
an in-flight loss of control for undetermined reasons. 
 On July 1, 1997, at an undetermined time, an experimental DFL Holdings Inc., Model: 
Tango, N772T,  operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed in the vicinity of 
Keystone, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The 
airplane was destroyed and the airline transport rated pilot was fatally injured. The flight 
originated from Keystone Airpark at about 1330 eastern daylight time. 
The airplane was reported as missing on July 1, 1997, and was located on July 2, 1997, in 
the northeast corner of restricted area 2903A.
Examination of the crash site revealed the airplane collided with trees in a nose down 
attitude with little horizontal movement spinning to the left. The left wing was bent slightly up, 
was attached at the forward portion of the wing, and separated 10 to 12 inches on the trailing 
part of the wing. The right wing tip bottom was found two feet forward of the right wing. The 
fuel tanks were ruptured and browning of the  vegetation was present. Torsional twisting, "s" 
bending and chordwise scarring was present on the propeller blades. Tree branches found in 
the vicinity of the crash site exhibited 45-degree "v" cuts
Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assembly and accessories revealed 
no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. All components necessary for 
flight were present at the crash site. For additional information see FAA inspector's statement
Personnel who had known the pilot since college stated, he had the experience and 
talent to fly the tango airplane, but at times had shown less than good judgment performing 
maneuvers at low altitudes and buzzing at tree top level before and after joining the military. 
He was informed about the characteristics of the tango airplane, was instructed not to perform 
aerobatics, power on stalls, or spins, and to consider it as a low g aircraft. After initially flying 
the airplane the pilot informed them that the airplane did a great "pull close" maneuver.
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted on July 3, 1997, by Dr. Margarita 
Arruza, Associate Medical Examiner, Jacksonville, Florida. The cause of death was multiple 
injuries. Postmortem toxicology studies of specimens from the pilot were performed by the 
Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Federal Aviation Administration, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma. These studies were negative for basic, acidic, and neutral drugs. Ethanol 21.000 
mg/dl was detected in the blood, 30.00 mg/dl ethanol was detected in the muscle fluid, 1.00 
mg/dl acetaldehyde was detected in the muscle fluid, 16.000 acetaldehyde was detected in the 
blood, and 5.000 mg/dl n-propanol was detected in the blood.   
The wreckage was released to MSG Ronald Watson, Provost Marshals Office, Camp 
Blanding, Florida, on July 11, 1997. The pilot log books were released to the deceased pilot's 
father, Dr. Richard K. Ames, on August 19, 1997.
