Approximately two miles after takeoff, the pilot reported losing partial power due to backfiring 
of the engine.  The pilot then made a forced landing and ground looped the airplane.  The 
engine was test run on the airplane.  Rated power was achieved during the test run with no 
mechanical deficiencies were noted. 
The pilot did not maintain aircraft control and the reason for the loss of engine power was 
undetermined. 
 On July 1, 1997, at 2030 central daylight time (cdt), a Grumman G-164, N10397, registered to 
Satanta Flying Service, Inc., of Satanta, Kansas, was substantially damaged following a partial 
loss of engine power and subsequent forced landing in a farmer's field.  The commercial pilot 
reported no injuries.  The 14 CFR Part 137 aerial application flight was not operating on a flight 
plan.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The flight 
departed Satanta, Kansas, at 2025 cdt.
Post accident examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration principal 
Maintenance Inspector (PMI), stated that the pilot reported that about two miles from the 
departure airport the engine backfired and lost power causing an emergency landing.  The 
airplane's fuel system was inspected and the fuel tanks were empty due to rupture in the fuel 
line caused when the airplane ground looped and settled on the top of the upper wing.  The fuel 
strainer was inspected and held clean aviation 100LL fuel (blue in color).  The fuel line was 
repaired and fuel was added to the wing tanks for the engine test run.  The forward spark plugs 
were removed and cleaned and oil which had run into the cylinders when the airplane was 
inverted was allowed to drain.  The existing propeller was removed and a serviceable propeller 
installed for the test run on the airplane.  The propeller was pulled through to clear all the 
cylinders of oil.  The engine was then motored over with the starter and after several attempts 
the engine started.  The engine ran rough until it burned the remainder of the oil out of the 
cylinders and warmed up.  The engine was then ran at 2100 rpm's and produced 32 inches of 
manifold pressure.  There were no mechanical or backfiring problems discovered during the 
test run. 
The pilot did not submit the required National Transportation Safety Board's form 6120.1/2 
under Title 49, Part 830.15.
