The pilot was landing a tundra tire and tailwheel equipped airplane on an asphalt surfaced 
runway for the purpose of practicing touch-and-go landings. During the landing roll, the 
airplane ground looped to the right. The left main gear collapsed, and the left wing struck the 
ground. The pilot indicated he had accrued 172.4 hours of total pilot experience with about 18 
hours in tailwheel airplanes. The airplane received damage to the left wing, left landing gear, 
left elevator, and the fuselage, forward of the tail wheel. Also, the pilot reported calm wind 
conditions. 
failure of the pilot to maintain directional control of the airplane, which resulted in an 
inadvertent ground loop and a collapsed main landing gear.  His lack of experience in tailwheel 
airplanes was a related factor. 
 On July 2, 1997, about 0815 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Piper PA-18, 
N5582C, crashed during landing at the Nenana Municipal Airport, Nenana, Alaska.  The 
airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country government flight 
under Title 14 CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.  The airplane, operated by the Alaska 
State Troopers, Fairbanks, Alaska, sustained substantial damage.  The certificated private pilot, 
and the sole passenger, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  A VFR 
flight plan was filed.  The flight originated at the Fairbanks International Airport, Fairbanks, 
about 0730.
On July 2, 1997, the pilot reported in a telephone conversation with the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), he was planning to practice 
touch and go landings.  During the initial landing roll on runway 03, an asphalt covered 
runway, the airplane ground looped to the right.  The left main gear collapsed, and the left wing 
struck the ground.  The pilot indicated he had accrued 172.4 hours of total pilot experience with 
about 18 hours in tailwheel airplanes.                                                          
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors, Fairbanks Flight Standards District Office 
(FSDO), reported the airplane received damage to the left wing, left landing gear, left elevator, 
and the fuselage, forward of the tail wheel.
The passenger reported the weather conditions as clear; visibility, 10 miles in haze; 
temperature, 75 degrees F; and calm wind conditions.
