The pilot stated that he was landing on runway 34 when the airplane 'bounced on landing and 
weathervaned into the wind.' He said he initiated a go-around and gradually retracted the flaps 
to build up his airspeed; however, the airplane remained in ground effect. The pilot stated that 
the airplane would not 'climb quickly enough to clear a hedgerow perimetering a golf course.'  
Subsequently, the airplane struck the hedgerow and crashed onto the golf course. Ambient 
conditions at the time of the accident included high temperature and high density altitude. 
the pilot's improper planning/decision and failure to insure the that airplane would remain 
clear of trees during the go-around.  Factors relating to the accident included: the high 
temperature, high density altitude, and the proximity of trees. 
 On July 1, 1997, about 1615 central daylight time (CDT), a Maule MX-7-180C, N71VF, 
collided with the ground, near the Dyersburg Airport, Dyersburg, Tennessee. The flight was 
being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, with no flight plan filed. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed. The commercial pilot received minor injuries, and the 
airplane sustained substantial damage. The departure time is unknown.
The pilot stated that he was landing on runway 34 when he "bounced on landing and 
weathervaned into the wind". He initiated a go-around, "in order to not impose severe sideload 
on the landing gear". The airplane remained in ground effect, and the pilot gradually retracted 
the flaps to build up his airspeed. The pilot stated that the airplane would not "climb quickly 
enough to clear a hedgerow perimetering a golf course". The airplane struck the hedgerow, the 
left wing struck a tree, and the airplane rotated approximately 135 degrees. Subsequently, the 
left main gear struck a "barbed-wire fence and was torn from the airframe". The airplane came 
to rest on the golf course. 
According to the Sheriff's report, the pilot stated that he was "landing on runway 34 and 
the plane began to veer to the left and he decided to try and go around. The plane did not get 
enough altitude, causing the plane to veer to the left with the left wing tip striking the ground 
and then plow through a fence row coming to rest in the number six fairway, heading south". 
There were no mechanical malfunctions reported by the pilot.
According to the Sheriff's Report, the pilot stated that he was leaving another airplane at 
the airport for an inspection and was picking up N71VF for a test flight with its newly installed 
avionics equipment. He stated that he stopped in Kenneth, Missouri for fuel, and then returned 
to Dyersburg, stating that he was having problems with the new radio and was returning to 
have it inspected.
The pilot purchased N71VF, a 1997 MX-7-180C, new and had accumulated 11 hours total 
airframe time. The engine left the Lycoming factory on 10/19/96. The pilot stated in the 
accident report that an annual inspection would be the type of maintenance program. The last 
inspection was prior to leaving the factory.
