The pilot stated that he was landing on runway 31, when the aircraft encountered a crosswind 
gust. The aircraft then veered off the right side of the runway and went into a drainage ditch as 
it slowed almost to a stop. When the aircraft contacted the bottom of the ditch, it nosed over 
onto its back. No mechanical discrepancies were observed by FAA inspectors who examined 
the aircraft. Examination of runway 31 revealed marks which began near the right side of the 
runway at 1,934 feet from the approach end. At a distance of 2,110 feet, tire tracks departed the 
right side of the runway and continued 120 feet until terminating at the drainage ditch. The 25-
foot-wide by 6-foot-deep drainage canal paralleled the runway and was 45 feet from the 
runway edge.  
the pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions during landing, and his subsequent 
failure to maintain directional control of the aircraft.  The gusty crosswind condition was a 
related factor. 
 On July 1, 1997, at 1715 hours Pacific daylight time, an Aviat Aircraft A-1 Husky, N13HU, 
veered off the right side of runway 31 while landing at Gnoss Field, Novato, California.  The 
aircraft encountered a drainage ditch and subsequently nosed over.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time and included winds from 210 degrees at 15 knots.  The aircraft 
sustained substantial damage.  The private pilot and one passenger were not injured.  The 
flight originated at Logan, Utah, on the day of the accident at 1345 mountain standard time as 
a personal cross-country flight to Novato.
The pilot did not respond to requests from the Safety Board for information regarding this 
accident.
In a report to his insurance company, the pilot stated that he was landing on runway 31 and 
encountered a crosswind gust.  The aircraft then veered off the right side of the runway and ran 
into a drainage ditch as the pilot had slowed to nearly a stop.  When the aircraft contacted the 
bottom of the ditch, it nosed over onto its back.
Federal Aviation Administration inspectors from the Oakland, California, Flight Standards 
District Office examined the aircraft, the runway, and the drainage canal.  The aircraft 
sustained damage to both wing spars and the vertical stabilizer.  No mechanical discrepancies 
were observed by the inspectors.
Examination of runway 31 revealed two parallel 30-foot-long skid marks which began near the 
right side of the runway at 1,934 feet from the approach end.  A right side only skid mark about 
30 feet long and near the right side of the pavement was observed starting at 2,003 feet from 
the runway end.  Two additional right side only skid marks were observed starting at 2,038 and 
2,083 feet, respectively.  At a distance of 2,110 feet, the tire tracks departed the right side of the 
runway and continued 120 feet until terminating at the drainage ditch.  The 25-foot-wide by 6-
foot-deep drainage canal parallels the runway and is 45 feet from the runway edge.
