The pilot reported that, about 40 minutes into the local flight, the engine lost total power. He 
was unable to restart the engine, so he conducted a forced landing. The airplane collided with 
trees and terrain and came to rest inverted. The pilot reported that he began the flight with 9 
gallons of fuel on board and used about 3 gallons during the flight. Although only evidence of 
residual fuel was found in the fuel system, the impact breached the fuel system, and rain was 
present at the wreckage site after the accident. A postaccident examination of the airframe and 
engine revealed no evidence of preexisting mechanical anomalies or failures that would have 
precluded normal operation. The reason for the engine power loss could not be determined.
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of preexisting mechanical 
anomalies or failures that would have precluded normal operation. 
On November 1, 2013, about 1020 eastern daylight time, a Teal Sonerai II Stretch, N1927B, was 
substantially damaged following a total loss of engine power and collision with trees near De 
Leon Springs, Florida. The sport pilot received minor injuries. The experimental, amateur-built 
airplane was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91 as a personal flight. Day, visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was 
filed. The flight originated from Deland, Florida (DED), about 0930.
The pilot reported that he had been airborne for about 40 minutes when, at 3,000 feet above 
mean sea level, the engine lost power and stopped running. He attempted to restart the engine 
without success. He attempted a forced landing and the airplane collided with trees and terrain 
before coming rest, inverted. 
An inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) responded to the accident site 
and inspected the wreckage. The airplane came to rest, inverted, positioned against trees in a 
wooded area. Only evidence of residual fuel was found in the fuel system; however, the impact 
with trees breached the fuel system and there was rain at the wreckage site after the accident. 
There was no fire. The fuselage, both wings, and the horizontal stabilizer received structural 
damage. The cockpit canopy was shattered by a tree. The throttle and mixture cables remained 
attached to the carburetor. The mixture control was found in the full forward position and the 
throttle was retarded more than half way. The fuel selector was in the main position. The fuel 
gascolator screen was free of debris. 
After the wreckage was recovered, the FAA inspector performed a detailed examination of the 
engine and related systems. The following observations were noted. The engine case was 
undamaged and was free of oil or fuel leaks. Compression was observed on all cylinders when 
the propeller was rotated manually. The spark plugs were removed and several of the top plugs 
had oil and water residue on the electrodes; otherwise the plugs were normal in appearance. 
Rotation of the engine showed continuity to all engine accessories. The fuel selector, 
carburetor, fuel pressure regulator, and associated hoses showed no evidence of obstructions 
or pre-existing anomalies. The fuel gascolator mount was loose; however, there was no 
evidence of impact damage in that area.
The pilot reported that he began the flight with 9 gallons of fuel on board and he verified that 
amount with a sight gauge. He estimated that he used about 3 gallons of fuel during the flight 
and had 6 gallons on board at the time of the engine power loss. The engine was not equipped 
with carburetor heat and the carburetor was not susceptible to icing due to its design.
