The pilot, a pilot-rated passenger seated in the front right seat, and two additional passengers 
departed on a cross-country flight in a twin-engine airplane. As they neared an airport, about 
halfway to their final destination airport, the pilot was cleared by an air traffic controller to 
conduct an instrument approach to the airport; shortly afterward, the pilot cancelled the 
clearance. There was no further communication with the pilot. The airplane was found about 
590 feet northeast of the runway by a resident who happened to notice the wreckage. 
Examination of the airframe and engines revealed residual fuel was at the site and in both 
engines' fuel system components. The landing gear and the flaps were in the retracted 
positions. The examination did not find any abnormalities with the airframe or engines that 
would have prevented normal operation. The surviving passenger, who had flown with the 
pilots on numerous occasions, stated that they would typically stop for a break about halfway 
to their destination airport, but he could not recall any of the accident details.
The pilot's loss of control for reasons that could not be determined because the postaccident 
airplane examination did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 1, 2013 around 1515 central daylight time (CDT), a Piper Aztec, PA-23-250 
airplane, N6068Y, impacted terrain near the Houston County Airport (KCHU), Caledonia, 
Minnesota. The private rated pilot, a pilot rated passenger, and one passenger were fatally 
injured; one passenger received serious injuries. The airplane was substantially damaged. The 
airplane was registered to Garlam Aviation, Troy, Michigan, and operated by a private 
individual under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a cross-country 
flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules (IFR) plan was 
filed. The flight originated from the Oakland/Troy Airport (KVLL), Troy, Michigan, about 1100 
CDT and was en route to KCHU.
There were no reported witnesses to the accident; however, a local resident discovered the 
airplane wreckage and alerted authorities.
The surviving passenger later reported that his first recollection was wakening up in the 
hospital. He stated that he could not remember any details surrounding the accident, nor did 
he recall any comments made to the first responders. In subsequent conversations with the 
passenger, he still could not recall any details of the accident; however, he did recall events 
prior to, and shortly after takeoff. He was the first one to arrive at airport, followed afterwards 
by the others. The pilots conducted a preflight, opened tanks, went under the wing to sample 
the fuel, and looked at the airplane. The pilot had sandwiches for everyone; he remembered the 
airplane taxiing out and the run up, and then flying along. He then remembered waking up in 
the hospital.
PILOT INFORMATION 
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single and multiengine land, 
and instrument-airplane. The pilot held a third class medical certificate that was issued on 
June 12, 2013, with the restriction, "must wear corrective lenses". At the time of the exam the 
pilot reported 400 total flight hours and 3 hours in last six months. 
The pilot rated passenger held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single and 
multiengine land, and instrument-airplane. The pilot held a third class medical certificate that 
was issued June 15, 2012, with the restriction, "must wear lenses for distant, have glasses for 
near vision". At the time of the exam the pilot reported 2,150 total flight hours and 10 hours in 
the previous six months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Piper PA-23-250, Aztec, is a twin-engine, low-wing airplane with retractable landing gear, 
and Hartzell 2-bladed, constant speed, full-feathering propellers. The airplane was powered by 
two Lycoming IO-540 reciprocating engines. A review of maintenance records revealed the 
airplane's last annual inspection was on March 12, 2013, with an aircraft time at 4, 768 hrs. The 
right engine tachometer time read 1,440 hours since overhaul and the left engine tachometer 
time read 1,108 hours since overhaul.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1553, the automated weather observation facility located at the La Crosse Municipal Airport, 
(KLSE), La Crosse, Wisconsin located about 20 miles northeast of the accident site, reported 
wind from 320 degrees at 7 knots, visibility 10 miles, a broken ceiling at 3,700 feet, 
temperature 51 Fahrenheit (F), dew point 38 F, and a barometric pressure of 29.64 inches of 
mercury.
COMMUNICATIONS and RADAR INFORMATION
Prior to departure, the pilot contacted a Flight Service Station (FSS) and received a weather 
briefing for the route of flight. The pilot then filed an IFR flight plan from KVLL to KCHU, with 
an en route time of two and a half hours and five and a half hours of fuel on board. According 
to a review of air traffic control communications, prior to reaching KCHU, the pilot was cleared 
for the GPS-A approach; the pilot canceled his IFR clearance about 1405. There was no further 
communication with the pilot, nor any reported distress calls.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Houston County Airport (KCHU) is a public use airport, located about 3 miles south of 
Caledonia, Minnesota. The airport is unattended and does not have a control tower; pilots are 
to use the Common Traffic Advisory Frequency (CTAF). The airport features a single asphalt 
runway 13-31, which is 3,499-foot long and 77 foot wide. The field elevation is 1,179 feet mean 
sea level (msl). 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The accident site was located about 590 feet northeast of KCHU's runway, in an open soybean 
field. The wreckage path consisted of several ground scars and airplane pieces which extended 
approximately 100 feet from the main wreckage on a 260 degree heading. The first impact 
point was a ground scar which contained remains of a green navigation light lens. From the 
first impact point, about 24 feet from the green lens fragments, the ground scar contained 
several cuts; the next major ground scar contained the airplane's nose baggage door and 
fragmented pieces of windshield. Both wings had extensive damage, and were twisted in an 
upward position from the wing roots. The airplane's fuel bladders, located in the wings, were 
compromised, however, a small amount of fuel was found in the tanks. The left engine and 
engine mount had mostly separated from, but remained next to, the left wing. The right engine 
had totally separated from the wing and was located about 15 feet to the right of the main 
wreckage. The ground scars and wreckage were consistent with the airplane's right wing 
impact, followed by the right engine and fuselage impact. The airplane came to rest in an 
upright position, turned about 180-degrees, and facing the first impact point. The landing gear 
and flaps were in the retracted positions. Control continuity was established from the tail 
control surfaces to the forward section of the fuselage; aileron continuity was established out to 
the left and right bellcranks; the right aileron bellcrank had impact damage.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, conducted autopsies on the pilot and pilot rated 
passenger. The causes of death were determined to be "multiple blunt force injuries".
The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
toxicology tests on the pilot and pilot rated passenger. These tests were negative for carbon 
monoxide, ethanol, and tested drugs. 
TEST AND RESEARCH
The wreckage was recovered and examinations of the airplane's engines were conducted. 
Continuity was established from the front of the crankshaft to the rear gear drive section of 
each engines, and through their valve trains. The top set of sparkplugs were removed, each 
engine was rotated by hand; each cylinder produced suction and compression during a thumb 
test. Both magnetos were removed from each engine; all four rotated freely and produced a 
spark on each terminal. The engines fuel flow dividers were removed and opened, along with 
the fuel pumps, and fuel servos. The units contained residual fuel and appeared clear of any 
contaminants. Both propellers remained attached to their respective engines, and had similar 
signatures. For identification purposes the propeller blades are referred to as blade A or B. The 
left engine's propeller blade A appeared straight and absent any polishing or scoring; blade B 
was bent towards the cambered side, about 12 inches from the hub to about a 45-degree angle. 
The blade had only minor leading edge polishing near the tip of the blade. The right engine's 
propeller also had one blade (blade B) bent towards the cambered side, starting about 12 
inches from the hub, to about a 45-degree angle. Blade B had only minor leading edge 
polishing, outboard of the deicing boot. Blade A was relatively straight and absent any scuffs or 
scoring on the blade.
No abnormalities were found that would have prevented the engines from producing rated 
power.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The surviving passenger stated that he didn't know why they would be at Caledonia; however, 
typically they would pick a place about half-way to their destination, to exercise the dogs, use 
the restroom, and to refuel the airplane. He added that he'd flown with them numerous times, 
and never observed anything unsafe with the pilots or airplane. The usual routine would be to 
put the airplane away full of fuel.
