The pilot reported that, following a normal landing, he applied the brakes and that he then 
released the brakes as the airplane decelerated to allow for brake cooling. As the airplane 
passed the 4,000-foot-remaining sign, the pilot reapplied the brakes but noted no braking 
action. The airplane subsequently overran the departure end of the runway. Postaccident 
examination of the airplane revealed that the spring that allows the front brakes to engage a 
brake pawl was fractured, which resulted in the deactivation of the front brake pedals and the 
subsequent runway overrun.
The loss of brake control due to the fracture of the front brake pawl engagement spring, which 
resulted in a runway overrun.
On November 1, 2013, about 0940 Pacific daylight time, a Mikoyan Gurevich Mig 21 UM, 
N20739, was substantially damaged during a runway overrun at the Reno-Stead Airport (RTS), 
Reno, Nevada. The airplane was registered to Migs of Delaware LLC., Wilmington, Delaware, 
and operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained serious injuries. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight 
that originated from RTS at 0915.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the pilot reported that following a normal landing on runway 14 (9,000-foot long 
and 150-foot wide asphalt runway), he initially applied braking. The pilot released the wheel 
brakes as the airplane decelerated to allow for cooling. As the airplane crossed the 4,000 foot 
remaining sign, he reapplied brakes with no braking action noted. He applied the emergency 
brake, however, did not immediately feel a response. The pilot shut down the engine and 
retracted the landing gear as the airplane approached the departure end of the runway. 
Subsequently, the airplane overran the departure end of the runway, traveled down an 
embankment, and came to rest upright. The pilot added that at the time the brakes failed, the 
airplane was too slow for an effective drag chute deployment.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
that the fuselage and wings were structurally damaged. The inspector stated that the 
emergency brake handle and drag chute both remained in the stowed positions. The airplane 
was recovered to a secure location for further examination. 
The inspector reported that the accident airplane brake system features control levers for the 
front seat (student or solo position) and rear seat (instructor position) that are stacked on a 
pivot point with only the rear seat brake levers physically actuating the pneumatic brake valve. 
The front seat lever engages the rear seat lever with a pawl. Spring tension holds the pawl in 
the engaged position, however, can be disengaged if the rear seat pilot elects to override the 
front seat pilot. The inspector reported that he coordinated with the pilot's mechanic to look at 
the airplane further; however, the mechanic disassembled the brake system prior to his arrival. 
The inspector stated that examination of the accident airplane revealed that a spring that holds 
the pawl in place and engaged was fractured and separated, which allowed the pawl to become 
disengaged. The disengaged pawl resulted in the deactivation of front brakes. 
Review of the Pilot's Flight Operating Instructions for the airplane stated, in part, "–.if upon 
depressing the braking lever, the aircraft fails to get braked or one of the wheels gets sharply 
braked, proceed as follows: (a) release the braking lever, immediately deploy the drag chute 
and retract the flaps." The instructions further state "–after deployment of the drag chute, shut 
down the engine and use the emergency braking system."
