As the airplane was descending toward its destination airport, the pilot reported to an air 
traffic controller en route that he needed to change his destination to a closer airport because 
the airplane was low on fuel. The controller advised him to land at an airport that was 4 miles 
away. Shortly after, the pilot contacted the alternate airport™s air traffic control tower (ATCT) 
and reported that he was low on fuel. The tower controller cleared the airplane to land, and, 
about 30 seconds later, the pilot advised that he was not going to make it to the airport. The 
airplane subsequently impacted a field 3.25 miles southeast of the airport. One witness 
reported hearing the engine sputter, and another witness reported that the engine ﬁdid not 
sound right.ﬂ Forty-foot power lines crossed the field 311 feet from the point of impact. It is 
likely that the pilot was attempting to avoid the power lines during the forced landing and that 
the airplane then experienced an inadvertent stall and an uncontrolled collision with terrain. 
About 1 quart of fuel was observed in each fuel tank. No evidence of fuel spillage was found on 
the ground; no fuel stains were observed on the undersides of the wing panels, wing trailing 
edges, or engine nacelles; and no fuel smell was observed at the accident site. However, the fuel 
totalizer showed that 123 gallons of fuel was remaining. Magnification of the annunciator panel 
light bulbs revealed that the left and right low fuel pressure annunciator lights were 
illuminated at the time of impact. An examination of the airframe and engines revealed no 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. 
About 1 month before the accident, the pilot had instructed the fixed-base operator at Camden, 
Arkansas, to put 25 gallons of fuel in each wing tank; however, it is unknown how much fuel 
was already onboard the airplane. Although the fuel totalizer showed that the airplane had 123 
gallons of fuel remaining at the time of the crash, information in the fuel totalizer is based on 
pilot inputs, and it is likely the pilot did not update the fuel totalizer properly before the 
accident flight. The pilot was likely relying on the fuel totalizer instead of the fuel gauges for 
fuel information, and he likely reported his low fuel situation to the ATCT after the annunciator 
lights illuminated. 
Page 2 of 9CEN14FA035
A total loss of power to both engines due to fuel exhaustion. Also causal were the pilot™s 
reliance on the fuel totalizer rather than the fuel quantity gauges to determine the fuel on 
board and his improper fuel planning.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 1, 2013, at 1742 central daylight time, a Beech C90, N269JG, impacted terrain 
3.25 miles southeast of the Springdale Municipal Airport (ASG), Springdale, Arkansas. The 
private pilot and passenger were fatally injured. The airplane was destroyed. The airplane was 
registered to J&G Aviation, LLC, and operated by the pilot, both of Camden, Arkansas, under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, and no flight plan had been filed. The flight 
originated from Pine Bluff (PBF), Arkansas, about 1650, and was destined for Bentonville 
(VBT), Arkansas, but was diverting to Springdale (ASG), Arkansas.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) documents, the pilot contacted Little 
Rock, Arkansas, approach control at 1651 and advised that he was en route from PBF to VBT, 
and requested flight following services. Radar contact was established when the airplane was 
10 miles northwest of PBF at 10,000 feet and climbing to 16,500 feet. At 1702, the pilot was 
handed off to Memphis Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC), Hot Springs sector. At 1721, 
the pilot reported he was descending from 16,500 feet. At 1727, the pilot contacted Fort Smith 
(FSM) Air Traffic Control Tower, Razorback Approach, and advised he was passing 11,800 feet 
for 6,500 feet. He was then given traffic advisories. At 1740, the pilot said he wanted to change 
his destination from VBT to Fayetteville (FYV), Arkansas. When the FSM controller asked the 
reason for the change, the pilot replied he was low on fuel. He then requested the distance to 
FYV, and the controller told him it was 9 miles away. At 1741, the pilot said he needed to go to a 
closer airport. The controller advised that ASG was at his 12 o'clock position and 4 miles away. 
The pilot said he had ASG in sight and was familiar with the airport. The controller issued the 
pilot the ASG tower frequency. The pilot contacted ASG tower and reported he was low on fuel. 
The ASG controller issued the pilot the wind conditions and altimeter setting and cleared him 
to land on runway 36. Approximately 30 seconds later, the pilot advised ASG that he was not 
going to make the airport. The ASG controller attempted to get the aircraft's position. No 
further transmissions were received. At 1743, ASG advised FSM that the airplane was down.
Six written witness statements were collected by the Washington County Sheriff's Office. One 
witness reported hearing the engine(s) sputtering. Another witness said the engine noise was 
loud but "did not sound right." He observed one wing turn perpendicular to the ground before 
the airplane disappeared from sight. Three witnesses reported seeing the airplane pull up 
abruptly and fall from about 300 feet to the ground in a right wing-low, nose-low attitude. In 
his report, the sheriff's deputy stated that he interviewed two of five witnesses. They told him 
that the pilot was "trying to find a clear and empty place to land," and noticed that control was 
lost at times as the airplane would "tilt" to the right and left. They said the pilot "was trying to 
land smoothly and was being successful until about 300 feet from the ground when the plane 
suddenly went straight down." 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The 72-year-old private pilot held airplane single and multi-engine land and instrument 
ratings dated March 8, 2010. He also held a third class airman medical certificate, dated June 
4, 2013, with the restriction, "Must wear corrective lenses for near and distant vision." When 
the pilot applied for that medical certificate, he estimated his total flight time to be 3,367 
hours, of which 53 hours were acquired within the last six months. The pilot's logbook was 
never located, so it could not be ascertained as to how much flight time he had logged in 
turboprop airplanes or in the Beech C90 King Air.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N269JG (serial number LJ-949), a model C90, was manufactured by the Beech Aircraft 
Corporation in 1981. It had been equipped with two Pratt & Whitney PT6A-35 (upgraded from 
PT6A-21) turboprop engines, serial numbers PCE-25558 (left), and PCE-25501 (right), each 
rated at 750 horsepower, driving two Hartzell 4-blade, all-metal, constant speed, full-
feathering, reversible propellers. The propeller model numbers were HC-D4N-3C, with 
D9290K blades. The serial numbers were FY 2319 (left), and FY 2320 (right).
An FAA aviation safety inspector examined the aircraft maintenance records at the pilot's office 
in Camden, Arkansas, on November 12, 2013. He reported that Airframe and Engine Phase 3 
and 4 Inspections were accomplished on March 15, 2013, at a Hobbs meter time of 826.2 
hours. At that time, airframe total time was 11,395.9 hours. Airframe Phase 1 and 2 Inspections 
were accomplished on March 14, 2012, at a Hobbs meter time of 738.9 hours. At that time, 
airframe total time was 11,308.6 hours. The following times were recorded during the Phase 3 
and 4 inspections: 
LEFT ENGINE 
Time since new, 5,801.3
Time since overhaul, 2,453.6
Time since hot section inspection, 874.5
Total cycles since new, 6,613
Overhaul date, 07/21/2000
Cycles since overhaul, 2,800
Cycles since hot section inspection, 875
Engine time at overhaul, 3,454.5
Cycle time at overhaul, 3,930
RIGHT ENGINE
Time since new, 5,722.9
Time since overhaul, 2,268.4
Time since hot section inspection, 847.5
Total cycles since new, 6,311
Overhaul date, 12/06/03
Cycles since overhaul, 2,381
Cycles since hot section inspection, 875
Engine time at overhaul, 3,347.7
Cycle time at overhaul, 3,812
On October 9, 2013, the pilot flew to PBF where the altimeter, encoding and static systems, and 
transponder calibration checks were accomplished by Tomlinson Avionics, and the airplane 
was recertified for IFR (instrument flight rules) flight. A Garmin GNS 430W (WAAS-certified 
GPS, 2280-channel capacity comm, and 200-channel ILS/VOR with localizer and glideslope), 
Avidyne TAS610 (traffic advisory system), Bendix DA-144A (weather radar) antenna, and a PC-
250 (inverter) were removed and shipped to their respective manufacturers for repairs. The 
PC-250 inverter was non-repairable, and an overhauled unit was returned. On November 1, 
2013, these items were reinstalled and functionally tested satisfactory.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The following weather was recorded by the ASG Automated Weather Observing System 
(AWOS) at 1748:
Wind, 310 degrees at 7 knots, gusting to 14 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; sky condition, few 
clouds at 6,500 feet; temperature, 16 degrees Celsius (C.); dew point, 5 degrees C.; altimeter 
setting, 29.90 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane was located in a large open pasture that sloped downward from west to east. It 
was aligned on a magnetic heading of 030 degrees. South of the point of impact, power lines 
crossed the field from west to east. They were about 35 to 40 feet off the ground and 311 feet 
from the point of impact. The on-scene examination revealed no ground scars, only impact 
ground gouges, consistent with a right wing-low, nose-low attitude as reported by witnesses. 
The nose and cockpit area were crushed inward.
There were ground imprints, the same length as the wings. At the end of the left imprint were 
red lens fragments. At the end of the right imprint were green lens fragments. These ground 
imprints were immediately forward of both wings, consistent with the airplane rebounding 
slightly. The right wing was destroyed. The left wing was partially separated at midspan, and 
the wing tip was separated from the wing. The leading edge was crushed aft to the spar, and the 
wing was twisted up and aft. The right wing was bent aft and upward along its span, and the 
leading edge was crushed inward along the lower side. Minimal fuel (approximately one quart) 
was observed in each nacelle tank. There was no evidence of fuel spillage on the ground, and no 
fuel stains were observed on the undersides of the wing panels, wing trailing edges, or engine 
nacelles. There was no smell of fuel at the site.
Both engines and nacelles were partially separated from the wings. Both propeller assemblies 
remained attached to the engines and were partially buried in the earth. There were no ground 
scars leading up to the airplane, and there was no evidence of rotation at impact. Control 
continuity was established from the flight controls to the center of the airplane. Measurements 
of the elevator and rudder trim were indicative of a neutral position, and aileron trim was in a 
slight left wing down position. The landing gear and flaps were retracted. Propeller signatures 
indicate the propellers were not feathered and bore little or no rotational signatures.
The airplane was configured with two cockpit seats and four cabin seats arranged in club 
seating. The lavatory and baggage compartment were configured for additional seating. The 
cockpit seats were separated from the floor attachments and the seat bases were buckled. Both 
cockpit seatbelts and shoulder harnesses bore evidence of being fastened at impact.
Examination of the cockpit revealed both power, condition, and fuel shutoff levers were full 
forward. There was a witness mark on the airspeed indicator at 78 knots. The airplane's power 
off stall speed (flaps retracted) was between 78 and 89 knots (minimum weight versus 
maximum gross weight, respectively).
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Arkansas State Medical Examiners report stated the pilot's cause of death to be "multiple 
traumatic injuries." FAA's Civil Aeromedical Institute toxicology report indicated no carbon 
monoxide or ethanol were detected. However, verapamil (an antiarrhythmic drug used in the 
treatment of hypertension, angina, and arrhythmias) and norverapamil (a metabolite of 
verapamil) were detected.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The annunciator panel and fuel totalizer were removed from the airplane and sent to NTSB's 
Vehicle Recorder (RE-40) and Materials Laboratory (RE-30) Divisions for examination. 
According to the Vehicle Recorder Specialist's report, application of electrical power to the fuel 
totalizer revealed:
FUEL USED: 260 gallons
FUEL REMAINING: 123 gallons.
According to the Materials Laboratory Specialist's report, magnification of the annunciator 
panel light bulbs revealed that the following annunciator lights were illuminated at impact:
LEFT GENERATOR OUT
LEFT IGNITION ON
LOW FUEL PRESSURE (LEFT)
FUEL CROSSFEED
INVERTER OUT
LOW FUEL PRESSURE (RIGHT)
RIGHT GENERATOR OUT
RIGHT IGNITION ON
The fuel management panel, located on the left sidewall, had been cut away by first responders 
in order to extricate the pilot. Although intact, the panel had been damaged by impact. 
Examination of the panel revealed the left and right boost pumps were ON, the left and right 
fuel transfer switches were OFF, the fuel crossfeed switch was in the AUTO position, and all the 
fuel system circuit breakers were OPEN. There was a yellow arc on the fuel gauges, denoting 
minimum fuel that must be in each wing tank before takeoff. The range is from 0 to 265 
pounds or 0 to about 41 gallons in each wing (6.7 pounds per gallon).
In retracing the airplane's travels, FlightAware's Activity Log captured its movements from 
July 26, 2013, to September 28, 2013, when activity ceased. A Faith Aviation spokesman at 
Camden (CDH) said the pilot topped off the airplane with fuel and flew to Cozumel, Mexico, in 
early October. On the return flight to CDH, he stopped for fuel in New Orleans. It is unknown 
how much fuel he purchased in Cozumel or New Orleans. 
An effort was made to trace the airplane's movements in an attempt to explain the discrepancy 
between the fuel gauges and the fuel totalizer. On October 9, 2013, the pilot gave instructions 
to the Faith Aviation, the fixed base operator (FBO) at CDH, to put 25 gallons of fuel in each 
wing tank. When asked if he had a receipt for this transaction, the FBO replied that he did not. 
The pilot then flew from CDH to PBF, a distance of 65 nm. According to Beech Aircraft, the fuel 
required for this flight (assuming a cruising altitude of 10,000 feet) would be about 210 
pounds, or about 30 gallons. Grider Aviation and Pine Bluff Aviation, both FBOs at PBF, were 
contacted. It was learned that Tomlinson Avionics had replaced the airplane's inverter, and the 
airplane was placed in Tomlinson's hangar, where it remained until the pilot departed on 
November 1. Before departure, the pilot purchased a new battery but did not purchase fuel. It 
was reported that the pilot rarely topped off the airplane with fuel, but would add only enough 
fuel as necessary to make the trip. The distance between PBF and VBT is about 172 miles. 
According to Beech Aircraft, the estimated fuel needed for this flight (assuming a cruising 
altitude of 17,000 feet) would be about 460 pounds, or 70 gallons.
