National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Toms River, NJ
Accident Number: NYC06LA167
Date & Time: 07/01/2006, 1245 EDT
Registration: N50619
Aircraft: Bellanca 7GCBC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Banner Tow
 Analysis While in cruise flight, at an altitude of 1,000 feet, the airplane's engine lost power.
The pilot applied full throttle; however, the engine failed to respond, and the airplane continued to lose altitude and airspeed.
At an altitude of 800 feet, the pilot applied carburetor heat and looked for a place to land.
He performed a forced landing on a road, during which the airplane impacted a road sign.
Examination of the airplane revealed the throttle and carburetor heat controls were observed in the off position, and approximately 17 gallons of fuel was drained from the airplane, with no contamination observed.
Fuel was also observed in the carburetor bowl, gascolator, and fuel lines.
The throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control linkages were connected and operated smoothly.
The throttle and carburetor heat controls were observed in the off position.
The engine was test run on the airframe.
It started normally and was operated between 1500 and 1700 RPM.
During the test run, operational checks of the magnetos, mixture and carburetor heat controls revealed no anomalies.
Interpolation of a carburetor icing probability chart revealed that atmospheric conditions were conducive to "icing at glide or cruise power."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Carburetor icing, and the pilot's delayed application of carburetor heat, which resulted in a loss of engine power, and subsequent force landing.
A factor in the accident was carburetor icing conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 2.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - ICE 3.
(C) CARBURETOR HEAT - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
OBJECT - SIGN Factual Information On July 1, 2006, at 1245 eastern daylight time, a Bellanca 7GCBC, N50619, was substantially damaged during a forced landing in Toms River, New Jersey.
The certificated commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local banner towing flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, as he was flying westbound at an altitude of 1,000 feet, the airplane's engine lost power.
The pilot applied full throttle; however, the engine did not respond, and the airplane continued to lose altitude and airspeed.
At an altitude of 800 feet, the pilot applied carburetor heat and looked for a place to land.
He performed a forced landing on a road, during which the airplane impacted a road sign.
The airplane subsequently spun around, the landing gear impacted a curb, and the airplane skidded to a stop in a grass area.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed that approximately 17 gallons of fuel were drained from the airplane, with no contamination observed.
Fuel was also observed in the carburetor bowl, gascolator, and fuel lines.
The throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control linkages were connected and operated smoothly.
The throttle and carburetor heat controls were observed in the off position.
The engine was test run on the airframe.
It started normally and was operated between 1500 and 1700 RPM.
During the test run, operational checks of the magnetos, mixture and carburetor heat controls revealed no anomalies.
Interpolation of a carburetor icing probability chart revealed that atmospheric conditions were conducive to "light icing at glide or cruise power."
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
