Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Roanoke, TX
Accident Number:
CEN13LA041
Date & Time:
11/03/2012, 1040 CDT 
Registration:
N985GE
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172S
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
2 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The student pilot was returning from a solo cross-country flight at the time of the accident. He 
stated that the approach for landing was normal until he was on short final approach, when the 
airplane's landing gear struck an automobile that was being driven on a road that crossed near 
the approach end of the runway. The airplane subsequently landed hard and the nose and left 
main landing gear collapsed. The airplane veered off the right side of the runway before coming 
to rest in the grass. The student pilot stated that there were no malfunctions or failures with 
the airplane before it impacted the vehicle. The automobile driver reported that he had been to 
the airport before and was aware of the proximity of the road to the runway, describing the 
layout as "precarious." He noted that he did not see or hear the approaching airplane traffic 
before the accident. He said he was about halfway across the road, immediately north of the 
runway, when he first heard the airplane engine; the airplane impacted his car immediately 
afterward. 
The displaced threshold for the landing runway was located about 140 feet from the approach 
end of the runway. The roadway that crossed the extended runway centerline was located about 
25 feet from the approach end of the runway pavement, about 165 feet from the displaced 
threshold. Data indicated that the runway threshold was previously displaced 400 feet. 
Although the privately-owned airport was not required to maintain airport design standards 
established by the Federal Aviation Administration, the proximity of the roadway and the 
reduced runway threshold displacement did not provide any safety margin for approaching 
aircraft.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The student pilot's failure to maintain clearance from obstacles on the runway approach path. 
Contributing to the accident was the airport management's decision to relocate the runway 
displaced threshold, which did not provide an adequate safety margin for approaching aircraft, 
and the automobile driver's inadequate lookout for approaching aircraft before crossing the 
runway's approach path.
Page 2 of 6CEN13LA041
Findings
Aircraft
Descent/approach/glide path - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Student pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Ground vehicle - Effect on operation (Factor)
Airport facilities/design - Effect on operation (Factor)
Page 3 of 6CEN13LA041
Factual Information
On November 3, 2012, about 1040 central daylight time, a Cessna 172S, N985GE, impacted an 
automobile on final approach to runway 17 (3,500 feet by 40 feet, asphalt) at the Northwest 
Regional Airport (52F), Roanoke, Texas. The student pilot was not injured. The automobile 
driver and passenger sustained minor injuries. The airplane was substantially damaged. The 
aircraft was registered to and operated by Marcair, Inc. under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 as a solo instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight, which was operated on a visual flight rules flight plan. The cross-
country flight originated from Possum Kingdom Airport (F35), Graford, Texas, about 1005, 
with an intended destination of 52F.
The student pilot reported that he was returning from a solo cross-country flight, entered a left 
traffic pattern for runway 17 at 52F. He recalled that the approach was normal and the airspeed 
was about 60 knots when crossing the fence near the end of the runway. He stated that just 
after crossing the fence the landing gear impacted an automobile, which resulted in a hard 
landing. The nose and left main landing gear collapsed, and the airplane veered off the right 
side of the runway before coming to rest in the grass. The student pilot stated that there were 
no malfunctions or failures associated with the airplane before impacting the automobile.
The driver of the automobile reported that he had been to the airport before and was aware of 
the proximity of the road to the runway, describing the layout as "precarious." He noted that he 
did not see or hear the approaching airplane traffic prior to the accident; although, he had 
rolled the car windows down and turned off the radio to assist in hearing any airplane traffic. 
He stated that the vehicle was about halfway across the road immediately north of the runway 
when he first heard the airplane engine. The airplane impacted his car immediately afterward. 
He noted that the airplane impacted his car about 4-1/2 feet above the road.
The accident airport consisted of a single north-south oriented runway, designated 17 / 35. The 
published runway dimensions at the time of the accident were 3,500 feet by 40 feet. Although 
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Airport Facility Directory (AFD) current at the time 
of the accident noted a 400-foot displaced threshold for runway 17, the runway threshold was 
actually displaced approximately 140 feet at the time of the accident. Satellite imagery 
indicated that the runway threshold markings were changed sometime between June 12, 2011, 
and the date of the accident. The edge of the roadway crossing the runway 17 approach path 
was located about 25 feet from the end of the runway; about 165 feet from the displaced 
threshold. The roadway was marked with a faded "Stop" indication painted on the pavement at 
each side of the runway. However, there were no signs requiring drivers to stop or advising 
them of low flying aircraft. Because the accident airport was privately owned, the airport 
management was under no obligation to maintain the airport to any federal standard.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airport design guidance (Advisory Circular 150/5300-
13A) noted a standard approach slope of 20:1, or about 3 degrees. Guidance related to Visual 
Approach Slope Indicators (VASI), contained in Chapter 2 of the FAA Aeronautical 
Information Manual, noted that a standard runway glide path angle is 3 degrees; however, the 
glide path angle may be up to 4.5 degrees if necessary for obstacle clearance. The calculated 
glide path height above the roadway, considering a 165-foot distance between the displaced 
runway threshold and the edge of the roadway, would be 8.6 feet and 13.0 feet for a 3-degree 
and a 4.5 degree glide path, respectively. This does not take into account any difference in the 
Page 4 of 6CEN13LA041
elevation of the roadway relative to the runway, nor does it include any safety margin for 
momentary inadvertent operations slightly below the glidepath.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) 
Loss of control in flight
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
43, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/10/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/10/2012
Flight Time:
45 hours (Total, all aircraft), 45 hours (Total, this make and model), 3 hours (Pilot In Command, 
all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours 
(Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N985GE
Model/Series:
172S 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
172S10045
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/12/2012, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2558 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
89 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4798 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-L2A
Registered Owner:
Marcair Inc.
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Marcair Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN13LA041
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
AFW, 722 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1053 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
225°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 9000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.07 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Graford, TX (F35)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Roanoke, TX (52F)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1005 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Northwest Regional (52F)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
643 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
17
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3500 ft / 40 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
2 Minor
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.049722, -97.232222 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy Sorensen
Adopted Date:
01/30/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Paul Vercellino; FAA Flight Standards; Fort Worth, TX
Publish Date:
01/30/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85494
Page 6 of 6CEN13LA041
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
