The home built, powered glider was being flown on a flight to conduct a stall test at 3,000 feet. 
A witness observed the powered sailplane flying westbound at low altitude. According to the 
witness, the powered sailplane entered an abrupt turn to the east, then it started rotating to the 
left in a descent until it disappeared from view below a tree line. Examination of the crash site 
revealed evidence that the powered sailplane collided with the ground in a near vertical 
descent, 10-degree nose-up attitude, with no evidence of forward motion, rotating around its 
vertical axis to the left. Examination of the airframe, flight control assembly, engine assembly, 
and accessories revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. The 
powered sailplane had accumulated about 4 hours of flight time, since it was built. 
failure of the pilot to maintain adequate airspeed, while maneuvering, which resulted in an 
inadvertent stall/spin and subsequent collision with terrain. 
 On March 2, 1997, about 1646 eastern standard time, a Windex 1200C, N1201G, 
registered to a private owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed while 
maneuvering in the vicinity of Wauchula, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan was filed. The airplane was destroyed and the private pilot was fatally 
injured. The flight originated from Wauchula about 48 minutes before the accident.
Friends of the deceased pilot stated the pilot departed Wauchula at about 1558 for the 
local flight. The pilot was going to conduct a stall test at 3,000 feet. They talked to him 
periodically throughout the flight. The last communication was at about 1545. The pilot stated 
he had completed the stalls and everything was okay.  About 30 minutes later, a Hardee County 
Sheriff's Deputy arrived at the airport and informed them that there had been an airplane 
accident. They departed the airfield for the crash site, and upon arrival identified the deceased 
pilot.
A witness stated she was driving south when she observed the airplane on the east side 
of the road flying westbound at a very low altitude. She thought the airplane was a remote 
control airplane due to its size and altitude. She looked down towards the ground to see if she 
could find the operator and didn't see anyone. She looked back up and observed the airplane 
make an abrupt turn to the east. The airplane then started rotating to the left in a vertical 
descent until it disappeared from view below the tree line. She continued driving and observed 
the airplane in a pasture with the pilot laying motionless beside the airplane. She stopped her 
car, went to the fence and called the pilot. There was no response. She engaged the assistance 
of a passing motorist to call for help and notify the authorities.
The wreckage of N1201G was located in a pasture due east of Danby Road and Ander 
Marsh Road in the vicinity of Wauchula, Florida.
Examination of the crash site revealed the airplane collided with the ground in a near 
vertical descent, 10-degree nose-up attitude, with no evidence of forward motion rotating 
around its vertical axis to the left. The engine and propeller assembly were displaced 
downward. One composite propeller blade had separated and was located by the left wing. No 
evidence of chordwise scarring was present. The remaining propeller blade was found in the 
feather position with no evidence of chordwise scarring. Buckling damage was present on the 
upper surface of the left wing near the fuselage. The left wing flap was folded under the left 
wing and attached at the most inboard hinge. The right flap had separated and was laying 
below the trailing edge of the right wing oriented in a chordwise direction. The fuel tank was 
not ruptured and about 2 1/2 gallons of fuel was present in the fuel tank. The canopy had 
broken in four pieces. Examination of the canopy emergency jettison handle revealed the red 
release wire was functional and had not been activated. The right hand canopy attachment 
frame assembly was torn away from the fuselage. The left-hand canopy release mechanism was 
functional and revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
Examination of  the airframe, flight control assembly, engine assembly and accessories 
revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. All components 
necessary for flight were present at the crash site. Continuity of the flight control system was 
confirmed for pitch, roll, and yaw.  Postmortem examination of the pilot 
was conducted by Dr. Stephen J. Nelson, Medical Examiner, District Ten, Bartow, Florida, on 
March 3, 1997. The cause of death was multiple blunt force traumatic injuries. Postmortem 
toxicology of specimens from the pilot were forwarded to Wuesthoff Memorial Hospital, 
Rockledge, Florida, for analysis. The studies were negative for alcohol, neutral, acidic, and 
basic drugs.
