During climbout after a touch-and-go, the airplane sustained a total loss of engine power.  The 
airplane was landed in the grass on the airport property.  No engine discrepancies were found 
during examination of the engine.  The right main fuel tank was selected and contained 
approximately five quarts of fuel.  The aircraft's owners manual listed the unusable fuel for all 
our fuel tanks on the airplane, at one pint each.  The right main fuel tank gauge functioned 
normally following the accident, and no leaks were found in the right main fuel tank.  The 
carburetor's fuel bowl was not compromised in the accident, and was nearly empty.  The one 
fluid ounce of fluid removed from the carburetor fuel bowl, was one third water and two thirds 
gasoline. 
fuel starvation due to the pilot's improper fuel tank selection. 
 On March 2, 1997, at 1400 central standard time (cst), a Piper PA-28-235, N9420W, sustained 
substantial damage during an off runway landing.  The pilot was executing touch and go 
landings when he reported a loss of engine power shortly after taking off from runway 28, at 
the Dupage Airport, West Chicago, Illinois.  After the pilot reported the loss of power, the 
control tower cleared the airplane to land on any available runway.  The airplane landed on the 
airport property, south of the departure end of runway 28, in the grass.  Both pilots on board 
the airplane sustained minor injuries in the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was not 
operating on a flight plan, and VFR conditions existed at the time of the accident.
An interview of the pilot was conducted by the investigator in charge (IIC) on the morning of 
March 3, 1997.  The pilot reported that shortly after takeoff, at approximately 200 feet above 
the ground, the aircraft engine started to lose power, followed immediately by a total loss of 
engine power.  The pilot reported that the electric boost pump was on, and that he was too busy 
flying the airplane to attempt to switch fuel tanks.  When asked which fuel tank the fuel 
selector was on at the time of the accident, the pilot reported that he remembered it being 
selected to the right main fuel tank.  The pilot reported that on the day of the accident, the 
airplane had been flown to Rockford, Illinois, then to Janesville, Wisconsin, then back to the 
Dupage Airport.
The airplane was using automobile gasoline, and the pilot reported that he used gas cans to fuel 
the airplane himself.  The pilot reported on the day of the accident that he had drained some 
water out of the airplane's fuel tanks.
The airplane was inspected by the investigator in charge during the afternoon of March 3, 1997.  
The drain plug for the carburetor was removed, and approximately one fluid ounce of fluid was 
removed from the carburetor.  The fluid appeared to be one third water, and two thirds 
automobile gas.  The carburetor's fuel bowl capacity is greater than one fluid ounce.  The 
carburetor's fuel bowl was not compromised in the accident.  The finger strainer was removed, 
and found to be clean with no significant debris noted.  The carburetor contained a metal float.  
The carburetor was found broken loose from the engine with all fuel lines still attached.  Mud 
was found inside the accelerator pump of the carburetor.
When the fuel line which runs from the firewall fitting to the input side of the fuel pump was 
removed, only a trace of fuel was present.  The gascalator on the bottom of the fuselage was 
drained, and no water contamination in the fuel was noted.  The right main fuel tank was 
drained, and contained slightly less than 5 quarts of fluid, which appeared to be automobile 
gasoline.
Both wing tip tanks contained some fuel, the left tip tank was leaking fuel while the IIC was 
working on the airplane.  The left main tank gauge showed approximately eight gallons of 
remaining fuel.  Each of the four fuel tanks on the airplane was capable of supplying fuel to the 
engine area, when tested following the accident.    
The IIC reviewed the Aircraft Owners Manual for the accident aircraft.  The unusable fuel in 
the owners manual was listed at one pint for each fuel tank.  
After the right main tank was checked for remaining fluids, it was filled with water to check for 
leaks.  No leaks were found in the right main fuel tank when the water was allowed to remain 
in it for forty minutes.  After testing the right main tank for leaks the electric boost pump was 
used to drain the right main fuel tank, along with the tank's fuel drain.  During the draining of 
the water the right main tank's fuel gauge was checked for accuracy.  The fuel gauge registered 
full, when the tank was full of water.  The gauge was slightly below the empty mark, when the 
water in the fuel tank stopped flowing during draining.
The spark plugs were removed from the engine, and inspected.  All spark plugs were 
moderately sooted.  The magneto with the impulse coupling was checked, and would create 
spark on all six spark plugs.  Fuel was poured into the fuel line which was attached to the input 
side of the fuel pump.  When the propeller was rotated by hand the mechanical fuel pump 
pumped gasoline.  The air filter was opened and inspected.  A large amount of mud was present 
in the air filter area.  Compression was found on all of the engine's cylinders, when tested.
The airplane's left wing was crushed, the left main landing gear wheel was separated.  The nose 
gear had collapsed.  The propeller, engine mount, and firewall were all bent.
