The flight crew had checked weather for the intended flight from Durango, Mexico, to Chicago, 
Illinois, including a briefing from an arriving pilot who warned of light to moderate turbulence.  
The airplane encountered clear air turbulence while descending from 26,000 feet to 20,000 
feet which was described as severe.  When the turbulence was encountered the flight crew and 
a flight attendant made an announcement for the passengers to return to their seats and 
shortly after that, the 'Fasten Seatbelt' sign was turned on.  Two of the passengers sustaining 
serious injuries were occupying the lavatory at the time of the turbulence encounter. 
Clear air turbulence. 
 On March 2, 1997, at 0555 central standard time, a Boeing 757-2Q8, N755AT, operating as 
Mexicana Airlines Flight 199, experienced turbulence approximately 120 miles south of 
Chicago, Illinois.  The international 14 CFR Part 129 flight was descending through 26,000 
feet.  The flight departed Durango, Mexico, at 0335 with the intended destination of Chicago, 
Illinois.  The airplane sustained no damage; however, of the 202 persons aboard, 18 suffered 
minor injuries and 4 sustained serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the destination at the time of the accident.
The Captain stated in his written statement that the turbulence began when the airplane 
descended through 26,000 feet and continued until 20,000 feet.  He said that when passing 
through 26,000 he made an announcement to the passengers to take their seats.  He said that 
during the turbulence he told passengers to fasten their seatbelts. He said that after the 
turbulence encounter the "Fasten Seatbelt" sign remained on.
The First Officer, who was at the controls at the time of the turbulence encounter, said in his 
written report that descending through 28,000 feet he felt a little turbulence and discussed 
reducing penetration speed with the Captain, who agreed.  He said that from 26,000 to 20,000 
feet the airplane encountered severe turbulence with rate of climb reaching a 5,000 foot per 
minute descent and climb respectively.  He said the auto pilot was turned off, and the 
turbulence lasted about two minutes.  He said that while this was happening he told the 
Captain to turn on the "Fasten Seatbelt" light.  He indicated that after the turbulence encounter 
the Captain took control of the airplane.
A flight attendant described the turbulence encounter in her written statement stating that 
when it started she made an announcement for passengers to return to their seats and fasten 
their seatbelts.  This announcement was given in English and Spanish.  She indicated that the 
two most seriously injured passengers were in the lavatory when the turbulence encounter 
occurred.
The company debriefed the crew.  The company stated that the encounter was in clear air and 
they characterized it as "clear air turbulence."  The company reported that the pilots received 
no previous warning of turbulence while in-flight.  They did say that the Captain obtained 
meteorological information in Durango and talked with an arriving Captain who briefed him 
on the route conditions stating that he had encountered light to moderate occasional 
turbulence.
The accident occurred on Sunday (March 2nd).  Notification was received by the NTSB at 1008 
on March 3rd.  Prior to receiving notification, the airplane had been inspected by company 
maintenance personnel while in  Chicago on the date of the incident and no external damage 
was found.  The airplane was then returned to service and had made a return trip to Mexico the 
afternoon of the same day.  There was no attempt to isolate the cockpit voice recorder or the 
digital flight data recorder prior to further operation of the airplane.
