The pilot reported that while preparing the airplane for landing, he placed the fuel selector to 
the auxiliary position. During climb-out following an aborted landing, the engine lost power as 
the landing gear retracted. The airplane landed back on the runway and came to rest 50 feet 
from the departure end. The pilot stated, 'The Bonanza Manual states not to use auxiliaries for 
take-off as there is a possibility they could unport.'  According to the limitations section of the 
Beechcraft Pilot's Operating Handbook for the J35 Bonanza, 'Use auxiliary fuel in level flight 
only and do not use for take off or landing.' 
the pilot's placing the fuel selector in the improper position causing fuel starvation and a loss of 
engine power.  The loss of engine power resulted in a forced landing on the runway during an 
aborted landing. 
 On March 2, 1997, at 1600 eastern standard time, a Beech J-35 Bonanza, N88AA, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following an aborted landing at the Sky Manor 
Airport (N40) near Pittstown, New Jersey.  The certificated private pilot and commercial pilot 
rated flight instructor were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan had been filed.  The local flight originated at Morristown, New Jersey at 
approximately 1430, and was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a telephone interview and in the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot reported that while he was 
performing the before landing checks in preparation for landing at Sky Manor, he moved the 
fuel selector from the right main position to the left main position; however he did not visually 
confirm the position of the fuel selector because of its placement in the cockpit.  He stated, 
"The pilot has to move his (left) leg and bend over to look at it." 
The pilot reported, "There was no indication of turbulence during the approach but when over 
the numbers the plane dropped and bounced.  I was uncomfortable with the situation and 
called for a go-around."  The pilot reported that during the initial climb of the aborted landing, 
the engine lost power as the gear retracted.  He stated that the airplane landed back on the 
runway and came to rest 50 feet from the departure end.
The pilot reported that when he went back in the airplane to turn the fuel selector off, he "..was 
amazed..." he found the fuel selector in the auxiliary position.  The pilot stated, "The Bonanza 
Manual states not to use auxiliaries for take-off as there is a possibility they could unport."
In the Operator/Owner Safety Recommendation section of the Pilot/Operator Report the pilot 
stated, "Although fuel selector location does not lend itself to a visual check, I feel a visual 
confirmation of fuel selector location should be a mandatory part of my checklist..."
According to the limitations section of the Beechcraft Pilot's Operating Handbook for the J-35 
Bonanza, "Use auxiliary fuel in level flight only and do not use for take off or landing."
The pilot did not report any mechanical deficiencies and an inspection of the airplane by 
Federal Aviation Administration Safety Inspectors revealed no pre-impact anomalies.
