The student pilot was making a solo cross-country flight involving four flight legs. Before 
beginning the final return leg, he completed multiple full stop landings and touch-and-go 
landings that he had not included in his preflight planning. During the final leg, the engine 
began to lose power. The student pilot switched the fuel selector valve to the left tank, but then 
switched it back to the right tank after a short period of time. The engine subsequently lost all 
power, and the student pilot made a forced landing in rough terrain. Postaccident examination 
revealed that the right fuel tank was not breached and was empty of fuel. The left fuel tank was 
breached, and the soil beneath the tank was wet with fuel. After the wreckage was recovered, a 
fuel delivery system was rigged, and the engine was started and continued to run as the fuel 
selector was positioned to both the right and left fuel tank positions. According to the pilot 
operating handbook for the airplane, if the pilot allows a tank to run dry and the engine loses 
power, it may take up to 10 seconds for fuel to reach the engine after the other tank is selected. 
It is likely that, after running the right tank dry, the pilot did not leave the selector in the left 
tank position for long enough to allow fuel to reach the engine.
The pilot™s improper fuel management, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due to 
fuel starvation.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 1, 2010, about 1045 mountain standard time (MST), a Piper PA 28-181, N4122F, 
experienced a loss of engine power, and the pilot made a forced landing near Wittmann, 
Arizona.  TransPac Aviation Academy was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.  The student pilot sustained minor injuries; the 
airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage and right wing.  The solo cross-country 
instructional flight departed Deer Valley Airport (DVT), Phoenix, Arizona, about 0700, with a 
planned route of flight to Wickenburg, Arizona (E25), to Gila Bend, Arizona, back to E25, and 
then back to DVT. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
The student pilot reported that during the solo cross-country flight, specifically the last leg 
from E25 to DVT, the engine started to run rough and he was unable to maintain altitude. He 
made a forced landing in the desert near Wittmann.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) accident coordinator responded to the scene, and 
documented the accident site. During the recovery it was noted that the right fuel tank was not 
breeched, but contained no fuel. The left fuel tank™s drain had been damaged during the crash 
sequence. No fuel was found in the tank; however, the ground below the damaged fuel drain 
smelled of fuel, and was wet for several inches down in the dirt, covering an area of at least a 
12ﬂ diameter.
The student pilot was interviewed by the (FAA) accident coordinator. The student pilot related 
that he had intended to only complete one full stop landing with a taxi back for takeoff. 
However, during the second time at E25 on his return, the student pilot made two additional 
full stop taxi backs and two touch-and-goes. The student pilot stated that he felt the engine 
vibrate during the final approach to E25. The FAA coordinator asked him why he did not land 
at E25 and call for maintenance. The student pilot said he ﬁdidn™t feel it was that bad.ﬂ The 
student pilot also stated that he needed to return to DVT. The student pilot attempted to return 
to DVT. However, while en route, the engine lost partial power. The student pilot said he 
switched to the left tank, but only for a short period of time. He then switched it back to the 
right tank. Prior to landing, the engine completely quit, and the airplane landed in a desert 
wash. The airplane sustained damage to the left wing, both main landing gear, and the nose 
gear.
On December 8, 2010, investigators conducted an exam of the wreckage at Air Transport, Inc., 
Phoenix. During the examination, the airframe and engine were secured, and a temporary fuel 
delivery system was configured. The engine was started using both the left and right fuel 
selection positions.
No abnormalities were noted that would have precluded normal operations.
The Piper PA28-181 Pilot Operating Handbook addressed a loss of engine power. It states if the 
engine quits due to fuel exhaustion, it will take up to 10 seconds for fuel to reach the engine 
with the fuel pump on.
