The flightcrew reported that during the application of takeoff power, when the throttles were in 
approximately the vertical position, the numbers 1 and 3 engines were indicating 
approximately 70% N1. The number 2 engine was indicating about 48% N1 and not 
accelerating. They heard a 'crack' and aborted the takeoff. Examination of the engine revealed 
that the low pressure turbine (LPT) stage one disk had separated from the LPT rotor at the 
stage one to two flange joint. Seven intact toroid bolts and sets of associated hardware were 
recovered. No evidence of fatigue cracking or corrosion (pitting) was noted on any of the bolt 
pieces recovered from the engine. The shank of one of the toroid bolts exhibited significant 
damage. The lug arm, used for safetying the bolt, exhibited relatively minor damage. 
Examination of several of the lug arms revealed 'noticeable wear patterns' and 'crack arrest 
positions indicative of fatigue cracking.' Statements by UAL maintenance personnel indicate 
failures of the toroid bolt safeties are occasionally discovered when the engines are 
disassembled for major overhaul. 
failure of the safety wire and/or safety wire lug arm on one of the stage one to two disk flange 
bolts due to an inadequate safetying method. 
 On May 1, 1995, about 1120 central standard time, a McDonnell Douglas DC10-10, N1811U, 
operated by United Airlines (UAL) as United Airlines Flight 492, sustained minor damage 
following the uncontained failure of the number two engine during takeoff roll.
The flight crew aborted the takeoff, returned to the gate, and deplaned the passengers without 
further incident.  There were no injuries to the crew of 12, or the 180 passengers aboard the 
airplane.  The scheduled domestic passenger flight, operated under 14 CFR Part 121, originated 
at the Chicago O'Hare International Airport with a planned destination of the Washington 
Dulles International Airport, Washington, D. C.  An IFR flight plan was filed, and visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed in Chicago.
The flight crew reported that during the application of takeoff power, when the throttles were 
in approximately the vertical position, the number one and three engines were indicating 
approximately 70 percent N1.  The number two engine was indicating about 48 percent N1 and 
not accelerating.  They heard a "crack".  They aborted the takeoff, pulled the number two 
engine fire handle and discharged the fire bottle.
The airplane was transported to the UAL maintenance hanger at O'Hare International airport 
where it was subsequently examined.  Fragments of the turbine blades, shroud material, bolts, 
and the engine case were recovered from the runway, and from within the engine cowl and the 
engine.  A gap was located in the thrust reverser latch seam which spanned approximately 
three inches at the trailing edge and .25 inches at the leading edge.  The left cowling had a six 
inch by 21 inch puncture at the ten o'clock position and the right side cowling had a four inch 
by eighteen inch puncture at the four o'clock position.
The engine was removed from the airframe revealing a circumferential penetration of the 
engine case, about one inch wide, extending around about 270 degrees of the circumference 
from the three o'clock position to the twelve o'clock position, in the vicinity of the first low 
pressure turbine.  One oil line on the left side of the engine was fractured and the upper surface 
of the left stabilizer was oil covered.
The engine was transported to the UAL engine overhaul facility, San Francisco, California, 
where it was examined in the presence of the Powerplants Group Chairman.  In his factual 
report of the examination, he reported "the LPT stage one disk was separated from the LPT 
rotor at the stage one to two flange joint.  The bore, web and rim portion of the disk were 
intact...Several stage one to two disk flange bolts were recovered in the debris.  The fracture 
surfaces on the majority of the recovered bolt fragments were smoothed and rounded.  Six 
stage one to stage two flange bolts were fractured in the shank, adjacent to the threads, in 
which two bolts had coarse looking fracture surfaces with varying degrees of discoloration."
The LPT components were examined by a National Resource Specialist at the NTSB laboratory, 
Washington, D. C.  In his factual report he stated that "the internal surfaces of the engine 
hardware in the low pressure turbine section contained multiple small-object impact marks".  
Seven intact toroid bolts and sets of associated hardware were recovered.  X-ray energy 
dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) examination of the discolored areas of the bolts revealed 
substantial peaks for oxygen, aluminum, sulfur, and silver.  "No evidence of fatigue cracking or 
corrosion (pitting) was noted on any of the bolt pieces recovered from the engine."  A portion 
of the missing bolt, identified as an unthreaded portion of the shank, designated as bolt 
number six, was located with the fragments recovered from within the engine.  The shank of 
the bolt exhibited significant damage.  The lug arm, used for safetying the number six bolt, 
exhibited relatively minor damage.  Examination of several of the lug arms revealed "noticeable 
wear patterns" and "crack arrest positions indicative of fatigue cracking."
Statements by UAL maintenance personnel indicate failures of the toroid bolt safeties are 
occasionally discovered when the engines are disassembled for major overhaul.
