Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Arlington, WA
Accident Number:
SEA06LA003
Date & Time:
10/01/2005, 1230 PDT 
Registration:
N924GF
Aircraft:
Beech B-60
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
Analysis 
In a written statement the pilot reported that he lowered the landing gear before entering the 
downwind to runway 34.  He reported that after the landing, during the rollout, the landing 
gear "collapsed and the airplane slid to a stop."  A witness reported that the airplane's left wing 
"dropped" during landing and he heard what was described as the airplane's engines power up, 
followed by a rapid deceleration of the airplane's engines.  The witness reported that as the 
engines decelerated, the airplane settled to the ground eventually coming to rest on its belly.  
Examination of the airplane's main landing gear system showed that the main landing gear 
assembly was whole and intact.  The forward and aft attach fittings (both left and right) were 
undamaged and no deformation to the immediate area of the attach points was noted.  The 
outboard landing gear doors were intact and remained attached at their respective mounting 
points.  Nominal damage was noted to the outboard gear door assemblies.  The inboard 
landing gear doors remained attached to the wing assembly; however, both sustained extensive 
damage.  Erosion type damage, to include longitudinal striations, was noted to both doors.  
Extensive damage was noted to the distal ends of both inboard doors.  The outboard section of 
the left inboard gear door was bent, approximately 45 degrees, in the direction of the gear 
hinge.  The outboard section of the right inboard gear door was curled inboard, opposite the 
direction of the hinge.  The airplane's retractable courtesy step, which actuates simultaneously 
with the landing gear, was observed in the down and locked position.  No damage was noted to 
the courtesy step assembly.  The operator reported that with the exception of a leaking landing 
gear strut (left) there were no mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane prior to 
the accident. 
     
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Main landing gear collapse during the landing rollout for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 6SEA06LA003
Findings
Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
1. (C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - COLLAPSED
Page 3 of 6SEA06LA003
Factual Information
On October 1, 2005, at 1230 Pacific daylight time, a twin engine Beech B-60 (Duke), N924GF, 
sustained substantial damage following a landing gear collapse during the landing rollout at 
Arlington Municipal Airport, Arlington, Washington.  The airplane, which is registered to 
Precision Approach Management, LLC, was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-
country flight under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The 
airline transport pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country flight that originated at Bellingham, 
Washington, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.   
In a written statement dated October 11, the pilot reported that he lowered the landing gear 
before entering the downwind to runway 34.  He reported that after the landing, during the 
rollout, that the landing gear "collapsed and the airplane slid to a stop."  
A witness reported that the airplane's left wing "dropped" during landing and he heard what 
was described as the airplane's engines power up, followed by a rapid deceleration of the 
airplane's engines.  The witness reported that as the engines decelerated, the airplane settled to 
the ground eventually coming to rest on its belly.
Airport maintenance personnel reported that the airplane come to rest approximately 3,400 
feet beyond the threshold of runway 34, adjacent to the alpha three taxiway.  Propeller slashes 
were observed on the runway surface in three separate locations.  The first grouping of slash 
marks was noted approximately 1,280 feet beyond the landing threshold of runway 34.  The 
second grouping of slash marks (approximately 246 feet in length) was noted approximately 
1,720 feet beyond the landing threshold.  The third set of slash marks was noted approximately 
843 feet south of the wreckage and continued to the point where the airplane came to rest.  
On February 7, 2006, the NTSB IIC examined the airplane's main landing gear system at the 
operator's hangar facility in Arlington, Washington.  The main landing gear assembly was 
whole and intact.  The forward and aft attach fittings (both left and right) were undamaged and 
no deformation to the immediate area of the attach points was noted.  The outboard landing 
gear doors were intact and remained attached at their respective mounting points.  Nominal 
damage was noted to the outboard gear door assemblies.  The inboard landing gear doors 
remained attached to the wing assembly, however, both sustained extensive damage.  Erosion 
type damage, to include longitudinal striations, was noted to both doors.  Extensive damage 
was noted to the distal ends of both inboard doors.  The outboard section of the left inboard 
gear door was bent, approximately 45 degrees, in the direction of the gear hinge.  The outboard 
section of the right inboard gear door was curled inboard, opposite the direction of the hinge.  
The airplane's retractable courtesy step, which actuates simultaneously with the landing gear, 
was observed in the down and locked position.  No damage was noted to the courtesy step 
assembly.
Further examination of the landing gear system revealed bending type deformation to the right 
side landing gear retraction rod and inboard landing gear door retraction rod.  No damage was 
noted to the left side retraction rods. 
The operator reported that with the exception of a leaking landing gear strut (left) there were 
no mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane prior to the accident.     
Page 4 of 6SEA06LA003
    
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
71, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/01/2005
Flight Time:
10340 hours (Total, all aircraft), 15 hours (Total, this make and model), 8420 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N924GF
Model/Series:
B-60 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
435
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
18 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1935 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-541
Registered Owner:
Precision Approach 
Management LLC
Rated Power:
380 hp
Operator:
Precision Approach 
Management LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6SEA06LA003
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
BELLINGHAM, WA (BLI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Arlington, WA (AWO)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1200 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
ARLINGTON MUNI (AWO)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
137 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5333 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
48.160833, -122.158889
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis  J Hogenson
Adopted Date:
05/30/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Bill Jackson; FAA FSDO; Renton, WA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA06LA003
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
