Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Iliamna, AK
Accident Number:
ANC06LA001
Date & Time:
10/02/2005, 1930 AKD 
Registration:
N9950X
Aircraft:
Cessna 185
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airline transport pilot was conducting a 14 CFR Part 91 personal cross-country flight, when 
the engine lost power about 20 miles from the final destination.  The pilot said the symptoms 
were similar to fuel starvation, but according to his calculations he should have had 30 minutes 
of fuel remaining.  In a written statement to the NTSB, the pilot wrote that the morning 
following the accident, before the airplane was recovered, he "noticed a substantial amount of 
frost/ice buildup around the left fuel vent, and on the ground from the fuel venting throughout 
the night," and "in my opinion it seemed to indicate that there was still a fair amount of water 
in the fuel that caused this ice buildup."  He wrote, "although I felt I properly drained the tanks 
prior to takeoff, it seems there was still water trapped in the tanks."  After recovery the 
airplane's engine was prepared with a new propeller and clean fuel at an aircraft maintenance 
facility.  The engine was started, and run through a variety of power settings, without any 
evidence of mechanical malfunction.  The pilot reported that during the forced landing, the 
landing gear was torn off, structurally damaging the fuselage.  He also stated that prior to the 
accident there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inadequate preflight inspection, which failed to detect water-contaminated fuel, 
resulting in a loss of engine power during cruise flight, and subsequent in-flight collision with 
terrain.
Page 2 of 5ANC06LA001
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION,WATER
2. (C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 5ANC06LA001
Factual Information
On October 2, 2005, about 1930 Alaska daylight time, a Cessna 185 airplane, N9950X, collided 
with terrain during an emergency landing following a loss of engine power during normal 
cruise, about 20 miles west of Iliamna, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated by the pilot as 
a visual flight rules (VFR) personal cross-country flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the 
accident occurred.  The airline transport pilot and sole passenger were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight departed from a 
dirt airstrip 20 miles north of Aleknagik, Alaska, about 1830.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on October 4, the pilot said about 20 miles west of Iliamna the 
engine lost power.  He said the symptoms were similar to fuel starvation, but according to his 
calculations he should have had 30 minutes of fuel remaining.  He said during the forced 
landing the landing gear was torn off, structurally damaging the fuselage.  He said prior to the 
accident there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
In a written statement to the NTSB dated October 16, the pilot wrote that the morning 
following the accident he "noticed a substantial amount of frost/ice buildup around the left fuel 
vent, and on the ground from the fuel venting throughout the night," and "in my opinion it 
seemed to indicate that there was still a fair amount of water in the fuel that caused this ice 
buildup."  He wrote, "although I felt I properly drained the tanks prior to takeoff, it seems there 
was still water trapped in the tanks."
On October 12, after recovery, the airplane's engine was prepared with a new propeller and 
clean fuel.  The engine was started, and run through a variety of power settings, without any 
evidence of mechanical malfunction.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial; 
Military
Age:
41, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/01/2004
Flight Time:
6925 hours (Total, all aircraft), 440 hours (Total, this make and model), 4550 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 85 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ANC06LA001
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N9950X
Model/Series:
185 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
185-0150
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
70 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1120 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-470
Registered Owner:
Mark Hedlund
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
Mark Hedlund
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 10000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
4°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Aleknagik, AK 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Iliamna, AK (PAIL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1850 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
59.749722, -155.437778
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lawrence R Lewis
Adopted Date:
04/25/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Charlotte Luckett; Anchorage, FSDO-03; Anchorage, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
