The pilot reported that at an altitude of about 2,000', the engine lost power & ran rough. He 
elected to land on a road that was perpendicular to a highway. The airplane was seen touching 
down on the road, but was heading towards the intersection of the road & highway, where the 
Sheriff's Department was working a motor vehicle accident. As the airplane approached the 
activity at the highway intersection, the pilot attempted to take off to avoid hitting vehicles & 
people. He entered a steep climb to avoid a power line, then the airplane descended nose first 
into trees. The pilot stated that where the airplane touched down on the road, it was 'slippery' 
which made it 'hard to stop.'  As the airplane moved towards the highway, the pilot noticed that 
people were still on the road, so he tried to avoid hitting them by taking off & flying over the 
highway. The pilot said, '...unfortunately since we lost speed in the landing, we didn't have 
enough power and we stalled into the trees.'  The engine was examined & partially torn down. 
The examination of the engine revealed that the #4 cylinder exhaust valve was broken off at the 
base of the stem & was found in the combustion chamber. The bottom part of the valve was 
retrieved from inside the muffler, along with pieces of the valve seat. Damage from the valve 
was found on the cylinder head & piston top. A hole was found in the top of the piston. Further 
examination of the broken valve stem revealed that it was pitted & corroded. In addition, the 
engine showed signs of having been operated at high temperatures for a considerable length of 
time. An external examination of the engine revealed corrosion on the exterior of the steel 
cylinder barrels. Paint on the cylinder heads was blistered & peeled. The ignition system 
harness was found worn & tattered. The engine log books revealed that the engine had been 
operated about 700 hours past the manufacture's recommended overhaul time. 
partial loss of engine power due to a fractured number 4 exhaust valve, which resulted in a 
forced landing; and the lack of sufficient airspeed to maneuver over power lines during an 
attempt to abort (go around from) an emergency landing, which resulted in an inadvertent stall 
and subsequent impact with trees.  Factors relating to the accident were: the owner/operator's 
failure to perform the engine manufacture's recommended overhaul at the recommended time, 
and high obstructions in the emergency landing area. 
 On February 1, 1998, about 1413 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N94929, owned 
by Gateway Aviation Inc., operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, impacted with 
trees near Ochopee, Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  The private pilot was seriously injured and one 
passenger received minor injuries.  The flight had originated from Opa Locka, Florida, at 1330.
The pilot had refueled at Everglades City, Florida, and was en route back to Opa Locka.  
At an altitude of about 2,000 feet, the pilot reported that the engine lost power and ran rough.  
He elected to land on a road that was perpendicular to Highway 41.  The airplane was seen 
touching down on the road, but was heading towards the intersection of the road and the 
highway where the Sheriff's Department was working a motor vehicle accident.  As the airplane 
approached the activity at the highway intersection, the pilot attempted to take off to avoid 
hitting the vehicles and people.  The airplane went nose high, turned 90 degrees to the left, and 
descended nose first into the trees.
The pilot stated that at first he "...couldn't determine the cause of the engine 
roughness...we reached US41, but I noticed it was crowded...I tried to avoid US41...[and] I 
suddenly realized a small road.  We tried to land there."  In addition, he stated that when the 
airplane touched down on the road, it was "slippery" which made it "hard to stop."  As the 
airplane moved towards the highway, the pilot noticed that the people were still on the road, so 
he tried to avoid hitting them by "lift[ing] the plane and over flew US41."  The pilot said, 
"...unfortunately since we lost speed in the landing, we didn't have enough power and we 
stalled into the trees."
The engine was examined on February 12, 1998, at a hanger at the Fort Lauderdale 
Executive Airport, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, under the supervision of the NTSB investigator in 
charge.  An examination and partial teardown of the engine revealed that the No. 4 cylinder 
exhaust valve was broken off at the base of the stem and was found in the combustion 
chamber.  The bottom part of the valve was retrieved from inside the muffler, along with pieces 
of the valve seat.  Damage from the valve was found on the cylinder head and piston top.  A 
hole was found in the top of the piston.  Further examination of the broken valve stem revealed 
that it was pitted and corroded.
According to the FAA inspector's statement, the engine showed "signs of having been 
operated at high temperatures for a considerable length of time."  The external examination of 
the engine revealed corrosion on the exterior of the steel cylinder barrels.  The paint on the 
cylinder heads was blistered and peeled.  The ignition system harness was found worn and 
tattered.  The engine log books revealed that the engine had been operated about 840 hours 
past the manufacture's recommended overhaul time.  The manufacture's recommended time 
before overhaul was 2,400 hours
