The pilot said that he applied back pressure to the yoke to reduce a nose wheel vibration during 
landing and the airplane began 'hopping.'  The pilot also attempted to retract the flaps during 
the landing sequence in an effort to increase braking ability.  During that time, the airplane 
drifted to the right, struck a snowbank, nosed over, and came to rest inverted.  According to the 
pilot, 'The airplane drifted right and struck the snowbank, probably because I was reaching for 
the flaps.'  The pilot had 100 hours of flight experience, 20 hours of which were in make and 
model. 
 The pilot's failure to maintain directional control. 
 On February 1, 1998, at 1000 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172K, N78222, was substantially 
damaged after a loss of control during landing at the Oxford Airport (43M), Oxford, 
Massachusetts.  The certificated private pilot and passenger were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local personal flight that originated at 43M, at 
0950.  No flight plan had been filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot said he departed runway 02, completed a traffic pattern, and returned to land.  He 
said the airplane touched down in the first one-third of the runway.  The airplane then began to 
vibrate as soon as the nose wheel touched down.  He attempted to reduce the vibration by 
applying back pressure to the yoke.  He said that after applying back pressure, "...the airplane 
started hopping on me."  The pilot said the airplane bounced twice after the initial touchdown.
The pilot also attempted to retract the flaps during the landing sequence in an effort to increase 
braking ability.  During that time, the airplane drifted to the right, struck a snowbank, nosed 
over, and came to rest inverted.  According to the pilot, "The airplane drifted right and struck 
the snowbank, probably because I was reaching for the flaps."
The pilot reported that there were no mechanical deficiencies with the airplane.  When 
questioned about the performance of the airplane, the pilot said, "The aircraft was fine."  He 
said he completed a preflight using the checklist prior to departure and did not notice anything 
unusual. 
According to a report from a Federal Aviation Administration Aviation Safety Inspector, "The 
nose wheel had very little air in it.  However, it tested OK [at] 25 lbs. PSI."
The pilot stated that when weather permitted, he flew on a weekly basis.  He last flew 2 weeks 
prior to the accident flight and had accumulated approximately 100 hours of total flight 
experience.
