The pilot stated that about 8 to 10 minutes after takeoff, while still climbing, at an altitude of 
about 5,000 feet, the airplane lost engine power. The pilot further stated that the gauges 
showed about 1,000 rpm, and the manifold pressure remained at 25 inches. He turned around 
and returned to the airport and made attempts to restart the engine, all of which were 
unsuccessful. The pilot made a forced landing to a clearing short of the airport property, and 
the airplane incurred substantial damage. A postcrash examination of the airplane revealed 
that the dual magneto had detached from its mounted position, and was hanging by the 
ignition harness behind the engine. The magneto had not incurred any damage, and the 
magneto drive gear was laying in the accessory housing along with one hold-down plate. The 
retaining nuts, washers and lock washers were not recovered. When tested, the magneto 
operated on all eight distributor outputs. The impulse coupler was not damaged, and the 
distributor wiring was intact. There was engine continuity, proper valve action, and 
compression on all cylinders. Engine oil was present, and there was evidence of some oil 
having leaked at the back of the engine. No anomalies were noted with either the induction or 
fuel systems.  The airplane had last received an annual inspection on August 2005 when an 
overhauled engine had been installed. It had accumulated 10 hours since the annual 
inspection.
Improper magneto installation by maintenance personnel, which resulted in the magneto 
detaching from the engine and subsequent loss of engine power.
On March 1, 2006, about 1240 eastern standard time, a Mooney M-20J, N511G, registered to 
and operated by a private individual, as a Title 14 CFR part 91 personal flight, incurred a loss of 
engine power while climbing to cruise altitude, and the pilot made a forced landing in Fort 
Pierce Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The 
private-rated pilot received minor injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage.  The 
flight originated in Fort Pierce, Florida, the same day, about 1230.
According to the pilot, about 8 to 10 minutes after takeoff, while still climbing, at an altitude of 
about 5,000 feet, the airplane lost engine power. The pilot further stated that the gauges 
showed about 1,000 rpm, and the manifold pressure remained at 25 inches. He said he 
operated the throttle, and observed instruments while attempting to regain power, but he could 
not regain power or determine the reason for the power loss. He said he turned the airplane 
back towards Fort Pierce, Florida, and as it glided towards the airport, he communicated with 
the air traffic control tower controller, and declared an emergency. As the airplane glided 
toward the airport the pilot said he became less certain that he would reach it, so he selected a 
clearing in which to execute a forced landing. Upon reaching 900 feet, he abandoned the 
approach to the airport and made an approach to a clearing. While on short final to land in the 
clearing, the right wing of the airplane impacted the top of a pine tree, which changed the path. 
The airplane pan caked into the ground and bounced into an area of numerous 4-foot high 
sand piles, coming to rest upright on top of one of the piles. 
A postcrash examination of the airplane and engine was performed by a FAA licensed 
mechanic, under the supervision of an FAA inspector. The examination revealed that the 
magneto had detached from its mounted position, and was hanging by the ignition harness 
behind the engine. The magneto had not been damage, and the magneto drive gear was laying 
in the accessory housing along with one "hold-down" plate. The retaining nuts, washers and 
lock washers were not recovered. When tested, the magneto operated on all eight distributor 
outputs, and the impulse coupler and the distributor wiring were intact. and undamaged. 
There was engine continuity as well as valve action and compression on all cylinders. Engine 
oil was present, and there was evidence that some oil had leaked at the back of the engine. No 
anomalies were noted to exist with the induction or fuel systems.
The airplane and engine had last received an annual inspection in August 2005, when an 
overhauled engine had been installed. The airplane and engine had accumulated 10 hours since 
the annual inspection.
