The pilot said "the engine began to surge in power slightly as the airplane was rotated for liftoff 
from runway 03. During climbout, he notified the tower of a "possible engine problem," and 
the engine continued surging. As the pilot executed a slow left turn towards runway 13, the 
engine started losing power. He managed to land on runway 13 near the intersection with 
runway 03-21.  The airplane was not aligned with the runway centerline, and went off the side 
of the runway. The left wing struck an elevated runway marker and taxiway lights.  Both wing 
spars were damaged and the left wing was twisted down. An FAA airworthiness inspector 
examined the airplane and engine and reported finding an exposed left magneto "P" lead 
touching the connector shell. This could "cause an intermittent grounding of the left magneto," 
and result in the "fuel control[er] hunting to compensate [and] producing an engine power 
surge."
A loss of engine power due to the intermittent grounding of the left magneto "P" lead, causing 
the fuel controller to search and the engine to surge then lose power, and the pilot's failure to 
attain proper runway alignment. Contributing factors were the runway sign and taxiway lights.
On March 1, 2006, approximately 1140 central standard time, a Piper PA-32RT-300T, 
N7824T, piloted by a private pilot, was substantially damaged when the it struck several 
runway lights and a taxiway sign during a forced landing at the Manhattan Regional Airport 
(MHK), Manhattan, Kansas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident.  The business flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, 
and a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan had been filed.  The pilot and his passenger were not 
injured.  The cross-country flight was originating at the time of the accident and was en route 
to Olathe, Kansas.  
According to the pilot's accident report, "the engine began to surge in power slightly" as the 
airplane was rotated for liftoff from runway 03. During climbout, the pilot notified the tower of 
a "possible engine problem," and the engine continued surging. As the pilot executed a slow left 
turn towards runway 13, the engine started losing power. He managed to land on runway 13 
near the intersection with runway 03-21.  The airplane was not aligned with the runway 
centerline, and went off the side of the runway. The left wing struck an elevated runway marker 
and taxiway lights.  Both wing spars were damaged and the left wing was twisted down.
On March 8, an FAA airworthiness inspector examined the airplane and engine. In an e-mail 
dated March 17, he reported finding an exposed left magneto "P" lead touching the connector 
shell, which could "cause an intermittent grounding of the left magneto," resulting in the "fuel 
control[er] hunting to compensate [and] producing an engine power surge."
