National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Rockland, ME
Accident Number: ERA16LA137
Date & Time: 03/02/2016, 0800 EST
Registration: N198WA
Aircraft: BEECH 99
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Turbulence encounter
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The commercial pilot was conducting a nonscheduled cargo flight.
The pilot reported that, as the airplane was descending on an instrument approach, it encountered continuous light-to- moderate turbulence.
As the airplane descended through about 2,000 ft mean sea level at an airspeed of 130 knots, it encountered severe turbulence, and the pilot subsequently executed a missed approach and chose to divert to an alternate airport.
The airplane continued to encounter light-to-moderate turbulence en route to the alternate airport, and the pilot landed the airplane uneventfully.
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that the airframe had sustained substantial damage during the flight.
Although there were multiple AIRMETs for widespread moderate turbulence and low-level windshear, there were no pilot reports of, nor SIGMETs forecasting, severe turbulence at the time the pilot received her preflight weather briefing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The airplane's encounter with isolated severe turbulence, which resulted in substantial airframe damage.
The commercial pilot was not injured.
Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed, and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the flight.
The non-scheduled cargo flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135, and originated from Manchester Airport (MHT), Manchester, New Hampshire, around 0730.
The pilot stated that the flight was in IMC on descent for the instrument landing system approach to RKD when the airplane encountered an area of continuous light to moderate turbulence.
About 2,000 feet mean sea level (msl), and an airspeed about 130 knots, the airplane encountered severe turbulence, and the pilot initiated a missed approach.
She decided not to attempt another approach to RKD, and instead diverted to Bangor International Airport (BGR), Bangor, Maine.
She stated that the airplane continued to experience light to moderate turbulence enroute to BGR.
After landing and securing the airplane, she entered the severe turbulence encounter in the aircraft log book.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that both wings exhibited skin deformation, and the fuselage side skins were wrinkled.
Further examination by a local repair station revealed substantial damage to the right wing root between the fuselage and nacelle, just aft of main spar.
The right wing root-to-fuselage fillet fairing was also damaged just aft of the main spar.
There were several other areas noted with wrinkled skin on both wings.
The pilot held an airline transport certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land, multi-engine land, and instrument airplane.
She also held a first class medical certificate, issued on March 15, 2016.
Her last flight review was completed on November 24, 2015.
At the time of the accident the pilot reported 3,600 total hours of flight experience, with 2,784 hours in the accident airplane make and model airplane.
She had had accumulated 480 hours of flight experience in IMC, of which 295 hours were in the accident airplane make and model.
The RKD weather observation at 0756 included wind from 150 degrees at 20 knots, gusting to 30 knots, visibility 4 statute miles in mist, ceiling overcast at 700 feet above ground level, temperature 8 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 7degrees C, and altimeter setting of 29.43 inches of mercury.
Peak wind from 150 degrees at 34 knots was recorded at 0716, with pressure falling rapidly.
The Terminal Aerodrome Forecast for RKD, valid at the time of the accident, predicted wind from the southeast at 22 knots with gusts to 37 knots, and the potential for low-level wind shear at 2,000 feet, with wind from 180 degrees at 45 knots.
The National Weather Service issued multiple AIRMETs for the region, which advised of widespread IMC, moderate turbulence, and low-level wind shear.
There were no pilot reports (PIREPs) or SIGMETs for severe turbulence in the area.
The operator's policy and procedures manual stated that it was a general policy of the company to suspend operations over a route that subjected equipment to unacceptable turbulence.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92875
