Page 1 of 11
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Westminster, SC
Accident Number:
ERA16FA001
Date & Time:
10/02/2015, 1512 EDT 
Registration:
N782TM
Aircraft:
PIPER PA32R
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Aircraft structural failure
Injuries:
4 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Nearing the conclusion of a cross-country, instrument flight rules flight in instrument 
meteorological conditions, the private pilot was entering a procedure turn in advance of 
conducting an instrument approach to the destination airport. The pilot reported to air traffic 
control that he was outbound on the procedure turn but did not subsequently report when the 
airplane was inbound. Shortly thereafter, a military flight on the frequency reported hearing a 
"mayday" call and that the airplane was "going down." No further communications were 
received from the accident airplane. Radar and GPS data showed the airplane in a right, rapidly 
descending spiral. Witness statements and the distribution of the wreckage indicated that the 
airplane experienced an in-flight breakup. A postaccident examination of the airframe and 
engine revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded 
normal operation. Fractures to the right wing and stabilator were consistent with overstress 
and likely occurred during an attempted recovery from the descending spiral.
The pilot's autopsy revealed severe atherosclerosis in the vasculature of the brain and heart. 
There was near-total occlusion of the right frontal and middle cerebral arteries. In the heart, 
the left anterior descending coronary had 80% occlusion, while both the right and circumflex 
coronary arteries showed 40% atheromatous occlusion. In addition, the myocardium displayed 
indications that the pilot had experienced a previous heart attack. The pilot's wife was unaware 
of a previous heart attack or heart condition, and the pilot had not reported any heart issues to 
the Federal Aviation Administration.
The pilot had very low levels of pseudoephedrine in his system at the time of the accident. 
Although his use of this powerful vasoconstrictor may have further increased his risk of an 
acute cardio- or cerebro-vascular event, given the low levels, it is unlikely that any direct 
psychoactive effect of the drug contributed to the accident. Finally, the pilot had 0.06 ug/ml of 
chlorpheniramine, a sedating antihistamine, in his postmortem blood. Although the pilot lost 
control of the airplane, there was no evidence of impaired behavior or decision-making before 
the loss of control. Therefore, it is unlikely that the sedating effects of the chlorpheniramine 
contributed to this accident.
Page 2 of 11ERA16FA001
Given the circumstances of the accident and pilot's cardiac conditions, it is possible that he 
became acutely incapacitated by a sudden cardio- or cerebro-vascular event and that could 
have resulted in the loss of airplane control. Because the pilot suffered fatal blunt force injuries 
within a few minutes after symptoms began, no findings indicating the acute event would be 
expected to be visible on autopsy, and none were found; thus, it could not be determined 
whether the loss of control was the result of incapacitation or if there was another reason that 
the airplane departed controlled flight and the pilot was unable to regain control.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's loss of airplane control for reasons that could not be determined based on the 
available information.
Findings
Aircraft
Flight surfaces (wing) - Capability exceeded
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Predisposing condition - Pilot
Environmental issues
Ceiling/visibility/precip - Not specified
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 11ERA16FA001
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 2, 2015, about 1512 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-32R-301, N782TM, was 
destroyed when it collided with terrain following an in-flight breakup near Westminster, South 
Carolina. The private pilot and three passengers were fatally injured. The airplane was 
registered to Smith Family Aviation, LLC, and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91 as a personal flight. Day instrument meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan 
was filed. The flight originated from Warsaw Municipal Airport (ASW), Warsaw, Indiana, 
about 1151, and was destined for Oconee County Regional Airport (CEU), Clemson, South 
Carolina.
According air traffic control information provided by the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA), the en route portion of the flight was uneventful. Due to other traffic landing at CEU 
and prevailing weather, the pilot was told to expect to hold at the ZEYLM intersection before 
executing the RNAV runway 7 approach at CEU. At 1504, Atlanta Center coordinated with 
Greer approach control for the flight to hold at ZEYLM at 6,000 ft mean sea level (msl). 
Recorded radar data showed that the airplane approached ZEYLM at 6,000 ft on a 
southeasterly heading. GPS data indicated the airplane track passed over ZEYLM at 1508:08. 
After passing ZEYLM, the airplane began a turn to the right, consistent with the published 
holding pattern on the approach chart; however, it continued to turn a full 180° toward the 
opposite direction. At 1509:19, the flight was cleared for the approach and the pilot reported 
that he was "outbound now" and would report when the airplane was established on the 
procedure turn inbound. About 1510:06, at 5,991 ft GPS altitude, the airplane entered an 
increasingly tightening, descending right turn, and within 16 seconds, its ground speed 
increased from 150 knots to 212 knots. At 1510:56, the pilot of a military flight, call sign 
"Blackbird 89," reported hearing a "mayday" call that an airplane was "going down." The 
controller subsequently queried the pilot when he did not report inbound on the approach; no 
response was received. Radar data showed the flight in a right, descending spiral until radar 
contact was lost over Lake Hartwell, on the Georgia/South Carolina border, about 2,200 ft msl. 
The last recorded GPS point was at 1510:44 in the vicinity of the main wreckage location.
Local residents reported hearing and seeing the airplane before the accident. One witness 
heard a loud "boom," followed by white pieces of debris falling into the lake. Another witness 
saw the airplane descending vertically, in a spiral motion, until it disappeared behind a tree 
line. Another witness reported that the engine was running until ground impact. Several 
witnesses reported the event to 911, and the wreckage was located by first responders shortly 
thereafter.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 71, held a private pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land and 
instrument airplane ratings. He reported 1,448 hours total flight time on his most recent 
application for an FAA third-class medical certificate, dated October 17, 2013.
Page 4 of 11ERA16FA001
A review of the pilot's logbook revealed that the last entry was made on September 21, 2015. At 
that time, he had logged 1,736.4 total hours, including 1,677.9 hours as pilot-in-command, 
125.2 hours actual instrument time, and 59.3 hours simulated instrument time. He logged 
148.6 hours during the previous 12 months, including 27.6 hours actual instrument time and 
23 instrument approaches. During the 24 months prior to the accident, all of his logged flight 
time was in the accident airplane. His most recent flight review was completed on August 28, 
2015 in the accident airplane. The flight review included three instrument approaches and 
holding.
The pilot's son, age 44, was seated in the right cockpit seat. He held an FAA student pilot 
certificate, dated October 17, 2013. At that time, he reported 40 hours of total flight time and 
32 hours in the last 6 months. No pilot logbook was found, and no determination could be 
made of his total flight experience or experience in the accident airplane.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The six-seat, low-wing, retractable-gear airplane was manufactured in 1984. It was powered by 
a 300-hp Lycoming IO-540-K1G5D reciprocating engine, which drove a Hartzell three-bladed, 
constant-speed propeller.
According to the maintenance logbooks, the most recent annual inspection of the airframe and 
engine was completed on October 28, 2014. At that time, the airframe total time was 4,817.5 
hours. At the time of the accident, the airplane had accrued about 135 since the annual 
inspection.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
CEU, located about 14 nautical miles northeast of the accident site, was the closest official 
weather station. The 1454weather observation included wind from 040° at 10 knots, visibility 
10 statute miles, light rain, broken clouds at 1,800 ft, overcast ceiling at 2,300 ft, temperature 
17°C, dew point 14°C, and altimeter setting 29.81 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The main wreckage, which comprised the cabin, cockpit, engine, propeller, left wing, the 
inboard half of the right wing, and the separated right wing flap, was found inverted in a 
wooded area about 50 yards north of the shoreline of Lake Hartwell. Downward, vertical 
scraping damage was observed on adjacent trees. There was no fire.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation Evidence Response Team (ERT) assisted investigators in 
searching for missing sections of the airframe. Numerous pieces of wreckage were found in a 
wooded area south of the lake. The center of this debris field was about 2,000 ft south the main 
wreckage, and was about 1,400 ft long and about 500 ft wide. The pieces of wreckage found in 
this area included the right stabilator outboard section, three sections of the right aileron, right 
wing tip trailing edge, right wing fuel tank skin with fuel filler port and cap attached, sections 
of right wing and empennage skin, aft empennage skin with airplane data plate attached, and a 
tail cone fairing.
Page 5 of 11ERA16FA001
Following the land search, the ERT provided resources to search Lake Hartwell for parts of the 
wreckage still unaccounted for. On December 2, 2015, ERT personnel located the outboard half 
of the right wing and the left stabilator in the lake. The left stabilator was found in two separate 
sections. The vertical stabilizer and rudder were not located.
The wreckage was transported to a storage facility for additional examination.
The left wing was still attached to the fuselage. The left main landing gear was extended and 
locked. The upper wing skin exhibited upward compression buckling, while the bottom skin 
exhibited stretching with rebound buckling noted between the skin fasteners. The aileron and 
flap were in place and secure. The left flap was in the retracted position and the flap linkage 
was in place. The aileron pushrod was in place and connected to the bellcrank. The aileron 
control cable was connected to the bellcrank and continuous to the aileron control wheel chain. 
The aileron balance cable was secure to the left aileron bellcrank and continuous to the right 
wing. The wing tip was in place; however, the wing tip lighting components were separated.
The right wing was in two primary sections, inboard and outboard, along with several small 
pieces of wing skin, skin reinforcement channels, fuel cell pieces, and other small parts. The 
inboard section measured about 8.5 ft in length and was secured to the fuselage. The right 
main landing gear was extended and locked. Compression buckling of the upper wing skin was 
evident, and the main spar showed a permanent upward and aft deformation. All fracture 
surfaces exhibited overstress signatures; no evidence of fatigue or corrosion was observed. The 
separated outboard wing section was about 6.75 ft in length and was recovered from Lake 
Hartwell . The flap was separated and intact; it was located adjacent to the main wreckage. The 
right aileron was in three pieces and all pieces were found on land, south of the lake. The 
aileron bellcrank was connected to the outboard section and was bent in the inboard direction. 
The aileron control cable was connected to the bellcrank and was continuous for about 4.5 ft 
outboard of the fuselage, in the area of the wing separation. The remaining position of the 
control cable was continuous to the aileron control wheel chain. The cable separation displayed 
broomstraw signatures. The aileron balance cable was secured to the aileron bellcrank and 
continuous to about 3.7 ft from the fuselage. The balance cable separation displayed 
broomstraw signatures. The remaining portion of the balance cable was continuous to the left 
side of the aileron bellcrank.
The empennage assembly was separated from the aft fuselage. The right side of the stabilator 
was fragmented and the tip was separated. The left side of the stabilator was mostly intact; 
however, the tip assembly was separated. About two-thirds of the stabilator trim tab was 
recovered with the left side, and the remaining portion was recovered with the right side. The 
trim drum was attached to the trim tab and stabilator hinge assembly. The trim drum inner 
shaft was extended about 2 threads, consistent with a pitch trim setting of about 50% nose 
down. Both trim cables were pulled and displayed broomstraw separation signatures. The left 
side of the stabilator main spar structure displayed permanent rearward deformation and most 
of the skin was separated. Both stabilator hinge points were in place and free to move, although 
travel was restricted because of impact damage. The stabilator stop bolts were in place, secure, 
and displayed no damage.
The stabilator balance tube was attached to the spar and the balance weights were in place. The 
upper control cable was secure and continuous for about 14 inches. The remaining portion of 
Page 6 of 11ERA16FA001
the cable was continuous to the control column T-bar attach point. The cable was cut just 
forward of the rear seats to facilitate recovery. The lower stabilator control cable attach point 
was separated from the balance tube. The attach fitting and cable were secure and found in the 
aft pulley. The cable was continuous for about 18 inches, where it was separated and showed 
broomstraw signatures. The remaining portion of the cable was continuous and secure to the 
control column T-bar attach point. The cable was cut just forward of the aft seats to facilitate 
recovery. The bridle cable was secure in the attach clamps; however, it was separated between 
the clamps and the servo. A portion of the cable was wrapped around the pitch servo, which 
was free to rotate. The electric trim servo had a portion of the trim cable wrapped around the 
capstan, which was free to rotate.
The vertical stabilizer and rudder were separated and were not located. The right-side rudder 
control cable was separated just forward of the rudder bellcrank attach point and was 
continuous to the rudder pedals in the cockpit; however, it was cut immediately forward of the 
aft seats to facilitate recovery. The left-side rudder control cable attach point in the cockpit was 
broken from the rudder bar, and the control cable was not located. The left side rudder attach 
bracket was found under the floorboards of the forward fuselage section.
The forward fuselage was mostly intact but displayed substantial impact damage, mostly to the 
forward section. The engine displayed impact damage and was offset to the left side. The aft 
fuselage was cut immediately aft of the center rear facing seats to facilitate recovery. The 
empennage assembly was separated and fragmented.
The aft fuselage displayed compression impact damage on the right side immediately forward 
of the vertical stabilizer attach point in a rounded shape, consistent in size with the wing 
leading edge. This location was immediately forward of the horizontal stabilator. The aft 
fuselage also showed rotational compression wrinkling.
All seats were in place and secure. Some impact displacement of the lower seat frames and seat 
backs was noted. The left rear and left front seat belts were cut during extrication of the 
occupants. The right front and right rear seats belts were unbuckled. The center seats were not 
occupied. No shoulder belts were fastened to any of the lap belts.
The control column T-bar displayed impact damage, and the aileron chain was displaced from 
the sprockets. Both aileron control cables were secure to the chain. The left side was 
continuous to the aileron bellcrank and the right side was continuous to about 4.5 ft outboard 
of the fuselage. The aileron balance cable was continuous from the left side aileron bellcrank 
through the fuselage to about 3.7 ft from the fuselage. The aileron control cables were free to 
move and the balance bridle cable was still in place around the roll servo, which also was also 
free to move.
The flap jackscrew was fully extended and displayed 32 threads, consistent with a flap setting 
of 0° (fully retracted).
The fuel selector valve was positioned on the left tank and the linkage was secure. The fuel 
sump filter was free of contaminants. The auto gear extension mechanism was in place and 
connected.
Page 7 of 11ERA16FA001
The instrument panel incurred substantial impact damage. The gear selector switch was in the 
down position. The flap selector was in the up (retracted) position. The magneto switch was in 
the left position.
Examination of the engine revealed only superficial impact-related mechanical damage. The 
engine was removed from the airframe for further examination. The crankshaft was free to 
rotate, and rotation of the accessory drives was noted. Compression and suction were verified 
on all cylinders. Examination of the fuel servo filter, fuel manifold, and fuel pump revealed no 
anomalies. Rotation of the single-drive dual magneto verified spark to all leads.
The vacuum pump was removed; the drive was intact and the pump was free to rotate. The 
pump was disassembled and the vanes and rotor were intact.
The propeller was in place and secure to the engine. Soft, sandy soil was packed into the 
spinner as well as the front of the engine. Two of the three blades showed a gradual aft bend 
and the third blade showed a slight aft bend. There was leading edge surface erosion on the 
blades. The spinner displayed rotational compression, pushing the spinner into the leading 
edges of the propeller blades.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the request of the Oconee County, South Carolina 
Coroner. The cause of death was blunt force trauma with resultant multi-organ damage, and 
the manner of death was accident.
Severe atherosclerosis was observed in the vasculature of the brain and heart. There was near-
total occlusion of the right frontal and middle cerebral arteries. In the heart, the left anterior 
descending coronary had 80% occlusion, while both the right and circumflex coronary arteries 
showed 40% atheromatous occlusion. In addition, the myocardium demonstrated a pale area 
of fibrosis (scar) extending from the right sub endocardial ventricular septum to the left sub 
endocardial ventricular septum without acute hemorrhage. On microscopic evaluation, the 
myocardium demonstrated areas of sub endocardial fibrosis with entrapped, mummified, 
myocardial fibers and the coronary arteries showed severe atherosclerotic occlusion with near-
total obliteration of artery lumens.
The pilot reported hay fever, childhood asthma, orthopedic injuries, and kidney stones to the 
FAA. He reported that he was taking no medications at the time of his latest FAA medical 
exam, dated October 17, 2013.
Toxicology testing on specimens from the pilot was performed by the FAA's Bioaeronautical 
Research Sciences Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Testing identified chlorpheniramine 
(0.06 ug/ml) and pseudoephedrine in peripheral blood. Both chlorpheniramine and 
pseudoephedrine, as well as ephedrine, were detected in the urine.
Chlorpheniramine is a sedating antihistamine available over-the-counter in a variety of cold 
and allergy products. Therapeutic levels are considered between 0.01 and 0.04 ug/ml. This 
medication carries a warning, "May impair mental and/or physical ability required for the 
performance of potentially hazardous tasks (e.g., driving, operating heavy machinery)."
Page 8 of 11ERA16FA001
Pseudoephedrine is a sympathomimetic decongestant available without a prescription that is 
now maintained behind the counter and only available in small amounts because it is the base 
ingredient in home-brewing methamphetamine. Pseudoephedrine is not recommended for use 
by patients with high blood pressure or heart disease because of the potential for increased risk 
of stroke or heart attack. In this case, the pseudoephedrine level was not quantified; an email 
interaction with the FAA toxicologist who reviewed the data indicated the blood level was 
below the therapeutic limit of 0.400 ug/ml.
In some people, ephedrine is a metabolite of pseudoephedrine; it is also a drug used to curb 
appetite and treat obesity and may treat symptoms of asthma. Capsules may be available over-
the-counter. Ephedrine may also increase blood pressure.
The pilot's wife was interviewed by the NTSB investigator-in-charge following the accident. She 
was unaware of any heart issues with her husband and was not aware that he had previously 
experienced a heart attack or an event similar to a heart attack. She was certain that he was not 
taking any medications and he avoided all medications when flying, including aspirin.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
GPS
A Garmin GPSmap 496 battery-powered, portable GPS receiver with negligible damage was 
found in the cockpit. The unit was forwarded to the NTSB Vehicle Recorder Laboratory for 
examination. Power was applied to the device and the track log data was successfully 
downloaded using the manufacturer's procedures. The unit stored 28 sessions from March 28, 
2015 through the entire accident flight on October 2, 2015.
History of Flight
Approach-IFR initial 
approach
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Aircraft structural failure (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 9 of 11ERA16FA001
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
71, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/17/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/28/2015
Flight Time:
1736 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1677 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
44, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/17/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
40 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N782TM
Model/Series:
PA32R 301
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1984
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32R-8513001
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/28/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
135 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4953 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-K1J5D
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 10 of 11ERA16FA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CEU, 890 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
12 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1854 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
250°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 1800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Unknown
Wind Direction:
40°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Unknown
Altimeter Setting:
29.81 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Rain
Departure Point: 
Warsaw, IN (ASW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Clemson, SC (CEU)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1200 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
OCONEE COUNTY RGNL (CEU)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
890 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
07
IFR Approach:
RNAV
Runway Length/Width:
5000 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
34.598333, -83.162500 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Ralph E Hicks
Adopted Date:
07/05/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Bruce Vestal; FAA/FSDO; Columbia, SC
Michael McClure; Piper Aircraft; Vero Beach, FL
Publish Date:
07/05/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92103
Page 11 of 11ERA16FA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
