National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Navajo Dam, NM
Accident Number: FTW02LA170
Date & Time: 06/01/2002, 1940 MDT
Registration: N364SR
Aircraft: Cessna 172E
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During a touch and go landing, the pilot initiated a slight right turn to avoid striking a bird, and at which time, a wind gust pushed the airplane to the right.
The pilot reduced engine power, aborted the takeoff, and the airplane veered off the right side of the runway.
Subsequently, the right wing struck a tree, the airplane pivoted around the tree, and then the left wing contacted the ground.
The pilot stated the wind was from the west-southwest and gusting.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure maintain directional control of the airplane during a touch and go landing which resulted in a collision with trees.
A contributing factor was the gusting wind conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On June 1, 2002, approximately 1940 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 172E single-engine airplane, N364SR, was substantially damaged after it struck a tree while executing touch and go landings at the Navajo Dam Airport, Navajo State Park, New Mexico.
The student pilot, sole occupant and registered owner of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 solo instructional flight.
The flight departed the Four Corners Regional Airport, Farmington, New Mexico, at 1838.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot stated that he was performing touch and go landings to runway 24.
After the second touch and go landing, the pilot increased engine power to depart.
The pilot initiated a slight right turn to avoid striking a bird, and at that time, a wind gust pushed the airplane to the right.
The pilot reduced engine power, aborted the takeoff, and the airplane veered off the right side of the runway.
Subsequently, the right wing struck a tree, the airplane pivoted around the tree, and then the left wing contacted the ground.
The outboard 3 feet section of the left wing was structurally damaged.
The pilot stated the wind was from the west-southwest and gusting.
Student Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
