National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RUTLAND, VT
Accident Number: IAD02LA055
Date & Time: 06/01/2002, 1300 EDT
Registration: N97996
Aircraft: Cessna 182Q
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The winds were reported as being from the west, about 20 knots.
The pilot elected to land on runway 01 instead of runway 31 because it was longer.
She aborted the first landing attempt because she was too high.
On the second landing attempt, the airplane floated down the runway, and the pilot had difficulty getting it on the ground.
Once on the ground, she did not have sufficient runway remaining to abort the landing successfully.
She pumped the brakes as hard as she could, but could not stop the airplane from going off the end of the 5,000-foot- long, 100-foot- wide asphalt runway.
The airplane traveled down a steep embankment, and flipped over.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to attain the proper touchdown point.
A factor was the crosswind Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DROP-OFF/DESCENDING EMBANKMENT ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Factual Information On June 1, 2002, at 1300 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 182Q, N97996, was substantially damaged during a landing at Rutland State Airport (RUT), Rutland, Vermont.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that originated at Burlington International Airport (BTV), Burlington, Vermont, at 1200.
No flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that she was originally headed for North Hampton, Massachusetts.
While en route, she encountered moderate turbulence and haze, and elected to land at Rutland Airport.
As she approached Rutland, she obtained wind information on three different occasions.
Winds at the airport were reported as being from 270 to 280 degrees, about 20 knots.
The pilot elected to land on runway 01 instead of runway 31 because it was longer, and there were no trees on the end.
She aborted the first landing attempt, because she was too high.
On the second landing attempt, the pilot made a crosswind landing.
Once on the ground, she began pumping the brakes, but couldn't stop the airplane from going off the end of the runway.
The airplane traveled down a steep embankment and flipped over.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector interviewed the pilot over the telephone.
According to the inspector, the pilot said that she floated down the runway, and had difficulty getting the airplane on the ground.
Once on the ground, she did not have enough distance to abort the landing safely.
An FAA inspector performed an examination of the airplane on June 3, 2002.
According to the inspector, the airplane sustained damage to both wings, the firewall was wrinkled, both wing struts were bent, and both propeller blades were damaged.
The pilot reported a total of 165 flight hours, of which, 47 hours were in make and model.
The pilot also reported that there were no mechanical deficiencies.
Runway 01 was a 5,000-foot-long by 100-foot-wide asphalt runway.
Weather at Rutland Airport, at 1315, included winds from 260 degrees at 10 knots gusting to 23 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, and scattered clouds at 8,000 feet.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 42, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
