National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Beaver, UT
Accident Number: DEN02LA049
Date & Time: 06/01/2002, 1420 MDT
Registration: N171M
Aircraft: Piper PA-28R-201
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The stall warning was activating 15 knots higher than it was supposed to while the airplane was in a climb.
The pilot advised ARTCC that he was experiencing wind shear.
He was told there was no reported wind shear in the area and to maintain 13,000 feet.
The pilot was unable to maintain 13,000 feet, and descended to 12,000 feet, then to the minimum en route altitude of 11,000 feet.
Unable to maintain this altitude, the pilot descended to 10,500 feet, cancelled his IFR flight plan, and descended further to 9,500 feet, at which point radio communications with ARTCC were lost.
The airplane was yawing and "the ball (turn coordinator) was in the right side."
The pilot held "full right aileron deflection to keep the [air]plane from turning."
He attempted to make a precautionary landing at an airport.
A left crosswind aided in keeping the airplane on track, but he was "unable to use the rudder to straighten out the [air]plane to land."
At 100 feet above the ground, the pilot attempted a go-around.
With flaps up, landing gear down, and full power applied, the airplane would not climb but descended slowly instead.
The pilot made a forced landing in an open field 1 mile south of the airport.
In the ensuing landing, both wings were damaged, the aft portion of the fuselage was wrinkled, and the main gear was torn off.
An inspection of the aircraft after the accident disclosed no anomalies with the flight control system or the engine.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain on which to make a forced landing.
Contributing factors were mountain waves (wind shear) and crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - MOUNTAIN WAVE 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - WINDSHEAR ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 4.
GO-AROUND - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 6.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On June 1, 2002, approximately 1420 mountain daylight time, a Piper PA-28R-201, N171M, was substantially damaged when it struck terrain during a precautionary landing at Beaver, Utah.
The private pilot received no injuries, but his passenger received minor injuries.
Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an IFR flight plan had been filed for the cross- country flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated in San Diego, California, at 0930 Pacific daylight time, and was en route to Logan, Utah.
In an unsigned statement written in third person and submitted along with the accident report, the writer said the stall warning was activating 15 knots higher than it was supposed to while the airplane was in a climb.
The pilot advised Los Angeles Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) that he was experiencing wind shear.
ARTCC said there was no reported wind shear in the area and to maintain 13,000 feet.
The pilot was unable to maintain 13,000 feet, and descended to 12,000 feet, then to the minimum en route altitude of 11,000 feet.
Unable to maintain this altitude, the pilot descended to 10,500 feet, cancelled his IFR flight plan, and descended further to 9,500 feet, at which point radio communications with ARTCC were lost.
A United Air Lines flight relayed communications between N171M and ARTCC.
The writer said the airplane was yawing and "the ball (turn coordinator) was in the right side."
The pilot held "full right aileron deflection to keep the [air]plane from turning."
He attempted to make a precautionary landing on runway 13 at Beaver Municipal Airport.
A left crosswind aided in keeping the airplane on track, but the pilot was "unable to use the rudder to straighten out the [air]plane to land."
At 100 feet above the ground, the pilot attempted a go-around.
With flaps up, landing gear down, and full power applied, the airplane would not climb but descended slowly instead.
The pilot made a forced landing in an open field 1 mile south of the airport.
In the ensuing landing, both wings were damaged, the aft portion of the fuselage was wrinkled, and the main gear was torn off.
A statement given to the Beaver County Sheriff's Office was similar to the one submitted with the accident report.
An inspection of the aircraft after the accident disclosed no anomalies with the flight control system or the engine.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
Calm winds were recorded at Milford, Utah, located 21 miles west-northwest of the accident site, 26 minutes before the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 24, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
