Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Toledo, OH
Accident Number:
CEN11LA455
Date & Time:
07/01/2011, 1830 EDT 
Registration:
N433GC
Aircraft:
Couvillion S-17
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he found no discrepancies during the preflight inspection and that the 
engine run-up and before-takeoff checks were normal. Immediately after takeoff, the airplane 
entered an uncommanded right turn. The pilot was unable to keep the airplane from turning to 
the right as it climbed to about 200 to 300 feet above the ground. He pulled the throttle to idle 
and landed the airplane in a field. The touchdown was hard, and the airplane impacted a rock 
pile during the landing roll. Postaccident examination revealed that the right rudder pedal was 
sheared off and that the right rudder cable had slack in it and was twisted around the right 
rudder horn attachment fitting. If this twist had existing during the flight, it could have caused 
the uncommanded right turn; however, it is likely that the cable twisted around the rudder 
horn during the impact when the right rudder pedal separated and allowed the cable to go 
slack. Additionally, when the cable was straightened, it was noted to be the proper length, and 
rudder cable continuity was confirmed. Flight control cable continuity was also confirmed from 
the flight controls to the ailerons and the elevator. No mechanical discrepancy was noted that 
would have resulted in the uncontrolled right turn.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of control during initial climb for undetermined reasons, which resulted in a hard 
landing.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Attain/maintain not possible (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN11LA455
Factual Information
On July 1, 2011, about 1830 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Couvillion S-
17, N433GC, sustained substantial damage when it impacted the terrain following a loss of 
control during takeoff from runway 04 at the Toledo Executive Airport (TDZ), Toledo, Ohio. 
The private pilot was not injured. The airplane was registered and operated by the pilot as a 
personal flight under the provisions of the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane was departing on 
a local flight.
The pilot reported that it was his first flight in the airplane since he had purchased it from the 
previous owner. He reported that he inspected the flight controls and the cable attachment 
points during the preflight inspection and they appeared normal. The engine run-up and 
before takeoff checks were normal. 
He reported that he applied the throttle slowly to full power during takeoff. The airplane 
tracked straight on the runway until after liftoff. He reported that immediately after liftoff, the 
airplane entered into a sweeping right turn. The pilot was unable to keep the airplane from 
turning to the right as it climbed to about 200 Œ 300 feet above the ground. The airplane had 
turned about 180 degrees when he pulled the throttle to idle and attempted to land in a field. 
The airplane continued to turn as it overflew a fence, landed hard, and impacted a rock pile 
during the landing roll.  
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector examined the airplane and reported that it had 
sustained substantial damage. The airframe was twisted and the left wing bent. The right main 
landing gear was sheared off, and the right horizontal stabilizer was torn on the bottom. The 
right rudder pedal was sheared off. The right rudder cable was found slack and the cable 
attachment was found twisted around the right rudder horn attachment fitting. When the cable 
was straightened, it was the proper length and it confirmed rudder cable continuity. Flight 
control cable continuity was confirmed from the flight controls to their respective attach points 
on the flight control surfaces. No mechanical discrepancy was noted that could explain the 
reason for the uncontrolled right turn. The airplane had a total of 4.1 hours of flight time at the 
time of the accident.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with single-engine and multi-engine airplane land 
ratings and a single-engine seaplane rating. He held a third class medical certificate. He 
reported that he had a total of 1,353 flight hours, but with no flight time in the make and model 
of the accident airplane. He had built and flown a two-seat experimental amateur-built 
airplane that was similar to the accident airplane, and had logged about 150 Œ 200 hours of 
flight time in it.   
The original builder of the airplane reported that three pilots had flown the airplane prior to 
him selling it to a second owner. He reported that the three pilots did not indicate any 
discrepancies with the airplane. 
At 1953, the surface weather observation at TDZ was: wind 090 degrees at 6 knots; visibility 10 
miles; sky clear; temperature 29 degrees Celsius; dew point 17 degrees Celsius; altimeter 30.00 
inches of mercury.
Page 3 of 5CEN11LA455
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Hard landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/24/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/18/2010
Flight Time:
1353 hours (Total, all aircraft), 0 hours (Total, this make and model), 1112 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Couvillion
Registration:
N433GC
Model/Series:
S-17 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
0300011
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4.1 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ROTAX
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
503
Registered Owner:
Joseph Deaton
Rated Power:
Operator:
Joseph Deaton
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN11LA455
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TDZ, 620 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1953 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
90°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Toledo, OH (TDZ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Toledo, OH (TDZ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1830 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Toledo Executive Airport (TDZ)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
620 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
04
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3799 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.564722, -83.482222 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
James P Silliman
Adopted Date:
05/03/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Kevin Abbuhl; FAA Cleveland FSDO; Cleveland, OH
Publish Date:
05/03/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=81014
Page 5 of 5CEN11LA455
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
