Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Battle Creek, MI
Accident Number:
CEN11LA459
Date & Time:
07/02/2011, 2040 EDT 
Registration:
N330JK
Aircraft:
WINGTIP TO WINGTIP, LLC PANZL 
S-330
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Part(s) separation from AC
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Air Race/Show
Analysis 
The entire left aileron separated from the airplane as the pilot was performing an aerobatic 
aileron-roll maneuver during an airshow aerobatic demonstration flight. The pilot was able to 
recover into level flight and make an uneventful landing. The pilot stated that his preflight 
inspection before the accident flight did not reveal any mechanical issues with the airplane, 
including loose jam nuts or any other aileron anomalies. However, the pilot reported that his 
aviation mechanic had to retighten the jam nut for the center aileron hinge rod-end after it had 
been found loose on several occasions before the accident flight.
A postaccident examination revealed that the center aileron hinge had failed in the shank 
region of the rod end due to reverse bending fatigue. No material issues were identified with 
the center aileron rod end, which met the part specifications. A design analysis confirmed that 
the aileron rod ends were adequate for the limit loads on the structure but were inadequate for 
fatigue tolerance. The stress levels in the rod end shank were at or above the endurance limit 
for the specified rod end material, regardless of a loose or tight jam nut. However, a loose jam 
nut further increased the stress in the rod end about 28 percent and would have reduced the 
cycles to a fatigue failure. Following the accident, the airplane manufacturer redesigned the 
aileron bracket assemblies by increasing the diameter of the rod end shank and reducing the 
moment arm between the bearing and the aileron bracket. The redesign yielded a total stress 
reduction of about 83 percent in the rod end, which was significantly below the endurance 
limit for the specified material.
 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The inadequate aileron hinge design, which resulted in the in-flight separation of the left 
Page 2 of 7CEN11LA459
aileron following a fatigue failure of the center hinge rod-end.
Findings
Aircraft
Aileron control system - Design (Cause)
Aileron control system - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Aileron control system - Failure (Cause)
Page 3 of 7CEN11LA459
Factual Information
On July 2, 2011, at 2040 eastern daylight time, a Wingtip to Wingtip, LLC model Panzl S-330 
airplane, N330JK, was substantially damaged when the entire left aileron separated from the 
airplane during an aerobatic flight over W K Kellogg Airport (BTL), Battle Creek, Michigan. 
The pilot, who was not injured, was able to land the airplane without further issue. The 
experimental airplane was registered to and operated by John Klatt Airshows, Inc., under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, without a flight plan. Day visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local airshow demonstration flight that departed at 
2035.
 
The pilot reported that the left aileron departed the airplane as he was performing an aerobatic 
aileron-roll maneuver about 50 feet above the ground at 160 miles per hour with a 30-degree 
nose-up attitude. The pilot was able to recover into level flight and make an uneventful landing. 
The pilot reported that his aviation mechanic had to retighten the jam nut for the center 
aileron hinge rod-end after it had been found loose on several occasions before the accident 
flight. The pilot stated that his preflight inspection before the accident flight did not reveal any 
mechanical issues with the airplane, including loose jam nuts or any other aileron anomalies.
 
The left aileron was recovered in three major sections and was sent to the NTSB Materials 
Laboratory for additional examination. The examination revealed that the center aileron hinge 
had failed in the shank region of the rod end due to reverse bending fatigue that covered about 
90-percent of the fracture face. The remaining 10-percent of the fracture face exhibited 
overstress signatures. The fatigue zones were located on the upper and lower portions of the 
fracture face as installed, indicating that the predominant loading was due to the actuation of 
the aileron. No material issues were identified with the center aileron rod end, which met the 
specification for a FAFNIR USA part number RE3ML6-2N. The rod end was constructed of 
AISI 8620 steel that had a specified tensile strength of 90 ksi. The remaining inboard and 
outboard aileron hinges exhibited fracture features consistent with overstress. The 
examination did not reveal any material anomalies with the inboard or outboard hinge 
assemblies.
 
The center rod end was installed in a 2024-T3 aluminum bracket that was attached to the wing 
rear spar. The rod end was threaded into the end of the bracket utilizing Loctite on the threads 
and a jam nut that was seated against the bracket to prevent the rod end from backing out. The 
accident airplane reportedly had experienced a loose jam nut on several flights before the 
accident. The rod end failed in the area of the shank adjacent to the aft edge of the bracket 
beneath the area where the jam nut normally was secured. A Finite Element Analysis (FEA) 
was performed on the design with a loose jam nut and a tight jam nut. The analysis indicated a 
maximum tensile stress of about 60 ksi at the upper surface of the shank for the loose jam nut 
Page 4 of 7CEN11LA459
condition and about 47.5 ksi for the tightened jam nut. The fore-aft location of the maximum 
stress was at the shank-to-bracket interface for the loose jam nut condition and at the shank to 
jam nut interface for the tight jam nut condition.
 
Considering a typical airplane operating weight of 1,600 pounds and the design load factor of 
10 G, the total aileron load was about 681 pounds due primarily to the bending stress produced 
by the vertical load at the bearing. The calculated load on the center hinge was about 286 
pounds. The maximum bending stress was about 51.0 ksi and 65.7 ksi for the tight jam nut and 
loose jam nut conditions, respectively. The maximum bending stress occurred at the upper 
surface of the shank for the aileron deflected full trailing edge up. The total tensile stress at the 
upper edge of the shank was 52.4 ksi and 67.1 ksi for the tight jam nut and loose jam nut 
conditions, respectively. The loose jam nut condition yielded a 28-percent increase in the 
tensile stress versus the tight jam nut condition.
 
For steel components with a tensile strength less than 160 ksi, the endurance limit is expected 
to be about 50-percent of the tensile strength for smooth polished specimens. Based on the 
load estimates, the stress in the rod end was at or above the corresponding endurance limit.
 
Following the accident, the airplane manufacturer redesigned the aileron bracket assemblies 
by increasing the diameter of the rod end shank and reducing the moment arm between the 
bearing and the aileron bracket. The redesign yielded a total stress reduction of about 83-
percent in the rod end, which was significantly below the endurance limit for the specified 
material.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-aerobatics
Part(s) separation from AC (Defining event)
Page 5 of 7CEN11LA459
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
44
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/03/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/08/2009
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 13000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 180 hours (Total, this make and model), 10000 
hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 30 
days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
WINGTIP TO WINGTIP, LLC
Registration:
N330JK
Model/Series:
PANZL S-330 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
009
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/20/2011, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
180 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
AEIO-540-EXP
Registered Owner:
John Klatt Airshows, Inc.
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
John Klatt Airshows, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7CEN11LA459
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BTL, 952 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2053 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
8 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 3500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.98 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Battle Creek, MI (BTL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Battle Creek, MI (BTL)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
2035 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
W K Kellogg Airport (BTL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
952 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
23R
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
10004 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
42.306389, -85.250000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
12/05/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Ralph J Payne; Federal Aviation Administration, Grand Rapids FSDO; Grand Rapids, MI
Publish Date:
12/05/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=81032
Page 7 of 7CEN11LA459
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
