Page 1 of 15
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bessemer, AL
Accident Number:
MIA02FA037
Date & Time:
12/01/2001, 0143 CST 
Registration:
N499BA
Aircraft:
Cessna 208B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The flight departed from Little Rock, Arkansas, about 2356 cst, and approximately 49 minutes 
after takeoff, the FAA approved un-augmented Automated Weather Observing System (AWOS-
3) installed at the destination airport began reporting the visibility as 1/4 statute mile; the 
visibility continued to be reported as that value for several hours after the accident.  Title 14 
CFR Part 135.225 indicates no pilot may begin an instrument approach procedure to an airport 
with an approved  weather reporting facility unless the latest weather report issued by that 
weather reporting facility indicates that weather conditions are at or above the authorized IFR 
landing minimums for that airport.  The listed minimums for the ILS approach to runway 05 
was in part 3/4 mile visibility.  A METAR taken at the destination airport approximately 2 
minutes after the accident indicated overcast clouds existed at 100 feet, the temperature and 
dew point were 4 and 2 degrees Celsius, respectively, and the altimeter setting was 30.16 inHg.  
No precipitation was present across Arkansas, Mississippi, or Alabama, and no radar echoes 
were noted along the accident airplane's route of flight.  The freezing level near the departure 
and destination airports at the nominal time of 0600 (4 hours 17 minutes after the accident) 
was 12000 and 14,500 feet mean sea level, respectively.  A witness at the airport reported the 
fog was the thickest he had seen since working at the airport for the previous year.  The flight 
was cleared for an ILS approach to runway 05, and the pilot was advised frequency change was 
approved.  The witness waiting at the airport reported hearing a sound he associated with a 
shotgun report.  Radar data indicated that between 0138:47, and 0142:11, the airplane was 
flying on a northeasterly heading and descended from 2,400 feet msl, to 900 feet msl.  At 
0142:11, the airplane was located .43 nautical mile from the approach end of runway 05.  The 
next recorded radar target 24 seconds later indicated 1,000 feet msl, and was .20 nautical mile 
from the approach end of runway 05.  The touchdown zone elevation for runway 05 is 700 feet 
msl.  The airplane crashed in a wooded area located approximately 342 degrees and .37 
nautical mile from the approach end of runway 05; the wreckage was located approximately 4 
hours after the accident.  Examination of trees revealed evidence the airplane was banked to 
the left approximately 24 degrees, and the descent angle from the trees to the ground was 
calculated to be approximately 22 degrees.  All components necessary to sustain flight were 
either attached to the airplane or in close proximity to the main wreckage.  There was no 
evidence of post crash fire and a strong odor of fuel was noted at the scene upon NTSB arrival.  
Page 2 of 15MIA02FA037
A 8-inch diameter pine tree located near the initial ground impact sight exhibited black paint 
transfer and a smooth cut surface that measured approximately 46 inches in length.  The 
bottom portion of the cut was located 4 feet above ground level.  The flap actuator was found 
nearly retracted; examination of the components of the flap system revealed no evidence of 
preimpact failure or malfunction.  Examination of the flight control system for roll, pitch, and 
yaw revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.  Examination of the engine and 
engine components with TSB of Canada oversight revealed no evidence of preimpact failure of 
the engine or engine components.  Examination of the propeller with FAA oversight revealed 
no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.  Examination of the components of the 
autopilot system, selected avionics and flight instruments from the airplane with FAA oversight 
revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.  The pilot's attitude indicator had 
been replaced on October 14, 2001, and according to FAA personnel, the mechanic and facility 
that performed the installation did not have the necessary equipment to perform the 
operational checks required to return the airplane to service.  The FAA flight checked the ILS 
approach to runway 05 two times after the accident and reported no discrepancies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The poor in-flight planning by the pilot-in-command for his initiation of the ILS approach to 
runway 05 with weather conditions below minimums for the approach contrary to the federal 
aviation regulations, and the failure of the pilot to maintain control of the airplane during a 
missed approach resulting in the in-flight collision with trees then terrain.
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: MISSED APPROACH (IFR)
Findings
1. WEATHER CONDITION - FOG
2. (C) WEATHER CONDITION - BELOW APPROACH/LANDING MINIMUMS
3. (C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - POOR - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) IFR PROCEDURE - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 15MIA02FA037
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 1, 2001, about 0143 central standard time, a Cessna 208B, N499BA, registered 
to and operated by Air Carriers, Inc., using call sign "Fast Check 600", collided with trees then 
terrain during an instrument landing system (ILS) approach to runway 05, at Bessemer 
Airport, Bessemer, Alabama.  Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed at the 
time and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 135, on-
demand, non-scheduled, domestic, cargo flight from Little Rock, Arkansas, to the Bessemer 
Airport, Bessemer, Alabama.  The airplane was destroyed and the commercial-rated pilot and a 
pilot-rated passenger (another company pilot) were fatally injured.  The flight originated 
approximately 2356 from the Adams Field Airport, Little Rock, Arkansas.
Shortly after takeoff, the flight was radar identified and cleared to fly direct to the Bessemer 
Airport.  At 0009, air traffic control (ATC) communications were transferred from the Little 
Rock Air Traffic Control Tower to the Memphis Air Route Traffic Control Center (Memphis 
ARTCC).  The flight remained in contact with that facility from 0009 to 0122; radar data 
indicates that between 0011 and 0122, the flight was conducted at 9,000 feet mean sea level 
(msl).  At 0055, the R13 sector controller provided the pilot the Birmingham altimeter setting 
of 30.17 inHg.  At 0122, ATC communications were transferred to Birmingham Air Traffic 
Control Tower (KBHM ATCT).
According to a transcription of communications between the pilot of Fast Check 600 and the 
Birmingham ATCT, at 0122:51, the pilot contacted the facility and advised the controller that 
the flight was at 9,000 feet msl.  The controller acknowledged the contact and advised the pilot 
"expect lower in one zero miles and visual approach Bessemer airport."  The pilot responded 
with, "600."  At 0126:41, the controller cleared the flight to descend and maintain 4,000 feet 
msl, which was acknowledged.  At 0126:57, the pilot requested radar vectors for the instrument 
landing system approach, to which the controller responded initially roger, followed by, 
"maintain three thousand till brookwood cleared ILS runway five approach to Bessemer."  The 
pilot acknowledged the descent clearance and at 0137:44, he advised the controller that the 
flight was "about to intercept", to which the controller replied, "fast check six hundred roger 
change to advisory frequency is approved report your cancellation in the air this frequency or 
on the ground clearance delivery frequency."  The pilot acknowledged the transmission from 
the controller with, "fast check six hundred."  There were no further recorded radio 
transmissions from the accident pilot, and there was no record that the Birmingham ATCT 
controller provided the pilot with an altimeter setting.
A witness who was on the airport waiting for the flight to arrive reported hearing the engine 
sound at a distance, and then heard a sharp sound he associated with a shotgun report north of 
runway 5.  The witness reported heavy fog existed at the airport at the time of the accident.
Review of radar data from Atlanta Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) associated with 
the accident airplane revealed that between 0138:47, and 0142:11, the airplane was flying on a 
northeasterly heading and descended from 2,400 feet msl, to 900 feet msl.  At 0142:11, the 
airplane was located at 33 degrees 18 minutes 12 seconds North latitude, and 086 degrees 56 
minutes 22 seconds West longitude, or approximately 225 degrees and .43 nautical mile from 
the approach end of runway 05.  The next recorded radar target 24 seconds later at 0142:35, 
was indicating 1,000 feet msl, and was located at 33 degrees 18 minutes 41 seconds North 
Page 4 of 15MIA02FA037
latitude, and 086 degrees 55 minutes 56 seconds West longitude, or 005 degrees and .20 
nautical mile from the approach end of runway 05.  The touchdown zone elevation for runway 
05 is 700 feet msl.
A search for the airplane was conducted; the wreckage was located approximately 4 hours after 
the accident.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot-in-command seated in the left front seat was the holder of a commercial pilot 
certificate, with airplane single and multi-engine land, and instrument airplane ratings.  He 
was issued a second-class medical certificate on August 30, 2001, with the limitation, "Holder 
shall wear lenses that correct for distant vision and possess glasses that correct for near vision 
while exercising the privileges of his airman certificate."
Air Carriers, Inc., and BancServ Air, Inc., are owned by the same individual.  Air Carriers, Inc., 
and BancServ Air, Inc., were assigned Air Carrier certificate number DKBA109S and 
VKSA957T, respectively.  Air Carriers, Inc., and BancServ Air, Inc., were authorized by the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to conduct on-demand cargo only operations, and on-
demand operations, respectively, in accordance with the certificates issued under Title 14 CFR 
Part 119.
Review of the pilot-in-command's Air Carriers, Inc., training file revealed he completed his 
initial new hire basic indoctrination training, and general emergency training in Cessna 206 
and 210 airplanes on October 11, 2000.  He completed initial hazardous materials training on 
October 12, 2000, and completed the initial new-hire equipment ground training for Cessna 
210 airplanes on October 13, 2000.  Initial new-hire equipment flight training that consisted of 
3.1 hours in an undesignated type airplane was completed on October 14, 2000.  He was 
assigned as pilot-in-command in Cessna 206 and 210 airplanes on October 16, 2000; he was 
not assigned as pilot-in-command on Cessna 208 airplanes.  His last airman 
competency/proficiency check flight in accordance with 14 CFR Part 135.293, and 297 occurred 
on November 17, 2001, which consisted of a .8  hour flight in a Cessna 210 airplane.  The result 
of the flight check was listed as "approved."
The pilot-in-command's training file with BancServ Air, Inc., indicates he received initial flight 
and ground training in Cessna 208 airplanes on February 27, 2001.  An airman 
competency/proficiency check flight form dated February 28, 2001, indicates he passed the 
flight check that was flown in the accident airplane.  He was assigned that same day as pilot-in-
command on Cessna 208 airplanes for BancServ Air, Inc.
The pilot-rated passenger seated in the right front seat was the holder of a commercial pilot 
certificate, with ratings airplane single and multi-engine land, and instrument airplane.  He 
was also the holder of a flight instructor certificate with ratings airplane single engine, multi-
engine, instrument airplane, that was issued on January 16, 2001.  He was issued a first class 
medical certificate with no limitations on June 21, 2001.  He completed his ground and flight 
training with Air Carriers, Inc., on July 23, 2001, and was assigned to a fly as pilot-in-
command Cessna 206 and 210 airplanes.  He had not been trained in the Cessna 208 airplane.  
His last airman competency/proficiency check flight in accordance with 14 CFR Part 135.293, 
297, and 299 occurred on July 21, 2001, which consisted of a 1.4 hours flight in a Cessna 210 
airplane.  The result of the flight check was listed as "approved."
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Page 5 of 15MIA02FA037
The airplane was a Cessna 208B, serial number 208B0689, manufactured in 1998.  It was 
equipped with a 675 shaft horsepower Pratt & Whitney PT6A-114A engine, and a McCauley 
3GFR34C703/106GA-0 propeller.  The airplane was also equipped with a Shadin Key Data 
Recorder, a Bendix/King KFC-150 autopilot/flight director system, and an altitude preselector.  
BancServ Air, Inc., maintained the airplane in accordance with a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) Approved Aircraft Inspection Program (AAIP).  The last recorded 
altimeter, transponder, and static system checks were performed on May 10, 2000, by 
Southern Avionics.
The engine was last overhauled on April 3, 2001, and installed in the airplane on May 12, 2001, 
at an airframe total time of 3,891.8 hours and 3,214 total landings.  The airplane had 
accumulated approximately 976 hours at the time of the accident since the overhauled engine 
was installed.  The last recorded inspection (AAIP #12) occurred on November 19, 2001, at an 
airplane total time of 4,783.2 hours, and 4,004 total aircraft landings.  The airplane had 
accumulated approximately 84 hours since the inspection at the time of the accident.
Review of the "Mechanical Irregularity Log" sheets recovered from the wreckage that begin 
with an entry dated April 13, 1999, and end with an entry dated July 16, 2001, revealed no 
logged discrepancies pertaining to the flight instruments.  A BancServ Air, Inc., "Service Order" 
document dated October 14, 2001, has a discrepancy that states, "Pilots attitude indicator 
tumbles."  On October 14, 2001, the pilot's Flight command indicator was replaced with an 
overhauled unit.  The comments section in the maintenance record indicates, "ops ck good", 
and was signed off by an airframe and powerplant mechanic.  According to FAA personnel, the 
mechanic and facility that performed the installation did not have the necessary equipment to 
perform the operational checks required to return the airplane to service.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The pilot phoned the Anniston, Alabama, Automated Flight Service Station at 1558 hours on 
November 30, 2001, and filed three flight plans that included the accident flight.  While in 
contact with that facility, the briefing specialist (specialist) asked the pilot if he needed a 
weather briefing to which he responded, "think I got it all."  The pilot was advised the only 
airmet for the routes of flight was for moderate turbulence below 20,000 feet.  The specialist 
reported looking at radar and advised the pilot, "I don't see any precipitation that should affect 
you, nothing–."  He advised the specialist that he had NOTAM information.
A FAA approved un-augmented Automated Weather Observing System (AWOS-3) is installed 
at the accident airport.  Review of the weather reports for the accident airport taken in 5-
minute intervals revealed that at 2350 (approximately 6 minutes before takeoff), the vertical 
visibility was 500 feet overcast, and the visibility was ½ mile.  At 2355, (approximately 1 
minute before takeoff), the visibility was 1 mile with clear skies reported.  The visibility 
increased to a maximum of 7 statute miles, which occurred at 0005 (approximately 9 minutes 
after takeoff), then began decreasing to 1/4 statute mile, which occurred at 0045 
(approximately 49 minutes after takeoff).  The recorded visibility remained at 1/4 statute mile 
or less from 0045 until several hours after the accident.  A METAR observation taken at 0145 
(approximately 2 minutes after the accident), indicates the wind was from 280 degrees at 0 
knots, the visibility was 1/4 mile (no sensor was installed to determine weather phenomena); 
overcast clouds existed at 100 feet.  The temperature and dew point were 4 and 2 degrees 
Celsius, respectively, and the altimeter setting was 30.16 inHg.
Page 6 of 15MIA02FA037
Review of 14 CFR Part 135.225, titled "Takeoff, approach and landing minimums" revealed no 
pilot may begin an instrument approach procedure to an airport unless it has a weather 
reporting facility operated by the U.S. National Weather Service, a source approved by the U.S. 
National Weather Service, or a source approved by the Administrator, and, "The latest weather 
report issued by that weather reporting facility indicates that weather conditions are at or 
above the authorized IFR landing minimums for that airport."
NTSB personnel located in Washington, D.C., prepared a meteorological factual report that 
indicates at 0115, no precipitation was present across Arkansas, Mississippi, or Alabama, and 
no radar echoes were noted along the accident airplane's route of flight.  Upper air stations 
near the departure and destination airports indicate that at the nominal time of 0600 (4 hours 
17 minutes after the accident), the freezing level was at 12000 and 14,500 feet mean sea level, 
respectively.
A witness who was located on the airport awaiting the arrival of the accident airplane reported 
that about the time of the accident, the fog was the thickest he had seen since working at the 
airport for the previous year.
Another company pilot on a flight from St. Petersburg, Florida, to Birmingham, Alabama, who 
landed at Birmingham approximately 2 minutes before the accident, reported hearing the 
accident flight being vectored on the approach.  Due to the fact that he was scheduled to fly into 
the accident airport after his flight landed at Birmingham, he checked the AWOS at the 
accident airport two times.  The first time when his flight was approximately 65 miles from his 
destination, and again when his flight was 30 miles from it.  The visibility was reported to be 
less than 1/4 mile with 100-foot indefinite ceiling when he checked it the first time, and 1/4 
mile visibility with again 100-foot indefinite ceiling when he checked it the second time.  He 
executed a visual approach to runway 36 at Birmingham, and while in-bound there, he 
observed "widespread dense fog", and couldn't see the rotating beacon at the accident airport.
COMMUNICATIONS
The witness who was at the accident airport awaiting the arrival of the accident airplane 
reported in writing hearing a sound he associated with "–tapping on radio system outside:  It 
was like when someone is attempting to do a microphone check.  Shortly after I heard, '"Flt 
600 ??? [Bessemer]."'  He reported during an interview hearing the pilot report "INS."
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The airport is equipped with one asphalt runway designated 05/23, which is 5,700 feet long 
and 100 feet wide, and is served by an instrument landing system (ILS) approach to runway 
05.  The FAA approved un-augmented Automated Weather Observing System (AWOS-3) 
broadcasts on 118.825 MHz.
Review of the ILS Runway 05 instrument approach procedure depicted in the Southeast U.S. 
Terminal Procedures publication in effect on the date of the accident revealed the decision 
height and visibility for a straight in ILS approach to runway 05 for all categories of aircraft is 
900 feet mean sea level and 3/4 mile visibility.  The published missed approach procedure is to 
climb to 1,400 feet msl, then climbing right turn to 3,000 feet and proceed direct to the 
Brookwood VORTAC (OKW) and hold.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane crashed in a wooded area, impact damage to several trees was noted.  The main 
Page 7 of 15MIA02FA037
wreckage was located at 33 degrees 18.794 minutes North latitude and 086 degrees 56.145 
minutes West longitude, or 342 degrees and .37 nautical mile from the approach end of runway 
05.  All components necessary to sustain flight were attached or in close proximity to the 
wreckage which was upright on a magnetic heading of 280 degrees.  The main wreckage was 
located approximately 107 feet and 209 degrees from the first tree contact location.  There was 
no in-flight or postcrash fire; a strong odor of fuel was noted at the accident site on NTSB 
arrival.
Examination of the accident site revealed the first observed contact to a tree was located at 33 
degrees 18.817 minutes North latitude and 086 degrees 56.131 minutes West longitude.  
Damage to trees located 37 feet past the first tree impact site were located left and right of a 
line from the first tree contact to the main wreckage (centerline).  The trees were located 3 feet 
left and 33 feet to the right of centerline and were contacted 14 feet and 30 feet above ground 
level (agl), respectively.  The angle of bank was later calculated to be approximately 24 degrees.  
Continuing along the centerline towards the main wreckage, a stand of trees located to the left 
and right of the centerline were damaged approximately 5 feet agl; the trees were located 
approximately 62 feet from the first tree contact location.  Components from the airplane were 
noted along the wreckage path.  The first observed ground contact location was noted 81 feet 
from the first tree contact location; the angle from the first tree contact point to the ground 
contact point was determine to be approximately 22 degrees.  A 8-inch diameter pine tree 
located near the initial ground impact sight exhibited black paint transfer and a smooth cut 
surface that measured approximately 46 inches in length.  The cut was oriented vertically and 
was not completely through the diameter; the bottom point of the cut was located 4 feet agl.
Examination of the airplane revealed the outboard 76 inches of the left wing with attached 
aileron was separated from the wing; the separated section was found in close proximity to the 
main wreckage.  Examination of the attached section of the left wing that was parallel to the 
fuselage revealed the aft fuel shutoff valve was not connected with the forward fuel shutoff 
valve.  The forward and aft fuel shutoff valves of the left wing were found in the "on" position 
and near the "on" position, respectively.  The right wing was separated from the airplane and 
was also found in close proximity to the main wreckage.  The forward and aft fuel shutoff 
valves of the right wing were connected.  The forward and aft fuel shutoff valves were found 
approximately 1/8 inch from "on" and "on", respectively.  Damage to the left wing in the area of 
the lift strut attach point was noted; the leading edge of the left wing was separated.  The 
leading edge of the right wing exhibited evidence of semi-circular indentations consistent with 
tree contacts.  Examination of the leading edges of the left wing lift strut, separated section of 
the left wing, and left horizontal stabilizer revealed dirt/debris adhering to the surface.  No 
evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction was noted to the flight control system for roll, 
pitch, or yaw.  The cabin roof was separated at the aft doorframe bulkhead.
Examination of the flap control system revealed the flap actuator was extended approximately 
6.5 inches which equates to nearly fully retracted.  The left flap remained connected at the 
inboard and middle flap tracks but was separated at the outboard flap track; the outboard 
section of the flap was folded under the remaining section of the flap.  Examination of the 
components of the left flap system revealed the "tube assembly-short" P/N 2662018-4, was "D" 
shaped and fractured consistent with bending approximately 5 inches from the left hand 
inboard bellcrank assembly.  The "flap cable assembly" P/N 2660001-105, was attached to the 
left hand flap bellcrank assembly but was fractured consistent with tension overload in the area 
of the outboard attach point.  There were no other fracture or separations noted of the 
Page 8 of 15MIA02FA037
components of the left flap system.  The right flap remained connected to the middle and 
outboard flap tracks; the middle flap track was separated from the wing structure.  The inboard 
section of the right flap including the inboard flap track was separated but found in close 
proximity to the wreckage.  Examination of the components of the right flap system revealed 
the "flap cable assembly" P/N 2660001-105, was attached to the outboard attach point on the 
flap but was fractured consistent with tension overload near the right hand flap bellcrank 
assembly.  The "bellcrank connecting rod assembly" P/N 2522179-1, was flattened and 
fractured consistent with bending in close proximity to the right hand flap bellcrank assembly.  
The flap inboard pushrod assembly was connected to the right hand flap bellcrank assembly 
and the inboard flap attachment bracket, but the flap attachment bracket was separated from 
the flap.  The "right hand interconnect rod assembly" P/N 2660020-4, was bent and fractured 
at the rod end which connects to the right hand inboard bellcrank assembly.  There were no 
other fracture or separations noted of the components of the right flap system.
Examination of the cockpit revealed that the auxiliary vacuum pump switch was fully out.  The 
left and right landing light, strobe light, pitot static and stall heat switches were in the "off" 
position, while the navigation and beacon light switches were in the "on" position.  The pilot's 
altimeter was set to approximately 30.27 inHg, and was indicating 700 feet mean sea level 
when first examined.  The condition lever was at the low idle position and the propeller control 
was approximately ½ inch above the minimum dent, both controls were bent to the right.  The 
emergency power lever was also bent to the right and was located forward of the mechanical 
stop in the emergency power lever slot.  A 1/4 inch long gouge was noted on the left side of the 
emergency power lever slot forward of the mechanical stop; the gouge became progressively 
deeper moving aft.  No obvious damage was noted to the mechanical stop that extends in the 
emergency power lever slot.  Full right aileron trim was noted.  All circuit breakers on the 
circuit breaker panel were in.  Autopilot, avionics, and pilot's and co-pilot's flight instruments 
were retained for further examination.
Examination of the engine compartment revealed continuity from the cockpit to the engine 
compartment for propeller, emergency power lever, condition lever, and power lever controls.  
The primary vacuum system line was crushed associated with impact damage in several 
locations along its length, bent, and fractured behind the standby vacuum pump bracket.  The 
vacuum ejector nozzle was clear; no obstructions were noted.
Examination of the propeller at the manufacturer's facility with FAA oversight revealed no 
evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.  The reverse stop and feather mechanisms were 
undamaged.  Counterweight impact signatures on the No. 3 hub socket indicate that the 
propeller was at a blade angle of approximately 20 degrees at the time of impact.
The engine assembly was examined at the engine manufacturer's Service Investigation 
Facilities in Canada, with Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) oversight.  Visual 
inspection of the engine revealed minimal impact damage; no fire damage was noted.  The 
compressor discharge air (P3) and power turbine control (Py) lines were intact and continuous; 
no cracks or discontinuities of either line were noted.  The reduction and accessory gearbox 
chip detectors, oil filter, fuel filter, and P3 filter were all noted to be clean.  The first, second, 
and third stage compressor disks, blades, stators and shrouds exhibited circumferential 
rubbing and/or scoring, as did the centrifugal impeller and shroud in the area of the inducer.  
No distress was reported to the Nos. 1 and 2 bearings and airseals, combustion chamber liner, 
or large and small exit duct.  No distress was noted to the compressor turbine guide vane ring, 
Page 9 of 15MIA02FA037
while the compressor turbine shroud exhibited circumferential scoring.  Light circumferential 
scoring was noted on the downstream side of the compressor turbine disk at the outer rim area.  
Circumferential rubbing of the power turbine shroud was noted, with an area of heavy 
smearing noted.  The power turbine shaft and the Nos. 3 and 4 bearings were noted to rotate 
freely by hand.  The second stage coupling input spline was fractured; heavy rubbing was noted 
on the fracture surface.  No distress of the first or second stage gearing was noted.  Continuity 
to all accessory drive pads was noted.  The fuel heater was found to be spring loaded to the "full 
hot" position.  The engine manufacturer reported that the position as found of the fuel heater 
would not affect normal engine operation.
Accessories/controls from the engine consisting of the fuel control unit, fuel pump, propeller 
and overspeed governor, flow divider, oil to fuel heater, bleed valve, igniters, 
primary/secondary, and inlet fuel nozzles were also examined with TSB oversight at the 
manufacturer's facility in Canada.  Impact damage to the exciter box precluded operational 
test.  Approximately 5 minutes into bench testing of the fuel pump, the main drive shaft 
fractured.  The fractured shaft was replaced, the pump was reinstalled on the test bench, 
testing was resumed then halted due to a noise heard emanating from the pump.  Disassembly 
of the pump revealed binding of the idler gear to the floating bearing consistent with impact 
damage.  Bench testing of the remaining components revealed discrepancies when compared 
with new components, but there was no evidence of preimpact failure of any of the 
components.
Examination of the pilot's altimeter and vertical speed indicator, and the co-pilot's vertical 
speed indicator was performed with FAA oversight at the manufacturer's facility in Wichita, 
Kansas.  The results of the examination of the pilot's altimeter revealed the barometric setting 
was 30.265 inHg.  Impact damage was noted to the barometric shaft knob, pressure port fitting 
and electrical connections at the rear of the instrument, and rear cover of the instrument.  
Testing of the altimeter was performed in a vacuum chamber due to leakage caused by impact 
damage.  Minor discrepancies with scale error and friction, encoder, and barometric output 
were reported, and were consistent with impact damage.  Both vertical speed indicators were 
functionally tested which revealed discrepancies to both in the zero adjustment range, and 
scale error test.  Disassembly of both units revealed discrepancies to both consistent with 
impact damage.  According to the vice president of engineering of the altimeter manufacturer, 
the barometric knob would have to be rotated approximately 180-degrees counter-clockwise to 
change the altimeter setting from 30.16 inHg to the as found setting of 30.265 inHg.
The autopilot and avionics components from the airplane were examined with FAA oversight at 
the manufacturer's facility.  Bench testing of the KC 192 Flight computer, KS 270A Pitch servo, 
KS 272A Pitch trim servo, and KI 256 Flight command indicator was performed with the 
components connected to a test harness.  A slave roll servo was installed due to impact damage 
to the accident roll servo.  The testing revealed the KI 256 Flight command indicator did not 
initially erect when gyro pressure was applied. Removal of the instrument cover revealed the 
gyro erection vanes were found loose.  The vanes were clipped into position, and gyro pressure 
was applied again.  All autopilot modes were found to function normally, as well as the KI 256 
Flight command indicator.  The autopilot responded correctly to roll and pitch commands.  
The KI 256 Flight command indicator display showed zero roll/pitch when the gyro was placed 
in the zero deflection position on the test fixture.  The autopilot responded correctly to pitch 
commands when directed from the mode controller.  The NAV/ILS modes were not 
functionally tested, but the modes engaged.  The communication and navigation frequencies in 
Page 10 of 15MIA02FA037
use of the No. 1 Communication Transceiver/Navigation Receiver (Nav/Comm) were found to 
be 127.67, and 111.75 (I-EKY Localizer) MHz, respectively.  The communication and navigation 
frequencies in use of the No. 2 Nav/Comm were found to be 123.00 (Common Traffic Advisory 
Frequency), and 111.00 (Brookwood VORTAC/IAF) MHz, respectively.  Impact damage 
precluded testing of the DME indicator, Pictoral Navigation Indicator (HSI), No. 2 Nav/ILS 
indicator, and remote directional gyro.  Operational testing of the Altitude/Vertical Speed 
Preselector, Altitude Alerter was performed; the unit was found to operate normally; no 
discrepancies were reported.  The last known position displayed in the GPS Receiver was 33 
degrees 18.81 minutes North latitude and 086 degrees 56.10 minutes West longitude.  The unit 
also displayed 277 degrees 0 nautical mile from the reference point of the accident airport.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Postmortem examinations of the pilot and pilot-rated passenger were performed by Elizabeth 
Miller, M.D., Forensic Pathology Fellow with the Jefferson County Coroner, Birmingham, 
Alabama.  The cause of death for both was listed as severe blunt force trauma.
The FAA Toxicology Accident and Research Laboratory (FAA CAMI) and the University of 
Alabama, at Birmingham (UAB) performed toxicological analysis of specimens of the pilot and 
of the pilot-rated passenger.  The results of analysis by FAA CAMI of specimens of the pilot and 
pilot-rated passenger were negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, ethanol, and tested drugs.  
The results of analysis by UAB of specimens of the pilot and pilot-rated passenger were 
negative for ethanol, drugs of abuse, and cyanide; alkaline drug screen of specimens of the 
pilot-rated passenger was also negative.  Carbon monoxide (<5 percent saturation) was 
detected in blood specimens of the pilot and pilot-rated passenger.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The engine trend monitor (ETM) Key Recorder, ETM Remote Display, and Remote ETM3, 
were examined with FAA oversight at the manufacturer's facility.  No data was found stored in 
the ETM Remote processor; four hundred forty records including records from the accident 
flight were downloaded from the ETM Key Recorder.  Record number 0436, captioned 
"Takeoff", taken at 0054:36, recorded an indicated airspeed of 70 knots, and an outside air 
temperature (OAT) of 5 degrees Celsius; the record was later determined to be from the Adams 
Field Airport, Little Rock, Arkansas.  Three "Power Check Report" records were recorded after 
takeoff.  The first power check report record (0437) occurred approximately 16 minutes 12 
seconds after the takeoff record, and recorded a pressure altitude of 8,210 feet, an OAT of 9 
degrees Celsius, and an indicated airspeed of 100 knots.  The second power check report record 
(0438) occurred approximately 46 minutes 12 seconds after the takeoff record, and recorded a 
pressure altitude of 8,240 feet, an OAT of 10 degrees Celsius, and an indicated airspeed of 103 
knots.  The third power check report record (0439) occurred approximately 1 hour 16 minutes 
12 seconds after the takeoff record, and recorded a pressure altitude of 8,240 feet, an OAT of 11 
degrees Celsius, and an indicated airspeed of 101 knots.  The final record (0440) captioned 
"Landing", occurred 1 hour 44 minutes 53 seconds after the takeoff record.  The last record 
indicated the airplane was located at 33 degrees 18.6 minutes North latitude and 086 degrees 
55.9 minutes West longitude; the pressure altitude and OAT were not recorded.  The last 
recorded position was later determined to be located 030 degrees and .15 nautical mile from 
the approach end of runway 05.
As discussed in the previous paragraph, the ETM Key Recorder recorded the temperature 
Page 11 of 15MIA02FA037
during takeoff from the departure airport to be 5 degrees Celsius.  The temperature taken at 
the departure airport approximately 3 minutes before the flight departed was recorded to be 6 
degrees Celsius.
According to the president of the manufacturer of the ETM system, the "Takeoff" report is 
programmed to occur at 65 knots, and the "Power Check Report" is programmed to occur every 
30 minutes assuming no torque change in the previous 5 minutes, the altitude is stable at plus 
or minus 50 feet, and the indicated airspeed is plus or minus 3 knots.  The "Landing" report is 
programmed to occur when the indicated airspeed is less than 45 knots and the vertical speed 
is zero for 5 seconds.  Additionally, the accuracy of the recorded OAT is to be within plus or 
minus 1 degree.  The ETM processor is connected to the airplane's pitot static system at the co-
pilot's airspeed indicator; the ETM system is calibrated when it is manufactured.
Review of the "Aircraft Flight Log" sheets found in the wreckage revealed one of the sheets had 
the accident flight leg partially completed; the only information lacking was the accumulated 
aircraft time and landings, and accumulated engine cycles.  The temperature and pressure 
altitude were recorded to be "8", and "8.8", respectively.  As previously mentioned, the ETM 
Key Recorder indicated the OAT was 9, 10, and 11 degrees Celsius when recorded three times 
during the accident flight.
The last displayed coordinates in the GPS receiver were later determined to be located .46 
nautical mile and 277 degrees from the accident airport.  The first impacted tree was 
determined to be located 287 degrees and 166 feet from the last known position displayed in 
the GPS Receiver.
The airplane annunciator panel was examined with FAA oversight at the airplane 
manufacturer's facility.  Examination of the bulbs revealed the filaments of the left and right 
bulbs of the door warning annunciator exhibited slight stretching; the filaments did not contact 
the glass envelope.  No other bulb filament stretching was reported.
The airplane was last fueled at 2345 (approximately 2 hours before the accident), while at the 
Adams Field Airport, Little Rock, Arkansas, where 228 gallons of Jet-A with prist were added.
According to the Director of Operations of Air Carriers, Inc., the accident flight was dispatched 
as an Air Carriers, Inc., flight, using call sign "Fast Check", which is to be used only for Air 
Carriers, Inc., airplanes.
The accident airplane registration was not listed in the FAA approved Air Carriers, Inc., 
operations specifications in section D085 titled "Aircraft Listing", or in section D073, titled, 
"Approved Aircraft Inspection Program (AAIP), both of which were dated October 23, 2001.
Review of the Airport Facility Directory in effect on the date and time of the accident for the 
accident airport revealed, "RWY 05.  Glide slope unusable beyond 4 [degrees right] of course."
On the day of the accident and again 2 days later, the FAA flight checked the runway 05 ILS 
approach and all related facilities of the approach.  The second flight check 2 days after the 
accident was due to incorrect height programmed into the computer located on the flight check 
airplane during the first flight check.  The "Flight Inspection Report-Instrument Landing 
System" document indicates the result of the December 3rd flight check was "Satisfactory" with 
the glide slope being listed as "Restricted."  The glide slope was restricted for use only 
whenever an airplane is beyond 4 degrees right of course, and was first documented during a 
"Flight Inspection Report-Instrument Landing System" of the runway 05 ILS approach 
Page 12 of 15MIA02FA037
document dated January 30, 2001.
Review of a plot of Atlanta Air Route Traffic Control Center radar data provided by Cessna 
Aircraft Company revealed that during the ILS approach to runway 05, between 0141:23 and 
0142:11, there was no indication that the airplane went more than 4 degrees right of course.  
The last radar target at 900 feet msl located southwest of the approach end of runway 05 was 
plotted to be on the localizer centerline.  Further review of the Atlanta Air Route Traffic Control 
Center radar data revealed that between 0141:23, and 0142:11 (the last radar target 
approximately 1/2 nautical mile southwest of the approach end of runway 05), the average 
groundspeed was calculated to be approximately 114 knots.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage minus the retained components was released to Deanes L. Rowedder, of Kern 
and Wooley LLP, on November 18, 2003.  All NTSB retained components were also released to 
Deanes L. Rowedder, on November 25, 2003.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/30/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/17/2001
Flight Time:
5773 hours (Total, all aircraft), 990 hours (Total, this make and model), 5603 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 390 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 130 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 6 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 13 of 15MIA02FA037
Other Flight Crew Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/21/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1675 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1595 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 326 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 77 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N499BA
Model/Series:
208B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
208B0689
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/19/2001, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
8750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
84.2 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
4867 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney Canada
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-114A
Registered Owner:
Air Carriers, Inc.
Rated Power:
675 hp
Operator:
Air Carriers, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
DKBA
Page 14 of 15MIA02FA037
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KEKY, 700 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0145 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
95°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
0.25 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 100 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.16 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
4°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
LITTLE ROCK, AR (LIT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Bessemer, AL (KEKY)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
2356 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Bessemer Airport (KEKY)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
700 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
05
IFR Approach:
ILS
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.313333, -86.935833
Page 15 of 15
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
03/30/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Edward T Jeszka; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Vestavia Hills, AL
Donald Hall; Air Carriers, Inc.; Bessemer, AL
Thomas J Teplik; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
Thomas Berthe; P&W Canada Corp.; Longueuil,   
Phil Goettel; Honeywell, Inc.; Olathe, KS
Rasheed Reda; Shadin Company, Inc.; St. Louis Park, MN
Thomas M Knopp; McCauley Propeller Systems; Vandalia, OH
Eldon Griffin; FAA, MIDO; Minneapolis, MN
Marvin Trease; FAA, FSDO; Kansas City, MO
Stanley P Faske; FAA, FSDO; Cincinnati, OH
Toshio Kawawa; United Instruments, Inc.; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
