National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Rome, GA
Accident Number: ATL06CA042
Date & Time: 02/01/2006, 1715 EST
Registration: N2134U
Aircraft: Cessna T210N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that while in cruise flight she looked at the fuel gauges and the right fuel tank was empty and the left fuel tank was approximately a quarter full.
The primer was stuck in the out position.
She and the passenger attempted to push the primer in with negative results.
She then decided to fly back towards the departure airport and while en-route, the engine lost power.
The pilot stated that the airplane was approximately 1000 feet above the ground and she elected not to attempt an engine restart.
She made a 180 degree turn and initiated a forced landing to an open field.
The airplane landed half way down the field.
She attempted to stop the airplane, but the airplane skidded through a barb wire fence, the left wing clipped a tree, and the airplane spun around 180-degrees.
The airplane came to rest facing north.
Examination of the airplane found the airplane contained no usable fuel and the primer handle was unlocked.
A review of the primer's design drawings found that there are two check valves within the primers system which prevent fuel from entering the engine even with the primer in the out position.
Fuel can only enter the engine through the action of closing the primer.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper fuel management resulting in a total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
OBJECT - FENCE 4.
: 4016 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2219.4 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: TSIO 520 R Registered Owner: Dean Steel Buildings Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
