During the takeoff climb, the engine was starved of fuel and lost power.  Following the power 
loss, the pilot activated the auxiliary fuel pump and tried unsuccessfully to restart the engine.  
The pilot was turning in a 10-degree bank toward an off-airport emergency landing site in open 
terrain, when the left main landing gear touched down first on the upsloping terrain.  About 50 
feet from the initial touchdown, the nose landing gear dug into the soft terrain and separated, 
and the airplane came to rest on its nose.  The pilot reported that prior to the loss of power, the 
fuel pressure gage went to zero and he received a low fuel pressure warning.  He further 
reported that on the daytime flight, he was operating all of his electrical systems; strobes, 
transponder, and radios.  He said he believed that with the full operation of all the electrical 
devices, the electrically driven fuel pump did not have sufficient amperage to run.  An 
inspection of the airplane revealed that the carburetor bowl was empty; even though there was 
fuel onboard the airplane.  With the fuel pump not operating, fuel was not being supplied to 
the carburetor, thus allowing the engine to lose power as a result of fuel starvation.  When 
functionally checked the fuel pump operated normally. The pilot reported that there was no 
recent maintenance done on the airplane.
A loss of engine power due to fuel starvation, which was induced by the electrical system 
lacking sufficient power to run all of the electrical devices on the airplane and the electrical fuel 
pump.
On February 1, 2008, at 1116 Pacific standard time, a single engine experimental Smith Zodiac 
601XL, N601KS, experienced a loss of engine power on takeoff and came to rest nose down in 
an open field following an emergency landing adjacent to French Valley Airport (F70), 
Murrieta/Temecula, California. The pilot/owner operated the personal local area flight under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The pilot, the sole occupant 
was not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight and no flight plan had been filed. 
During a telephone interview and subsequent written statement, the pilot reported that he was 
going to fly locally in the area.  He had flown the airplane about a month prior to the accident 
and encountered no problems.  On the accident flight, the preflight was normal, and the run-up 
was "good."  He reported that on the takeoff roll all of the gages were in the "green." He rotated 
the airplane at 65 miles per hour (mph), and established a normal climb rate to about 200 feet 
above ground level (agl), when the engine lost power and quit.  The pilot stated that he 
activated the auxiliary fuel pump, and tried unsuccessfully to restart the engine. 
The pilot stated that he banked the airplane to the left about 30 degrees and selected a landing 
site, while maintaining 75 mph. He noted that the terrain was undulating at his chosen landing 
site and he aimed for relatively flat terrain.  About 2 feet above the ground he flared for 
landing; however, the airplane was still in a left bank about 10 degrees and the left main 
landing gear touched down on slightly upsloping soft terrain. About 50 feet from the initial 
touchdown, the nose landing gear touched down and dug into the soft dirt; it separated at the 
strut. The airplane spun around 180 degrees from its original direction of travel, the wing tips 
touched down and the airplane stopped and came to rest in a nose low attitude.  The forward 
cockpit, engine, and cowl were damaged. The pilot also stated that there had been no recent 
maintenance on the airplane.
In a follow-up interview with the pilot, he reported that the fuel pressure gage went to zero and 
he received a low fuel pressure warning just prior to the engine failure.  The pilot stated that he 
believed the electrical system was overpowered with the operation of strobes, transponder, 
radios, and other systems; he stated that he was "running it all."  When he checked the 
carburetor he noted that there was no fuel in the carburetor bowl.  The pilot stated that the fuel 
pump quit as a result of an electrical drain.  In turn there was no fuel being supplied to the 
carburetor and thus the rest of the fuel system was starved of fuel allowing the engine to quit.  
He functionally checked the fuel pump and indicated that it operated normally.  The pilot 
further reported that there was fuel onboard the airplane.
According to a responding deputy from Riverside County Sheriff's Department, the airplane 
came to rest about 1/4 mile southeast of the airport. The right wing was "smashed" and had 
multiple dents, the landing gear had separated from the airplane, and the front end of the 
airplane had sustained damage.
