While the pilot was on short-final for a touch-and-go landing, the airplane's engine lost all 
power. Because he was at such a low altitude, he did not have time to go through a complete 
restart procedure, so after switching fuel tanks, he aligned the airplane to land on a paved road 
that was under his approach path. While attempting to land on that road, the airplane clipped a 
power line and descended into the surface of the road. An inspection of the engine, fuel system, 
and air induction system did not reveal any system or component anomaly that would have 
prevented the engine from producing rated horsepower. Both the fuel tank that was selected 
prior to the power loss, and the fuel tank that was selected after the power loss contained 
sufficient fuel to maintain operation of the engine. Fuel was also found in the fuel manifold 
valve. The reason for the loss of power was not determined.
Loss of engine power while on final approach for undetermined reasons. Contributing to the 
accident was a power line.
On February 2, 2008, about 1230 Pacific standard time, a Bellanca 17-30A, N8794V, collided 
with a power line during an attempted forced landing at Snohomish County Airport (Paine 
Field), Mukilteo, Washington. The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant of the airplane, 
received serious injuries, and the airplane, which was owned and operated by the pilot, 
sustained substantial damage. The local 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal 
pleasure flight, which departed the same airport about 15 minutes prior to the accident, was 
being operated in visual meteorological conditions. No flight plan had been filed. There was no 
report of an ELT activation.
According to the pilot, the airplane's engine lost all power while he was on short-final for a 
touch-and-go landing. Because he was at such a low altitude, he did not have time to go 
through a complete restart procedure, so after switching fuel tanks, he aligned the airplane to 
land on a paved road that was under his approach path. While attempting to land on that road, 
the airplane clipped a power line near the edge of the road. After hitting the power line, the 
airplane rolled to a steep angle of bank, and descended into the surface of the road.
The engine, fuel system, and air induction system underwent a post-accident teardown 
inspection. That inspection did not reveal any system or component anomaly that would have 
prevented the engine from producing rated horsepower. In addition, both the fuel tank that 
was selected prior to the power loss, and the fuel tank that was selected after the power loss 
contained sufficient fuel to maintain operation of the engine. Fuel was also found in the fuel 
manifold valve, and the use of water detection paste determined that there was no water 
present in the valve.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
