Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SHELBYVILLE, IL
Accident Number:
CHI00LA101
Date & Time:
04/01/2000, 1030 CST 
Registration:
N224V
Aircraft:
Aerotek PITTS S-2A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane impacted a golf cart during a grass field landing on runway 14.  The golf cart 
driver was spraying weeds near the edge of runway 14.  Ground scarring preceding the accident 
site began at a point located near the centerline of runway 22 and offset 40 feet to the west 
from runway 14's left edge.  The ground scarring continued to a pre-impact location of the golf 
cart and continued onto runway 14 where both the accident airplane and golf cart came to rest. 
The green colored golf cart was used as an airport service vehicle and was not equipped with 
lighting, flags or a radio.  Advisory circular 150/5210-5B, Painting, Marking, and Lighting of 
Vehicles used on an Airport, provides guidance, specifications, and standards for the painting, 
marking, and lighting of vehicles operating in the airport operations area.  There were no local 
Notices to Airmen (NOTAM) issued for runway/airport maintenance. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the proper touchdown point and proper alignment not attained by the pilot.  Contributing 
factors were the unmarked golf cart, color, and lack of a radio.  Additional factors were the 
runway maintenance performed by the driver of the golf cart and the NOTAM(s) not issued by 
airport personnel. 
Page 2 of 6CHI00LA101
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
1. (F) AIRPORT EQUIPMENT - UNMARKED
2. (C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) AIRPORT EQUIPMENT - INADEQUATE
4. (C) PROPER ALIGNMENT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (F) RUNWAY MAINTENANCE - PERFORMED - DRIVER OF VEHICLE
6. (F) NOTAMS - NOT ISSUED - AIRPORT PERSONNEL
Page 3 of 6CHI00LA101
Factual Information
 On April 1, 2000, at 1030 central standard time, an Aerotek Pitts S-2A, N224V, owned and 
piloted by a commercial pilot, received substantial damage during landing on runway 14 (3,264 
feet by 200 feet, grass) at the Shelby County Airport (2H0), Shelbyville, Illinois.  The airplane 
impacted a golf cart that was being used to apply weed killer adjacent to runway 14.  The driver 
of the golf cart sustained fatal injuries.  The pilot reported no injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was not 
operating on a flight plan.  The flight departed from the Coles County Memorial Airport 
(MTO), Mattoon, Illinois, at 1005, en route to 2H0.
According to the Shelby County Sheriff's report, the golf cart driver was spraying weed killer 
around the runway markers prior to the accident.
A witness reported the following in a written statement, "I arrived at the Shelbyville airport at 
approximately 9:45 am on April 1, 2000.  I was there to pick up my son, believing he would 
arrive around 10:15 am.  The [relative of the golf cart driver] and four small children were 
there...  We heard a radio transmission from inside and she said it must be my son calling.  We 
heard the plane before we saw it.  It approached from the south, flying in a northern direction.  
The plane turned to land on the runway behind us, on the west side of the airport.  Instead of 
landing, the plane lifted up again and flew south, then made a sharp turn to head north and 
came around headed southeast again.  [A family member of the driver] commented that they 
were showing off for me, as we still believed that it was my son arriving.  [The family member 
of the driver] said they were going to land on the grass strip, and that Shelbyville was known 
for having a very good grass strip.  As the plane descended, [The family member of the driver] 
said they were way off of the runway and she screamed that they were going to hit [the driver] 
spraying weeds at the east side of the airport.  He was headed south with his back to the plane.  
The plane came down and hit the cart...  [The pilot] said "I'm so sorry sir, I didn't see you..."
The pilot reported the following in a written statement.  "I departed MTO this date at 
approximately 1605Z on a pleasure flight to Shelby County Memorial Airport 2H0 for touch 
and go's on their grass runways.  2H0 is apx 27 nm from MTO on the 265 [degree] radial.  
Arriving at 2H0 just before 1630Z.  I announced L downwind for R14.  There was no response.  
I announced again on turns to base and final.  Although there was no response, just turning 
base, I observed a taperwing was just touching down on R14.  I continued the approach, but he 
did not fully exit the runway, so I announced, and initiated, a go around.  On the go-around, I 
announced three more times on the final announcement, turning base to final, a tri-pacer 
responded saying they were turning downwind at 2,000 ft.  The approach and final was 
normal, with a normal three-point touchdown.  After a few seconds of rollout, the aircraft 
impacted an unseen, unknown object and came to an abrupt stop, tail up about 45 degrees and 
sitting on the nose and right wingtip.  I still could not see what the aircraft had hit.  I shut off 
the mags, master, electronics, and fuel and looked about.  I observed a person apparently lying 
outboard of the right wings..."  "...At no time prior to impact was I aware of any persons or 
vehicles on the field.  I do not recall any flashing beacons or other safety warning signals."
According to the on-scene Federal Aviation Inspector, there was a 430 foot long ground scar 
from a point located on runway 22 to the accident site.  The point on runway 22 was located 40 
feet to the southwest from the left edge of runway 14.  The accident site was offset 
approximately 5 feet from the left edge and towards the centerline of runway 14.
Page 4 of 6CHI00LA101
The pilot was involved in a landing accident of a Engleman Pitts S1, N64DE, at MTO, on May 
15, 1999.  The National Transportation Safety Board's probable cause of the accident was, "The 
pilot's failure to maintain directional control and inadvertent ground loop/swerve.  A related 
factor was the crosswind."
The airport manager stated that the golf cart driver had mowed runways and performed 
weeding at the airport for approximately two years.  The golf cart was green in color and not 
equipped with vehicle lighting or a radio.  He also stated that the airport mowing equipment 
was equipped with lights.  The airport mowing equipment was not equipped with radios.
Advisory Circular 150/5210-5B, Painting, Marking, and Lighting of Vehicles Used on an 
Airport, states, "This advisory circular (AC) provides guidance, specifications, and standards, 
in the interest of airport personnel safety and operational efficiency, for painting, marking, and 
lighting of vehicles operating in the airport air operations area."  The AC specifies the color of 
airfield service vehicles.  Under Vehicle Marking, the AC states, "...At airports without air 
traffic control facilities, flags should be provided on these vehicles."  Under Vehicle Lighting, 
the AC states, "The standard for identification lighting of vehicles routinely operating in the 
AOA [airport operations area] is an appropriately sized flashing or steady burning beacon, 
mounted on the uppermost part of the vehicle such that it is conspicuous from any direction 
including the air..."  AC 150/5210-5B is included in this report.
There were no local Notices to Airmen issued for the application of weed killer adjacent to the 
runway.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/07/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
906 hours (Total, all aircraft), 64 hours (Total, this make and model), 818 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 28 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6CHI00LA101
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Aerotek
Registration:
N224V
Model/Series:
PITTS S-2A PITTS S-2A
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Aerobatic
Serial Number:
2216
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1575 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1319 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1319 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
AEIO360
Registered Owner:
JIMMY T. STEWART
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
JIMMY T. STEWART
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DEC, 618 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1550 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
356°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
8 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 11000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
16°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
MATTOON, IL (MTO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (2H0)
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
1005 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
SHELBY COUNTY (2HO)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
618 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Vegetation
Runway Used:
14
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
3264 ft / 200 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Page 6 of 6CHI00LA101
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
MITCHELL   F GALLO
Adopted Date:
05/08/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVE L SLAYBAUGH; SPRINGFIELD, IL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
