The glider pilot reported that he was competing in a national soaring championship 
competition and that his flight was the last of several glider tows for the day. He added that the 
launch procedure required that every glider have a tow rope laid out next to the glider, and 
then a ground crewmember would hook the Schweizer tow ring first to the Schweizer tow latch 
on the tow airplane and then attach the Tost tow ring to his Tost-equipped glider. He further 
added that his glider was loaded with water ballast so that the glider could operate at 
maximum gross weight for competition purposes. 
The glider pilot reported that the takeoff roll and liftoff were normal, but about 100 to 150 ft 
above ground level (agl), "the tow rope spontaneously released from the tow plane." He added 
that he immediately pulled his rope release handle and pitched forward to land in a grass 
overrun area past the departure runway, but the glider "had too much airspeed and too little 
area to land." Subsequently, he pulled up to avoid a "solid line of trees," entered a "gentle" right 
turn, and impacted a "favorable brushy area." 
The glider was destroyed during the impact sequence. 
The glider pilot reported that there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures 
with the glider that would have precluded normal operation.
The tow airplane pilot reported that this was his seventh and last tow of the day. He added that 
the tow rope was attached to his airplane by a ground crewmember, and then he was given 
instructions to "take up slack and launch as usual." He further added that the takeoff and climb 
out of ground effect were normal, but about 300 ft agl, the tow airplane was climbing too fast, 
and he radioed, "was that a rope break?" The tow airplane pilot did not receive a response, so 
he continued his climb. Shortly thereafter, he observed that the glider was no longer on tow 
and then witnessed the impact. The tow airplane pilot reported that he subsequently completed 
a normal landing, which included a low pass and rope release. When he moved the rope release 
handle to drop the rope, he felt a "lighter than normal release pressure on the tow handle." 
Page 2 of 6GAA17CA466
The ground crewmember who attached the tow rope to the tow airplane and glider reported in 
a written statement that he "made sure the tow rope ring was placed in the proper location at 
the back of the mechanism." He added that he "placed the latch over the top beam in the 
vertical position locking the ring in place." He further added that he "made sure there was no 
tension on the release cable" and used his weight "in both a straight back and back and up 
direction assuring the tow ring was securely locked in place." 
The glider contest manager reported that the tow airplane involved in the accident was the only 
airplane with a Schweizer tow hitch. The other tow airplanes being used were equipped with 
Tost tow hitches. The manager reported that for future contests, only tow airplanes equipped 
with Tost tow hitches will be used.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation safety inspector reported that the glider tow 
rope and tow rope rings were found intact just beyond the end of the departure runway, and no 
anomalies were observed. He added that he performed a functional check of the tow hitches on 
the tow airplane and glider, and no anomalies were observed.
FAA Advisory Circular, "Acceptable Methods, Techniques, and Practices Œ Aircraft 
Alterations," AC No. 43.13-2B, stated, in part: "The Schweizer is a simple over center L-hook 
type with a rubber tension block to preload the release lever." 
The FAA Glider Flying Handbook stated, in part:
Schweizer Tow Hook
Prior to use, the tow hook and release arm should be inspected for damage, cracks, 
deformation, and freedom of movement on the pivot bolt. Visually check the tow hook and 
ensure that the hook properly engages the release arm. Inspect the rubber spacer for general 
condition and check the condition of the release cable. Inside the cockpit, check to see that the 
manual release lever is not rubbing against the aircraft seat or any other obstructions, and 
check the security of the release handle assembly and the cable attachment.
It is likely that the ground crewmember did not fully engage the tow hook release arm during 
preflight, and that, during the initial climb, the tow ring prematurely released from the tow 
airplane. 
The ground crewmember's failure to fully engage the tow hook release arm during preflight, 
which resulted in the premature release of the glider at insufficient altitude to complete a safe 
landing.
