Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Chadron, NE
Accident Number:
CHI03LA244
Date & Time:
08/02/2003, 0815 MDT 
Registration:
N70522
Aircraft:
Piper J3C-65
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane was substantially damaged when it impacted a hangar immediately after takeoff 
from an alfalfa field.  The pilot reported that he taxied for takeoff, leaving what he thought was 
sufficient distance for the takeoff roll and initial climb.  He noted that during the takeoff, at a 
point three-quarters of the distance to the hangar, he realized he was not going to be able to 
clear the obstacles.  The pilot stated:  "I was in a nose up attitude to try to clear the hangar but 
could not gain enough altitude.  I hit the hangar just left of center and the plane fell back to the 
ground."  The field was approximately one mile square and was surrounded by a barbed-wire 
fence.  The available distance from the point where the takeoff was initiated to the hangar was 
approximately 730 feet.  The takeoff path reportedly sloped upward about 10 feet.  The pilot 
reported that there were no malfunctions with the aircraft or engine prior to the accident.  
Winds in the vicinity were reported from the south at eight knots.  Temperature and dew point 
were 22 degrees Celsius and 29.98 inches of mercury.  Density altitude was calculated as 4,847 
feet.  Federal regulations require the pilot-in-command to review takeoff distance data prior to 
flight to ensure sufficient runway distance is available.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Inadequate preflight planning by the pilot to ensure the required takeoff distance was utilized, 
as well as a failure to abort the takeoff.  Contributing factors were the uphill gradient and the 
hangar.
Page 2 of 6CHI03LA244
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) OBJECT - HANGAR/AIRPORT BUILDING
4. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - UPHILL
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Page 3 of 6CHI03LA244
Factual Information
On August 2, 2003, at 0815 mountain daylight time, a Piper J3C-65, N70522, piloted by a 
private pilot, was substantially damaged following an in-flight collision with a hangar 
immediately after takeoff from a field in Chadron, Nebraska.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was being conducted under 14 CFR 
Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.  The pilot reported minor injuries.  The local flight was 
originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot's written statement reported that he taxied for takeoff, leaving what he thought was 
sufficient distance for the takeoff roll and initial climb.  The operating area was reportedly an 
alfalfa field with a hangar located on the north end.
The pilot noted that during the takeoff, at a point three-quarters of the distance to the hangar, 
he realized he was not going to be able to clear the obstacles.  He reported he stayed to the left 
of his intended takeoff path in order to minimize the hazard to people on the ground.  The pilot 
stated:  "I was in a nose up attitude to try to clear the hangar but could not gain enough 
altitude.  I hit the hangar just left of center and the plane fell back to the ground."
The owner of the aircraft reported that prior to the accident he had flown two passes over the 
field in the accident airplane, landed and shutdown approximately 50 yards south of the 
hangar.  He stated that the pilot, who was going to take the aircraft for a flight, situated himself 
in the rear seat.  He assisted the pilot start the engine and observed him taxi to the south.  He 
noted:  "I had began to walk back to the [hangar] when my attention was returned to the 
aircraft ... and noted he had shorten[ed] the takeoff area to less [than] I expected. ... As the 
aircraft passed by me I noted he had enough altitude to clear the fence, but the aircraft seemed 
to stall as it hit the [hangar]."
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) investigator on-scene, the field was 
approximately one mile square and was surrounded by a barbed-wire fence.  The investigator 
estimated the available distance from the point where the takeoff was initiated to the hangar 
was approximately 730 feet.  In addition, the takeoff path reportedly sloped upward about 10 
feet.
Owners of the same make and model aircraft were asked about the expected takeoff 
performance by the FAA investigator.  They reportedly estimated a required takeoff distance of 
900 feet based on the weather and loading conditions.
The post-accident examination of the aircraft did not reveal any pre-impact anomalies.  In 
addition, the pilot reported that there were no malfunctions with the aircraft or engine prior to 
the accident.
The pilot reported weather conditions at the scene as clear, 10 miles visibility, and northeast 
winds at less than 10 knots.  Conditions reported by the Chadron Municipal Airport (CDR) 
Automated Surface Observing System at 0753, located 6 miles south-southwest of the accident 
site, were clear skies, 10 miles visibility, and winds from 160 degrees at 8 knots.  The 
temperature and altimeter setting were reported as 22 degrees Celsius and 29.98 inches of 
mercury.  The density altitude calculated based on these conditions was 4,847 feet.
Federal regulations require the pilot-in-command to review takeoff distance data prior to 
flight.  Specifically, 14 CFR 91.103, Preflight Action, states in part:  "For civil aircraft for which 
Page 4 of 6CHI03LA244
an approved Airplane or Rotorcraft Flight Manual containing takeoff and landing distance data 
is required, the takeoff and landing distance data contained therein," or for other civil aircraft 
"other reliable information appropriate to the aircraft, relating to aircraft performance under 
expected values of airport elevation and runway slope, aircraft gross weight, and wind and 
temperature."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/18/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/18/2002
Flight Time:
836 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3 hours (Total, this make and model), 782 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N70522
Model/Series:
J3C-65 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17528
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/12/2003, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1220 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2863 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
C65
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI03LA244
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CDR, 3297 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0753 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
210°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.98 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 15°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Chadron, NE (PVT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0715 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Pvt 
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
42.933333, -103.000000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tim Sorensen
Adopted Date:
12/30/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Douglas Dymock; FAA -- Lincoln FSDO; Lincoln, NE
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI03LA244
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
