National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Crescent City, FL
Accident Number: MIA02LA076
Date & Time: 04/02/2002, 1330 EST
Registration: N43615
Aircraft: Taylorcraft BC12-D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, as soon as he lifted the tail wheel off the ground during takeoff, the right wing lifted, he lost directional control, and the aircraft ran off the left side of the grass runway, into an adjacent hangar.
He stated that no mechanical irregularities, or surface wind conditions were a factor in the accident.
Postcrash investigation by an FAA inspector confirmed that mechanical malfunction was not a factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 2.
OBJECT - HANGAR/AIRPORT BUILDING Factual Information On April 2, 2002, about 1330 eastern standard time, a Taylorcraft BC12-D, N43615, registered to a private individual, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed during takeoff in the vicinity of Crescent City, Florida.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft received substantial damage, a hangar received minor collision damage, and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The flight was departing at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot, during takeoff roll from a private grass strip, as soon as he brought the tail wheel off the runway in his rotation sequence, the right wing suddenly lifted, causing him to lose directional control.
The aircraft veered left off the runway and into an adjacent hangar.
He reported neither surface winds nor runway conditions were a factor in the runway excursion.
The pilot reported damage to the hangar was limited to an entrance door and aluminum siding.
According to an FAA inspector, a postcrash inspection of the aircraft determined that there were no mechanical discrepancies that may have contributed to the accident.
The pilot agreed to taking additional training in tail wheel configured aircraft prior to exercising further solo privileges.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 66, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
