National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Granite Shoals, TX
Accident Number: FTW02LA110
Date & Time: 04/02/2002, 1120 CST
Registration: N248JT
Aircraft: Thornley Thornley 2000
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot took off to the north in the gyrocopter to practice takeoffs and landings, with winds light and variable.
After takeoff and reaching an altitude of 90 feet agl, the aircraft stopped climbing.
As the aircraft was now near the departure end of the runway, the pilot elected not to try landing on the runway, feeling he would overshoot the runway into a wooded field.
The pilot proceeded northward and initiated a gentle turn to the right, intending to land on the runway to the south; however, the aircraft continued to lose altitude.
When the pilot was 90 degrees into his turn, he felt he was getting too far east of the runway, at which time he decided to land to the east on an east-west roadway which bordered the north boundary of the runway.
As the pilot "straightened out," the aircraft stopped losing altitude, but was now barely above treetop level.
Preparing to land, the pilot's attention was diverted as he was looking for cars, overhanging trees, power lines, and TV lines, resulting in the aircraft's wheels impacting the top strand of a power line.
The aircraft broke through the power lines, impacted terrain, and came to rest on its left side.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain clearance with a power line while maneuvering.
Contributing factors were the pilot's diverted attention and the power lines.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - OPEN FIELD Factual Information On April 2, 2002, approximately 1120 central standard time, a Thornley 2000 experimental/homebuilt gyrocopter, N248JT, was substantially damaged when it impacted power lines and terrain while maneuvering near Granite Shoals, Texas.
The student pilot, sole occupant, received serious injuries.
The Subaru powered gyrocopter was owned by a private individual and operated under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.
The personal flight originated from Granite Shoals at 1100.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot reported that he took off to the north to practice takeoffs and landings, with winds light and variable, "and everything seemed to be functioning properly."
After takeoff and reaching an altitude of 90 feet agl, the aircraft stopped climbing.
He proceeded northward and initiated a gentle turn to the right, intending to land on the runway to the south; however, the aircraft continued to lose altitude.
Ninety degrees into his turn, the pilot reported "I was venturing too far east of the runway to make a safe return to the airport.
At this point I made the decision to land to the east on an east-west roadway which bordered the north boundary of the runway".
As the pilot "straightened out," the aircraft stopped losing altitude, but was now barely above treetop level.
Preparing to land, the pilot said his attention was diverted, as he was looking for cars, overhanging trees, power lines, and TV lines.
The pilot further stated that this resulted in the aircraft's wheels impacting the top strand of a power line.
The aircraft broke through the power lines and impacted terrain, coming to rest on its left side.
The pilot reported his total time in this make and model aircraft was 162 hours, with 121 hours as pilot in command.
He also reported that in the last 90 days, 30 days, and 24 hours respectively, he had accumulated 1 hour of flight time.
According to an FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, the gyrocopter's cockpit area was intact, all rotor blades were bent, and the remaining structure was bent and twisted.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 66, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
