Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
PIONEER, LA
Accident Number:
FTW00LA166
Date & Time:
06/01/2000, 0700 CDT 
Registration:
N70114
Aircraft:
Cessna A188B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The airplane departed with full fuel and 150 gallons of herbicide for a local aerial application 
flight.  The airplane made three north-south spray runs, and during the third turn from the 
south to the north, the airplane contacted trees, the left wing separated, and subsequently, the 
airplane impacted the ground.  A witness stated that during the third turn he could hear, but 
could 'barely see the aircraft over the tree tops, unlike the previous two times.'  A friend of the 
accident pilot, who is also an agricultural pilot for the same operator, reported that on the 
evening of May 31, 2000, (one day prior to the accident flight) the accident pilot reported that 
he had 'hit some trees on that day and had to pull the leaves out of the boom of the airplane.'  
The accident pilot had also reported that 'he had the power lines licked, but seemed to have a 
problem clearing the tree tops.'  The pilot had successfully completed a professional 
agricultural pilot training course on May 5, 2000, and the accident flight was the pilot's second 
revenue spray flight. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with trees while maneuvering during an aerial 
application flight.  A factor was the pilot's lack in experience with aerial application flight 
operations. 
Page 2 of 6FTW00LA166
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION
Findings
1. OBJECT - TREE(S)
2. (C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) LACK OF EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6FTW00LA166
Factual Information
 On June 1, 2000, at 0700 central daylight time, a Cessna A188B agricultural airplane, N70114, 
was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain while maneuvering near Pioneer, 
Louisiana.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained fatal injuries.  The 
airplane was registered to and operated by Pioneer Flying Service Inc., of Pioneer.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight.  The flight originated from the operator's private 
grass airstrip, at 0635. 
According to the operator and his personnel, the airplane's fuel tanks were topped off and the 
airplane departed with 150 gallons of Trefend (herbicide) on board to spray a nearby field.  
Witnesses reported that prior to the accident, they observed the airplane making north-south 
passes over a field.  One witness stated that from his view, he saw the airplane make two 180 
degree turns from the south to the north, one following each of the first two southbound spray 
runs.  He stated that during the airplane's third turn he could hear, but could "barely see the 
aircraft over the trees tops, unlike the previous two times."  Another witness stated that he was 
working in the area when he heard a "loud pop," looked, and observed the airplane pointed 
straight up over the trees.  Subsequently, the airplane passed out of the witnesses' view behind 
trees.
According to an FAA inspector and a representative from Cessna Aircraft Company, who 
examined the accident site and airplane, the airplane was heading approximately 190 degrees 
when it initially contacted trees that were approximately 50 feet tall.  The airplane traveled an 
additional 200 feet before the airplane's left wing contacted a second area of trees that were 
approximately 70 feet tall.  Subsequently, the left wing separated from the airframe and the 
airplane descended to the ground.  The engine separated from the airframe, and the propeller 
blades, which remained attached to the propeller hub, were loose and exhibited "S" type 
bending.  Flight control continuity was established from the rudder and elevator to the forward 
cockpit.  Aileron flight control continuity was established between the right wing's aileron and 
the cabin area; the left wing's aileron cable was separated at the wing's mid-span.  The throttle, 
mixture, and propeller controls were found in the full forward position.
A friend of the accident pilot, who is also a pilot for Pioneer Flying Service, was interviewed 
following the accident.  He stated that on the evening of May 31, 2000, the accident pilot 
mentioned that he had "hit some trees on that day and had to pull the leaves out of the boom of 
the airplane."  The accident pilot added that "he had the power lines licked, but seemed to have 
a problem clearing the tree tops." 
A review of the pilot's flight logbook and flight training records revealed that he received his 
commercial certificate on April 25, 2000, and successfully completed a professional 
agricultural pilot training course administered by Ag-Flight, Inc., of Bainbridge, Georgia, on 
May 5, 2000.  He had accumulated a total of 586 flight hours during the nine month period 
preceding the accident.  Two hundred fourteen of his total flight hours were in the make and 
model of the accident airplane, and had been accumulated during a one month period 
preceding the accident.  The operator reported that the accident flight was the pilot's second 
revenue spray flight.
Page 4 of 6FTW00LA166
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
21, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/22/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
586 hours (Total, all aircraft), 214 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N70114
Model/Series:
A188B A188B
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
18801840T
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-D
Registered Owner:
PIONEER FLYING SERVICE 
INC.
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
PIONEER FLYING SERVICE 
INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
JOBG
Page 5 of 6FTW00LA166
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
, LA (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
0635 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JASON      A RAGOGNA
Adopted Date:
04/19/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
PAUL A KEESLER; BATON ROUGE, LA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW00LA166
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
