National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BROOKSVILLE, FL
Accident Number: ATL97LA015
Date & Time: 11/01/1996, 1745 EST
Registration: N81435
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The aircraft owner reported that the student pilot was conducting traffic pattern training when he experienced a total loss of engine power while on final approach.
The student pilot reported that he completed the before landing check that included the application of carburetor heat.
After he turned on to the final approach leg the student pilot noticed that the engine had quit.
During the forced landing roll the airplane collided with two parked vehicles.
The examination of the aircraft at the accident site failed to disclose a mechanical problem.
A subsequent functional check of the engine disclosed that it operated normally throughout all power ranges.
Weather conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor ice.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED 2.
WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
OBJECT - VEHICLE Factual Information On November 1, 1996, at 1745 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N81435, collided with two travel trailers in a secure lot east of the Hernando County Airport in  Brooksville, Florida.
The instructional flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the student pilot was not injured.
The flight departed Brooksville, at 1730.
The aircraft owner reported that the student pilot was conducting traffic pattern training when he experienced a total loss of engine power while on final approach to runway 27.
The student pilot reported that he completed the before landing check, that included the application of carburetor heat.
After the student pilot turned on to the final approach leg, he noticed that the engine had quit.
The student pilot selected an area near the airport and attempted a forced landing.
During the forced landing roll out, the airplane collided with two parked vehicles.
The examination of the aircraft at the accident site failed to disclose a mechanical problem.
A subsequent functional check of the engine disclosed that it operated normally throughout all power ranges.
This check was repeated with the same results.
A review of the weather data disclosed that conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor icing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
