National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NORWOOD, MA
Accident Number: NYC97LA010
Date & Time: 11/01/1996, 2100 EST
Registration: N1216T
Aircraft: Piper PA-28R-200
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was returning to his departure airport at 2100, and flew the localizer approach to runway 35.
The control tower was closed, and the ATIS stated that the pilot controlled lighting (PCL) was in operation.
The pilot stated that he was not able to activate the PCL, and performed a go-around.
During the go-around, he was able to activate the runway lights, which included the runway visual approach slope indicator (VASI) for runway 35.
During his second approach, while on final, he reduced power at 100 feet and then observed a deer on the runway.
The pilot veered the airplane left to avoid the deer, and the airplane touched down on the grass parallel to the runway.
After a 300 foot ground roll, the airplane struck the VASI.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to perform a go-around, when an animal obstructed the runway; and his failure to maintain clearance from an obstruction (VASI).
Factors relating to the accident were: darkness, an animal (deer) on the runway, and the proximity of the obstruction.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - NIGHT 2.
(F) OBJECT - ANIMAL(S) 3.
(C) GO-AROUND - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) OBJECT - VASI LIGHT/SYSTEM 5.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On November 1, 1996, at 2100 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28R-200, N1216T, was substantially damaged when it collided with a visual approach slope indicator (VASI), while landing at the Norwood Memorial Airport, Norwood, Massachusetts.
The private pilot and two passengers were not injured.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight that originated at Niagara Falls, New York, at 1825.
An instrument flight plan had been filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot rented the airplane at the Norwood Memorial Airport (OWD), and flew it to Niagara Falls with two passengers.
During the return flight, he flew the OWD localizer approach to runway 35.
The OWD control tower was closed, and the ATIS stated that the pilot controlled lighting (PCL) was in operation.
The pilot stated that he was not able to activate the PCL, and performed a go-around.
During the go-around he was able to activate the runway lights, which included the VASI for runway 35.
He further stated: "...This ride was smooth and aligned with LOC (localizer), and VASI.
I had full flaps and reduced power at about 100 feet.
A few seconds later I saw an animal (I believe a deer) just on the runway, and abruptly turned left, but did not pull up.
By the time I leveled the wings out, I was hitting the VASI, and then landed on the grass..." The Norwood Police report stated that there were tire marks in the grass for approximately 300 feet before the VASI lights.
It also stated that examination of the airplane revealed "...damage to both wings and tail.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
