National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SUPAI, AZ
Accident Number: LAX97LA030
Date & Time: 11/01/1996, 1230 MST
Registration: N90144
Aircraft: Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
 Analysis The helicopter was was being used in an external lift operation, moving supplies of salt to a storage location.
The pilot reported that he was lifting to a hover over a loaded cargo net, unaware that the external load cable was draped over one of the skids.
As the cable took the strain of the load, the helicopter rolled, and the lateral control limit was exceeded.
The pilot released the load with an electrical switch; however, before control was regained, the helicopter contacted the ground, nose low, and the main rotor blades struck the ground.
The pilot reported that from initial down-force on the skid until impact, the time frame was less than 4 seconds.
He also reported no mechanical malfunction with the helicopter.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: improper routing of the external cargo hoist cable (over helicopter skid), which resulted in lateral imbalance and roll-over of the helicopter, as weight on the cable became effective.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: HOVER Findings 1.
(C) EXTERNAL LOAD EQUIPMENT - IMPROPER 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - UNCONTROLLED 3.
(C) REMEDIAL ACTION - NOT ATTAINED 4.
AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE 5.
LOAD JETTISON ---------- Occurrence #2: ROLL OVER Phase of Operation: HOVER Findings 6.
The helicopter was owned and operated by Action Helo of Arizona, under 14 CFR Part 133 for the local flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and a company VFR flight plan had been filed for the operation.
The helicopter was destroyed and property on the ground was damaged in the ensuing crash.
The certificated commercial pilot, the sole occupant, sustained minor injuries.
In his written accident report, the pilot said that "while lifting to a hover over a cargo net external load, the 40 foot cable became fouled over the skid (left-right unknown).
Control limits were exceeded with an increasing roll rate.
The load was released by the electrical switch but the helicopter contacted the ground nose low striking main rotors to the ground.
From initial down-force on [the] skid to impact[, it] was less than perhaps four seconds."
The pilot also reported that there were no mechanical malfunctions with the helicopter.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 50, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane; Helicopter Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
