Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
BLAKESBURG, IA
Accident Number:
CHI97LA275
Date & Time:
09/01/1997, 1035 CDT 
Registration:
N131G
Aircraft:
Bucker Flugzeugbau JUNGMANN
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported the '...engine suffered [a] dramatic loss of power...' about 10 minutes after 
takeoff.  He said he could not restart the engine and made a forced landing in the '...best 
available field... .'  The airplane collided with a power line during its final approach and nosed 
onto the ground.  The on-site examination revealed no mechanical anomalies with the airframe 
or engine that would prevent flight.  Fuel was found in the engine s fuel lines and fuel injection 
pump.  About a teaspoon of water was found in the gascolator.  Water was not found in the fuel 
lines or injector manifold.  Attempts to have the fuel injection pump examined at the 
manufacturer in the Czech Republic, with the Federal Aviation Administration's assistance was 
made. The FAA was unable to participate because the engine is not certificated under the FAA's 
regulations.  The Czech Civil Aviation Authority and engine manufacturer examined the fuel 
injection pump.  The examination revealed the pump operated within the manufacturer's 
specifications. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. 
Page 2 of 6CHI97LA275
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. POWERPLANT - FAILURE,TOTAL
2. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
3. OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6CHI97LA275
Factual Information
 On September 1, 1997, at 1035 central daylight time (cdt), a Bucker Jungmann, N131G, piloted 
by a commercially certificated pilot, was substantially damaged during a collision with power 
lines and the ground during a forced landing approach.  The pilot reported a total loss of power 
while cruising at 2,000 feet mean sea level. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The 
pilot reported minor injuries.  The flight departed Blakesburg, Iowa, at 1025 cdt.
According to the pilot, the "...engine suffered [a] dramatic loss of power..." about 10 minutes 
after takeoff.  He said the engine could not be restarted following the failure.  The pilot said he 
selected the "...best available field..." for the forced landing.  He said the airplane struck a 
power line during the landing approach and nosed down onto the ground.
The North American representative for the engine manufacturer, Letecke Oprauny Maleske 
(LOM), stated the manager at N131G's departure airport said N131G had aborted a takeoff due 
to "...engine difficulties... ."  The representative's statement continues, "...[the] fuel pumps 
[were] drained, and the engine ran at high RPM, and all seemed to be working fine."  A 
mechanic from the departure airport examined N131G at the accident site.  He stated the 
"...fuel was not contaminated in any way."  He said the gascolator had "...less than a 
teaspoon..." of water in it.  His statement is appended to this report.  
The on-scene investigation revealed mechanical continuity within the LOM M332AK engine.  
One magneto was removed and sparked when rotated.  The fuselage fuel tank had sustained 
collision damage and was ruptured.  About 1-cup of residual fuel having an odor and color 
similar to 100LL was found in the tank.   Fuel was found in all 4 injector lines.  The fuel lines 
were removed from the fuel injection pump.  Fuel drained from the fuel pump at all 4 fuel line 
attach points.  The gascolator contained fuel and about 1-teaspoon of water when examined.  
The throttle, mixture, and supercharger controls sustained crash damage and were not able to 
be moved.  The throttle was found in the full forward position.
The fuel injection pump could not be properly inspected by facilities in the United States.  The 
Federal Aviation Administration's AAI-100 in Washington, D.C. was asked to have one of the 
Agency's Belgium inspectors observe the manufacturer's testing of the pump.   The FAA was 
unable to assit because the engine was not an FAA certified engine.  The fuel injection pump 
was examined at the manufacturer's facility in Malesice, Czech Republic, with the cooperation 
of the Czech Republic Aviation Authority.  
The examination revealed that "The injection pump was securing reliable engine regulation...," 
according to the Quality Director for the engine manufacturer.  A copy of this report is 
appended to this report.          
Page 4 of 6CHI97LA275
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
47
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/25/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1206 hours (Total, all aircraft), 180 hours (Total, this make and model), 1136 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 13 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bucker Flugzeugbau
Registration:
N131G
Model/Series:
JUNGMANN JUNGMANN
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
E3B-391
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/01/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
33 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
98 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
LOM
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
M332AK
Registered Owner:
EUGENE S. SPAINHOUR
Rated Power:
140 hp
Operator:
EUGENE S. SPAINHOUR
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI97LA275
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OTM, 845 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1035 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
40°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
3 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 1000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (5C2)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (5C2)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1025 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
FRANK      S GATTOLIN
Adopted Date:
04/15/1999
Additional Participating Persons:
BOB   ANDERLIK; DES MOINES, IA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI97LA275
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
