After takeoff, the airplane climbed about 500 feet and turned to the left. It subsequently 
entered a nose-dive configuration and descended rapidly. As the airplane neared the ground, it 
appeared to assume a level attitude consistent with the pilot recovering from the nose dive. The 
airplane clipped a tree and landed hard in a field. A postaccident examination of the airplane 
revealed three large propeller strikes along the ground. Flight control continuity was 
established to all flight control surfaces and examination of the engine and system components 
revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunctions. No conclusive physical evidence 
was found to determine the reason for the sudden loss of altitude and resultant hard landing.
The pilot™s failure to maintain clearance from terrain for undetermined reasons.
On May 1, 2010, about 1852 eastern daylight time, an Interstate S1A, N34926, registered to and 
operated by a private individual, collided with the ground shortly after takeoff from a private 
airstrip in the vicinity of  Lakeland, Florida. The sport pilot sustained serious injuries, and the 
airplane was substantially damaged. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed for the personal flight operated under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations, Part 91. The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
A witness located at the private airstrip observed  the airplane climb to approximately 500 feet 
after takeoff. She reported that as the airplane was turning to the left, the nose of the airplane 
ﬁdivedﬂ, and the airplane descended rapidly. She stated that as the airplane descended toward 
the ground, the pilot pulled up at the last few seconds, clipped a tree, and landed hard in a 
field. The airplane continued to travel forward through a fence and across a dirt road, where it 
nosed over and came to rest inverted.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the 
airplane impacted a grass field. Three large propeller strikes were observed along the ground 
scar. Flight control continuity was established to all flight control surfaces and flight control 
system components revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction. Examination 
of the fuel system revealed an undetermined amount of fuel remained in the fuel tanks. No 
water or debris was found in the fuel system. Examination of the engine revealed valve train 
continuity, compression, and spark from the magneto leads. The examination of the engine 
and system components revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunctions.
The NTSB investigator-in-charge did not receive NTSB Form 6120.1, Pilot/Operator Report 
from the pilot.
