Witnesses observed the airplane flying low over houses. One witness stated that he heard the 
engine power decrease and that the airplane™s pitch attitude increased until the airplane 
stalled, descended in a spin, and impacted the ground. A postaccident examination of the 
wreckage and engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation.  The pilot had a history of pulmonary embolism; however, there are no indications 
that a medical condition contributed to the accident. The reason for the apparent loss of 
airspeed and the resultant stall could not be determined.
The pilot™s failure to maintain adequate airspeed, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall and 
loss of control of the airplane, for undetermined reasons.
On May 2, 2010, about 1713 central daylight time, an unregistered CGS Hawk ultra-light 
airplane was substantially damaged after impacting terrain near Haysville, Kansas. The private 
pilot was fatally injured. The local flight originated at Selby Farm Airport (35KS), Derby, 
Kansas and was being conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91 without a flight plan. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
Witnesses observed the airplane depart 35KS to the south and turn to the west. One witness 
estimated the aircraft reached 300 to 400 feet above the ground. Witnesses described hearing 
the engine power decrease, while the aircraft pitch increased as the altitude remained about the 
same. They observed the aircraft turn to the north and then it appeared to stall and spin into 
the ground. The engine power was described as increasing as the aircraft spun.
The pilot, age 78, held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land and 
glider aero tow. His last application for a third class medical certificate was dated September 3, 
2009, on which he reported 828 total flight hours and 20 flight hours in the previous six 
months. The pilot™s logbooks were not located during the investigation. The pilot™s medical 
records indicated a history of pulmonary embolism. An autopsy of the pilot was conducted by 
the Regional Forensic Science Center, Sedgwick, Kansas. The cause of death was attributed to 
multiple blunt force injuries.
Post-accident examination of the aircraft by Federal Aviation Inspectors revealed both left and 
right wings were twisted, struts were bent, and the fabric wing covering was torn. One of the 
wooden propeller blades was splintered with about one quarter of the blade outboard of the 
hub remaining. The second blade was mostly intact with about three quarters of the blade 
remaining and the end splintered. Flight control continuity was verified from all control 
surfaces to the cockpit controls. Throttle cable continuity was verified from the throttle control 
to the carburetor. The carburetor responded normally to throttle cable movements. Fuel was 
found in the carburetor bowl and the fuel filter was found free of contaminants. About one 
gallon of fuel was found in the fuel tank.  No moisture was noted in the fuel. The aircraft was 
powered by a Rotax 503 engine. No engine anomalies were observed.
