National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Tillar, AR
Accident Number: CEN13LA402
Date & Time: 07/03/2013, 1450 CDT
Registration: N5182C
Aircraft: AIR TRACTOR INC AT-502B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Part(s) separation from AC
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis During takeoff, the airplane sustained a partial loss of engine power and overran the runway after the pilot lost cockpit throttle control.
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed a throttle control pin lying on the cockpit floor.
A cotter pin for the throttle control pin was missing; the length of time it had been missing could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine throttle control during takeoff due to an unsecured cockpit throttle control pin, which resulted in a runway overrun.
Findings Aircraft Power lever - Failure (Cause) Powerplant parameters - Attain/maintain not possible (Cause) Factual Information On July 3, 2013, about 1450 central daylight time, an Air Tractor, Inc. AT-502B, N5182C, impacted terrain when it overran the runway during takeoff from a Tillar Airport (5AR1) near Tillar, Arkansas.
The airplane experienced a partial loss of engine power when there was a loss of cockpit throttle control.
A throttle control pin was found on the cockpit floor.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage, empennage, and wings.
The commercial pilot was uninjured.
The airplane was registered to and operated by Confederate Air Inc under 14 Code of Federal Regulation Part 137 as an aerial application flight and was not operating on a flight plan.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration inspector from the Little Rock, Arkansas Flight Standards District Office, post-accident examination of the airplane revealed that a cockpit throttle control pin was lying on the cockpit floor.
A cotter pin for the throttle control pin was missing, and the length of time it had been missing was not determined.
The last maintenance inspection of the airplane was a 100-hour inspection dated April 18, 2013, at a Hobbs time of 57 hours.
A National Transportation Safety Board Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report was not received from the pilot.
