National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ipswich, SD
Accident Number: CEN13LA391
Date & Time: 07/02/2013, 1530 CDT
Registration: N2072D
Aircraft: AIR TRACTOR AT-402B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis At the beginning of an aerial application run, the pilot rotated the airplane near the end of the runway; the airplane lifted up from the ground, yawed, and then shuddered.
The airplane descended, the left wing contacted the ground, and the airplane slid to a stop.
The circumstances of the accident are consistent with an aerodynamic stall during takeoff because the pilot failed to obtain adequate speed to climb the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot™s failure to obtain adequate airspeed during the takeoff roll, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall.
Findings Aircraft Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause) Personnel issues Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause) Factual Information On July 2, 2013, about 1530 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-402B, N2072D, impacted terrain after takeoff from a private strip near Ipswich, South Dakota.
The commercial pilot was not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The airplane was registered to and operated by Tri County Ag Service Inc., under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 as an aerial application flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight plan.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
In a telephone interview with the pilot, he reported that the airplane was loaded with 380 gallons of applicant and 170 gallons of fuel prior to departure.
He rotated the airplane near the end of the runway and the airplane lifted off.
The airplane then twisted or yawed and he felt the airplane shudder before the left wing dropped and the airplane descended.
The left wing contacted the ground and the airplane slid to a stop.
Examination of the airplane revealed substantial damage to the left wing and fuselage.
