The sightseeing aerial observation helicopter sustained substantial damage when the main 
rotor impacted the tail rotor drive shaft during a landing in a county fairground parking lot.  
The tail rotor drive shaft separated from the helicopter.  The tail rotor drive shaft impacted the 
rear window of a vehicle parked in the parking lot.  Three passengers reported minor injuries 
and the pilot reported that he was uninjured.  The pilot stated, "I made a stabilized steep 
approach to the landing area.  Once I detected the helicopter skids come in contact with the 
surface I lowered the collective at that moment the helicopter dropped and lunged forward.  
The landing site was a nearly level area with 2-3 inch tall grass."   Wind was 170 degrees at 7 
knots.  An on-scene examination of the helicopter detected no pre-impact anomalies.  The 
helicopter's flight manual stated, "The cabin interior is a full, three-place, side by side seating 
arrangement."   The helicopter's center of gravity range was 92.0 to 100 inches.  The operator's 
calculated center of gravity was 91.74 inches.
The pilot misjudged flare which led to a hard landing.  Contributing to the accident was the 
pilot's failure to follow procedures/directives when he exceeded the airplane's weight and 
balance.
On August 2, 2003, about 1755 central daylight time, an Enstrom F-28C helicopter, N15SA, 
piloted by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when the main rotor impacted the 
tail rotor drive shaft during a landing in a county fairground parking lot near Kankakee, 
Illinois.  The tail rotor drive shaft separated from the helicopter and impacted the rear window 
of a vehicle parked in the parking lot.  The aerial observation flight was operating under 14 CFR 
Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  No flight plan 
was on file.  Three passengers reported minor injuries and the pilot reported that he was 
uninjured.  The local sightseeing flight originated from the parking lot near Kankakee, Illinois, 
at time unknown and was returning to land at that parking lot when the accident occurred.
The pilot stated:
I was conducting helicopter rides at the fair ground.  I made a 
stabilized steep approach to the landing area.  Once I detected the 
helicopter skids come in contact with the surface I lowered the 
collective at that moment the helicopter dropped and lunged 
forward.  The landing site was a nearly level area with 2-3 inch 
tall grass.
An on-scene examination of the helicopter was performed.  The helicopter was found resting in 
a grass area roped off for landing.  The landing gear skid assemblies were not deformed.  No 
depressions were found in the grass area around the skids.  One rotor blade exhibited leading 
edge nicks and a red colored media transfer on its outboard section.  The push-pull tube for 
that blade was found with its rod end separated from its assembly.  The blade's drag link was 
found with one fork end fractured.  Control continuity was established from the cockpit to the 
other two blades.  The push-pull tube with the separation was observed to move in correct 
relationship to the movement of the cockpit controls.  The tail rotor drive shaft was found in 
the parking lot adjacent to the landing area.  The tail rotor drive shaft ends exhibited tears 
consistent with overload.  The tail rotor drive shaft's color scheme was red.  The rear section of 
the tail boom was found torn from its forward section about the splice joint aft of the 
stabilizer's carry through spar.  Both rudder cables were intact at the tail rotor gearbox 
assembly and moved in correct relationship to movements of the rudder pedals.  A deformed 
strobe light assembly was found on the ground.  The examination of the helicopter detected no 
pre-impact anomalies.
The helicopter operator supplied weight and balance data to the Federal Aviation 
Administration.  The helicopter's center of gravity range was 92.0 to 100 inches.  The 
operator's calculated center of gravity was 91.74 inches.
At 1803, the Greater Kankakee Airport, about two miles north of the accident site, near 
Kankakee, Illinois, recorded weather was: Wind 170 degrees at 7 knots: visibility 10 statute 
miles; sky condition clear; temperature 22 degrees C; dew point 20 degrees C; altimeter 29.90 
inches of mercury.
Excerpts from the helicopter's flight manual stated:
INTERIOR ARRANGEMENT
The cabin interior is a full, three-place, side by side seating 
arrangement with a spacious 61" width for maximum pilot and 
passenger comfort.
