According to the captain, after receiving permission from the ramp tower to commence the 
power-back, he indicated to the marshaller he was cleared for the power-back. During the 
power-back while lining up parallel with the north-south taxi line the captain felt a loud thump 
on the left side of the airplane. During the power-back turn a baggage tug was observed moving 
behind the airplane. The marshaller observed the tug driver getting jet blasted and one of the 
carts lying on the ground. The left wing walker, observed the tug driver come to a complete 
stop in the neutral area. The wing walker motioned the tug driver cross behind the airplane 
before the marshaller began the power-back. The tug driver pointed at his tug as if something 
had gone wrong, and the airplane collided with the baggage cart. The tug driver, observed the 
wing walker clear the tug to pass behind the airplane. As the tug driver proceeded slowly 
behind the airplane, the tug driver saw the trailing edge of the airplane coming towards him. In 
an attempt to speed up to avoid the airplane, the wingtip of the airplane struck the forth cart 
knocking it off of the transporter. Examination of the left wing revealed, the trailing edge of the 
aileron and wingtip were buckled. Review of the Airtran Standard Practice Flight Crew 
Powerback procedures, General Guidelines 6719.3, Part (D) states: It is the responsibility of the 
ground crew to ensure that the ramp area is clear of foreign objects and conflicting traffic 
before and during powerback.
The failure of the ground crew to follow powerback procedures and directives.
On August 1, 2003, at 1510 eastern daylight time, a Boeing 717-200, N970AT, operating as 
flight 460, registered to Wells Fargo Bank Northwest NA Trustee and operated by Airtran 
Airways Incorporated, collided with a baggage cart during powerback at Hartsfield 
International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia. The domestic passenger flight was operated under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 121 with an instrument flight plan filed. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane sustained substantial damage. 
The airline transport rated captain, airline transport rated first officer, three flight attendants, 
and 116 passengers were uninjured. The flight was originating from Hartsfield International 
Airport, Atlanta, Georgia at the time of the accident.
According to the captain, after receiving permission from the ramp tower to commence the 
power-back, he flashed the taxi lights to the marshaller indicating he was cleared for the 
power-back. During the power-back while lining up parallel with the north-south taxi line the 
captain felt a loud thump on the left side of the airplane. The marshaller then gave the signal to 
stop the airplane.
According to the marshaller, he gave the captain the signal to begin the power-back. During the 
power-back turn a baggage tug was observed moving behind the airplane. After the turn was 
complete, the marshaller observed the tug driver getting jet blasted and one of the carts lying 
on the ground. The stop signal was given and the airplane came to a complete stop.
According to the left wing walker, the tug driver had come to a complete stop in the neutral 
area. The wing walker motioned the tug driver cross before the marshaller began the 
powerback. The tug driver pointed at his tug as if something had gone wrong, and the airplane 
collided with the baggage cart.
According to the tug driver, the wing walker cleared the tug to pass behind the airplane. The 
tug driver proceeded to cross the taxiway behind the airplane. As the tug driver proceeded 
slowly behind the airplane, the tug driver saw the trailing edge of the airplane coming towards 
him. He sped up in an attempt to avoid the airplane, and the wingtip of the airplane struck the 
forth cart knocking it off of the transporter.
Examination of the left wing revealed, the tailing edge of the aileron and wingtip were buckled.
Review of the Airtran Standard Practice Flight Crew Powerback procedures, General 
Guidelines 6719.3, Part (D) states: It is the responsibility of the ground crew to ensure that the 
ramp area is clear of foreign objects and conflicting traffic before and during powerback.
