The airplane was destroyed following an in-flight collision with power lines during a low-level 
aerial application pass.  The airplane subsequently impacted a tree and terrain.  The airplane 
was burned in a post-impact ground fire.  The pilot reported that he circled to look for 
obstacles and then started spraying.  He said that his airplane's main landing gear caught the 
wires that ran through the middle of the field.  He stated that he lost control of the aircraft and 
it impacted a tree and terrain.  After exiting the airplane, it subsequently burst into flames.  
The pilot stated that there were no mechanical malfunctions during the flight.  His 
recommendation was, "Take ample time to observe all obstacles and give them respect."
The pilot's inadequate visual lookout and not maintaining clearance from the power line during 
the low level aerial application maneuver.  A related factor was the power line.
On August 2, 2003, about 0740 central daylight time, a Rockwell International S-2R, N4923X, 
was destroyed following an in-flight collision with power lines during an aerial application 
flight near Mitchell, South Dakota.  The airplane subsequently impacted a tree and terrain and 
burned in a post-impact ground fire.  The pilot reported minor injuries.  The aerial application 
flight was being operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 137 without a flight plan.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The local flight originated from 
MJ Aviation Airport I, near Letcher, South Dakota, at 0700.
The pilot reported that he circled the field to look for obstacles and then started spraying.  He 
said that his airplane's main landing gear caught the wires that ran through the middle of the 
field.  He stated:
I proceeded forward straight [and] level across I-90 until [the] wires broke.  
At this time I lost control hit a tree and crashed at approximately 
7:40 AM.  I [immediately] removed seatbelt, helmet, and evacuated 
aircraft.  I ran up to house got owner to call 911 and washed chemical 
off my skin with garden hose.  At this time aircraft burst into flames, 
which were extinguished by Mitchell Fire [and] Rescue.
The pilot stated that there were no mechanical malfunctions during the flight.  His 
recommendation was, "Take ample time to observe all obstacles and give them respect."
