Two airplanes were substantially damaged during a collision while both aircraft were landing 
at the annual Experimental Aircraft Association Airventure fly-in at Oshkosh, Wisconsin.  
Reduced separation standards and special arrival procedures were in effect at the time of the 
accident.  The accident aircraft were sequenced for landing and both were cleared to land at the 
same location on the same runway.  The trailing airplane landed and struck the leading 
airplane as the leading airplane was exiting the runway.  Federal regulations as well as the 
Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) state that the pilot in command of an aircraft is 
directly responsible for, and is the final authority as to, the operation of that aircraft.  The AIM 
further states that, regardless of type of flight plan or whether or not under control of a radar 
facility, the pilot is responsible to see and avoid other traffic, terrain, or obstacles, when 
meteorological conditions permit.
The pilot's inadequate visual look out and his failure to perform a go-around, and maintain 
clearance from the other airplane.
On August 1, 2003, about 1300 central daylight time, N3602D, an amateur-built Degair 
Lancair 360, piloted by a private pilot, sustained substantial damage when it collided with 
N66VA, a Vans Aircraft RV-6T, while landing on runway 27 (6,178 feet by 150 feet, asphalt), at 
the Wittman Regional Airport, Oshkosh, Wisconsin.  N66VA had already landed and was 
exiting the runway when N3602D landed and struck N66VA's left wing.  The accident occurred 
during the annual Experimental Aircraft Association Airventure gathering.  N3602D was 
operating as a personal flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight 
plan.  N66VA was operating as a business flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was 
not on a flight plan.  There were no injuries.  N3602D's flight originated from the Outagamie 
County Regional Airport, Appleton, Wisconsin about 1200.  N66VA was on a local flight that 
originated about 1245.
At the time of the accident, aircraft were using the "VFR Oshkosh Arrival, Purple Flow" 
procedures as outlined in the Special Flight Procedures Notice to Airmen (NOTAM), that was 
in effect at the time of the accident.  The NOTAM states, "Oshkosh Tower controllers may 
request that you land on one of the colored circles ('dots').  The 'orange dot' is 1,500 [feet] from 
the runway 27 threshold (4,678 [feet] remain); the 'green dot' is 3,000 [feet] from the runway 
27 threshold (3,178 [feet] remain)."  In addition, the NOTAM states, "A waiver has been issued 
reducing arrival and departure standards for category 1 and 2 aircraft (primarily single engine 
and light twin engine aircraft)."
The pilot of N66VA reported that he had landed his aircraft on runway 27 on the "green dot" 
and was clearing the runway into the grass adjacent to the runway when his airplane was 
struck by N3602D.
The pilot of N3602D reported that he approached the airport using the prescribed arrival 
procedures and was instructed by air traffic control (ATC) to fly a close-in right downwind for 
runway 27.  He stated that ATC instructed him to turn onto the base leg of the traffic pattern 
before N66VA, which was on a short final, had passed off of his right wing.  He further stated 
that this reduced the spacing, but it appeared to be safe to continue the approach.  N3602D 
was cleared by ATC to land on the "green dot."  The pilot stated that upon touchdown, he 
recognized that he would not be able to stop his airplane before colliding with N66VA, which 
was on the runway.  The pilot of N3602D turned left in an attempt to avoid a collision, but 
N66VA also turned left to exit the runway into the grass.
Neither pilot reported any pre-impact difficulties with respect to their aircraft or aircraft 
systems.
An eyewitness to the accident reported that N3602D landed on runway 27, bounced, went into 
the grass on the south side of the runway, bounced again, came down, and struck N66VA.
Chapter 5-5 of the Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) describes the roles and 
responsibilities of pilots and controllers as related to air traffic procedures.  Paragraph 5-5-1b 
of that chapter states; "The pilot in command of an aircraft is directly responsible for, and is 
the final authority as to the safe operation of that aircraft. In an emergency requiring 
immediate action, the pilot in command may deviate from any rule in the General Subpart A 
and Flight Rules Subpart B in accordance with 14 CFR Section 91.3."  Section  5-5-8 of the AIM, 
entitled "See and Avoid" states in paragraph (a): "Pilot: When meteorological conditions 
permit, regardless of type of flight plan or whether or not under control of a radar facility, the 
pilot is responsible to see and avoid other traffic, terrain, or obstacles."
14 CFR Part 91.3 (a) states; "The pilot in command of an aircraft is directly responsible for, and 
is the final authority as to, the operation of that aircraft."
