The private certificated pilot had recently received a tailwheel endorsement, and was practicing 
landings in the tailwheel-equipped airplane at various airports.  During the accident landing, 
the pilot reported that a right crosswind was blowing between 10 to 12 knots. He said the 
airplane bounced on touchdown, and the right wing was lifted by the wind.  He corrected the 
bounce by application of rudder, but the left wing contacted the runway surface and the 
airplane ground looped.  The pilot said a mechanic examined the airplane and advised him that 
two outboard wing ribs of the left wing and the left aileron required replacement.
The pilot's inadequate compensation for a crosswind condition and his failure to maintain 
directional control of the airplane that resulted in the left wing contacting the runway surface 
during the landing roll.  Factors contributing to the accident were the presence of the 
crosswind, and the pilot's lack of experience in tailwheel airplanes.
On August 1, 2003, about 1205 Alaska daylight time, a tailwheel-equipped Cessna 170 airplane, 
N3418C, sustained substantial damage when the left wing contacted the runway following a 
loss of control during the landing roll at Merrill Field, Anchorage, Alaska.  The airplane was 
being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 
91, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was operated by the pilot.  The private 
certificated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  The flight originated at Merrill Field about 0900.  No flight plan was filed, nor was 
one required.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on August 5, the pilot reported that he recently received a 
tailwheel endorsement.  He said he was practicing landings at various airports and then landed 
on runway 24 at Merrill Field.  During the landing, the pilot reported that a right crosswind 
was blowing between 10 to 12 knots. He said the airplane bounced on touchdown, and the right 
wing was lifted by the wind.  He corrected the bounce by application of rudder, but the left 
wing contacted the runway surface and the airplane ground looped.  The pilot said a mechanic 
examined the airplane and advised him that two outboard wing ribs of the left wing and the left 
aileron required replacement.
At 1153, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Merrill Field was reporting in part:  
Wind, 330 degrees (true) at 7 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, few 
at 6,000 feet, 12,000 feet scattered; temperature, 64 degrees F; dew point, 35 degrees F; 
altimeter, 30.03 inHg.
