The airplane was substantially damaged when it impacted a road after takeoff.  The pilot 
reported that the takeoff roll was long and the airplane's engine seemed to lose power.  He 
stated that he "released [the] flaps to gain speed but the engine seem[ed] to have less power."  
The pilot said that after clearing the fence at the end of the runway, he turned right and 
crashed on the road.  The passenger reported that on the accident flight the pilot used flaps 
during the takeoff and, in his opinion, the use of the flaps produced enough drag to slow the 
aircraft's speed on takeoff.  A witness stated that he observed the accident airplane during the 
takeoff, and the airplane was "going too slow, too low, and was climbing too steeply."  The 
witness stated that the airplane then stalled and struck the ground.  He stated that the 
airplane's engine was running until the airplane struck the ground.  In his written report, the 
pilot listed no mechanical malfunction of the airplane.  A postaccident examination of the 
airplane revealed no pre-impact anomalies.
The pilot's failure to abort the takeoff, his improper use of flaps during the takeoff, and his 
failure to attain sufficient airspeed resulting in an inadvertent stall and subsequent impact with 
a road.
On August 2, 2003, about 0920 central daylight time, an amateur-built Gerlach Skyraider II, 
N1068S, piloted by a private pilot, sustained substantial damage when it impacted a road after 
takeoff from the northwest ultralight runway (1,200 feet by 100 feet, turf), at the Wittman 
Regional Airport, Oshkosh, Wisconsin.  The flight was performed during the annual 
Experimental Aircraft Association gathering.  The pilot reported that the engine lost power 
during the takeoff.  The 14 CFR Part 91 business flight was operating in visual meteorological 
conditions without a flight plan.  The pilot and passenger were not injured.  The local flight was 
originating when the accident occurred.
In a written report of the accident, the pilot stated that the takeoff roll was long and the 
airplane's engine seemed to lose power.  He stated that he "released [the] flaps to gain speed 
but the engine seem[ed] to have less power."  The pilot said that after clearing the fence at the 
end of the runway, he turned right and crashed on the road.  In his written report, the pilot 
listed no mechanical malfunction of the airplane.
In a written statement to the Winnebago County Sheriff's Department, the pilot stated that the 
engine power "wasn't up to its normal standard. It did takeoff [and] seemed to get better but all 
of a sudden it seemed to lose power again.  I tried to release the flaps to get some speed and the 
plane didn't respond."  The pilot stated that the airplane kept losing speed and power.  He 
stated that when the airplane cleared the fence, he attempted to land on the road.
The passenger reported that the accident flight was his second flight of the day in the accident 
airplane.  He stated that on the accident flight the pilot used flaps during the takeoff.  He stated 
that, in his opinion, the use of the flaps produced enough drag to slow the aircraft's speed on 
takeoff.
A witness stated that he observed the accident airplane during the takeoff.  He stated that the 
airplane was "going too slow, too low, and it was climbing too steeply."  The witness stated that 
the airplane then stalled and struck the ground.  He stated that the airplane's engine was 
running until the airplane struck the ground.
A postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no pre-impact anomalies.
