The unregistered two-place airplane was destroyed on impact with terrain.  The non-
instrument rated pilot was fatally injured.  The accident pilot was told by his wife prior to the 
flight that the weather conditions at the destination were foggy.  The accident pilot replied to 
his wife that he could see the tops of the trees "and he was going to fly low and follow the rail 
road tracks."  The Sheriff's report stated the pilot's brother said that "it was too foggy to be 
flying.  The only reason he was flying was to look for [the accident pilot,] his brother."
The pilot's intentional flight into known fog and failure to maintain aircraft control during 
cruise flight.  A factor was the fog, and the low altitude flight.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 2, 2003, about 0630 central daylight time, an unregistered Teratorn two-place 
airplane, piloted by a private pilot, was destroyed on impact with terrain about three quarters 
of a mile west of the Elbow Lake Municipal Airport (Y63), near Elbow Lake, Minnesota.  The 
personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.  No flight plan was on file.  The pilot was fatally injured.  
The flight originated from a private airstrip near Elbow Lake, Minnesota, about 0600, and was 
en route to Y63 at the time of the accident.
The Grant County Sheriff's report stated that prior to the flight the pilot's wife told the accident 
pilot that the weather conditions at Elbow Lake Airport were foggy.  The report said that the 
accident pilot replied that he could see the tops of the trees "and he was going to fly low and 
follow the rail road tracks into Elbow Lake."
The Grant County Sheriff's report stated:
[The accident pilot's brother] told me that he had flown from Fergus Falls 
to Elbow Lake this morning looking for his brother's plane which had 
not arrived at the Elbow Lake Airport.  ... [He] then called [his brother's 
wife] and ... asked what direction [the accident pilot] was taking to get 
to the airport.  [She] said that he was following the train tracks east that 
come from Wendell to Elbow Lake.  [He] then flew over the railroad tracks 
and followed them east to Elbow Lake and found his brother's plane in the 
wheat field.  ... [He] said that it was too foggy to be flying.  The only reason 
he was flying was to look for his brother.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a single-engine land airplane rating.  His FAA 
third-class medical certificate was issued on December 26, 2002, with a limitation for 
corrective lenses.  On his application for that flight physical, the pilot reported that he had 
accumulated 12 total flight hours.  His pilot certificate was issued on April 23, 2003.  On his 
application for that certificate, the pilot reported that he had accumulated 45.8 total flight 
hours of which 3 hours were listed as instrument flight time.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was an unregistered Teratorn, two-place airplane.  The original kit 
manufacturer is no longer in business.  The airplane's original kit builder could not be 
confirmed.  The accident airplane was a single-engine, high-wing airplane.  Its engine was a 
64-horsepower Rotax 532 engine, serial number 3488536.  The engine was shipped from its 
manufacturer in April of 1985 to Teratorn Aircraft.  The propeller was a three-bladed, 66-inch 
diameter, Warp Drive propeller.  The propeller was shipped from its manufacturer on July 31, 
1994.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 0555, the Fergus Falls Municipal Airport-Einar Mickelson Field (FFM), near Fergus Falls, 
Minnesota, about 15 miles and 330 degrees from the accident site, recorded weather was: Wind 
340 degrees at 7 knots; visibility 1 1/4 statute miles; present weather mist; sky condition 
overcast 200 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew point 15 degrees C; altimeter 29.94 inches of 
mercury.
At 0615, the FFM recorded weather was: Wind 330 degrees at 7 knots; visibility 3/4 of a statute 
mile; present weather mist; sky condition overcast 200 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew 
point 15 degrees C; altimeter 29.94 inches of mercury.
At 0635, the FFM recorded weather was: Wind 350 degrees at 7 knots; visibility 1/4 of a statute 
mile; present weather fog; sky condition overcast 200 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew 
point 15 degrees C; altimeter 29.94 inches of mercury.
At 0655, the FFM recorded weather was: Wind 350 degrees at 7 knots; visibility 3/4 of a statute 
mile; present weather mist; sky condition overcast 200 feet; temperature 16 degrees C; dew 
point 15 degrees C; altimeter 29.95 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The Grant County Sheriff's report stated:
The nose of the aircraft was pushed back to the left side and the plastic 
door was in front of the aircraft about 15 feet.  The motor appeared to 
have pushed forward and snapped off two of three propellers.  The 
wings also had damage to the front of them. ... 
There was a considerable amount of damage to the cockpit area of the 
aircraft and it appeared that the aircraft had nose dived directly into the 
ground, bounced back up into the air, and landed upright, approximately 
10 yards away from an area where you could see the plane possibly hit.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed at the Department of Pathology, Lake Region Healthcare 
Corporation, in Fergus Falls, Minnesota, on August 2, 2003.
The FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute prepared a Final Forensic Toxicology Accident Report.  
The report was negative for the tests performed.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA was a party to the investigation.
