Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
DeWitt, AR
Accident Number:
CEN10LA236
Date & Time:
05/03/2010,  CDT 
Registration:
N5531X
Aircraft:
AERO COMMANDER S2R
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Unknown or undetermined
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The airplane was reported missing after failing to return from an aerial application flight. The 
airplane wreckage was located in a wooded area near the field being sprayed about 5 hours 
after the airplane's expected return time. Flight control continuity could not be verified due to 
damage to the airplane. Postaccident examination of the engine and propeller assemblies 
indicated that the engine was producing power and the propeller was rotating during the 
impact sequence. The reason for the airplane impacting the trees and terrain could not be 
determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot did not maintain clearance from terrain for undetermined reasons.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 6CEN10LA236
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 3, 2010, at an undetermined time, an Aero Commander S2R, N5531X, was 
substantially damaged after impacting trees and terrain near DeWitt, Arkansas. The 
commercial pilot was fatally injured. The aerial application flight was registered to and 
operated by AufderHeide Flying Service, Inc. and being conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 137. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of 
the accident. The flight originated from De Witt Municipal Airport (5M1), De Witt, Arkansas, at 
1530 central standard time (CST).
There were no witnesses to the accident. According to the operator, the pilot departed 5M1 to 
conduct aerial application on two rice fields located about three miles south of 5M1. The fields 
were described as having thick woods on several sides. A search for the airplane began when 
the pilot did not return by 1630, his expected land time. The wreckage was located about 2030.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 51, held a commercial pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land, and a 
second class airman medical certificate issued January 15, 2010, with the limitation ﬁMust have 
available glasses for near vision.ﬂ A review of the pilot™s log book indicated he had 8,257 total 
hours and approximately 650 hours in the make and model of the accident airplane.  His last 
biannual flight review occurred on May 25, 2009.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The single seat, low-wing, fixed gear airplane, serial number 1731R, was manufactured in 1973. 
It was powered by a Garrett TPE331-2-201A engine, serial number P-90252C, rated at 715 
horsepower at 2,000 propeller revolutions per minute (RPM), equipped with a Hartzell HC-
B3TN-5C 3-bladed propeller. The last airframe inspection was an annual type on December 12, 
2009, at 10,231.2 total time airframe (TTAF). The last engine inspection was a 100-hour type 
on December 13, 2009, at 5,272.1 tachometer (TACH) time and 9,294.5 hours since new. The 
operator reported 10,350 hours TTAF at the time of the accident.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A review of recorded data from the Stuttgart, Arkansas, (SGT) automated weather reporting 
station, about 15 miles northwest of the accident location, revealed at 1555 conditions were 
wind 230 degrees at 8 knots, visibility of 10 miles, and clear skies. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted trees and terrain in a heavily wooded area on a southern heading. The 
left and right wings, the fuselage, and the empennage exhibited crushing and deformation. 
Flight control continuity could not be verified due to damage to the airplane. The outboard 
sections of two of the three propeller blades were separated and all three propeller blades 
exhibited twisting and leading edge damage. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Arkansas State Crime Laboratory, Medical Examiner Division, located in Little Rock, 
Arkansas, performed an autopsy on the pilot on May 5, 2010. The cause of death was attributed 
to blunt force injuries.
Page 3 of 6CEN10LA236
The FAA, Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, located in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
conducted toxicological testing on the pilot. Testing for carbon monoxide, cyanide, and ethanol 
were negative. The following  drug was detected:
4.786 (ug/ml, ug/g) Acetaminophen detected in blood.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The propeller and propeller hub assembly were examined by Hartzell Propeller Inc. under the 
supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector. The spring retainer sleeve 
had multiple impact marks that occurred at different piston/blade angle positions. The spinner 
dome was separate from the main propeller assembly and was severely damaged and 
fragmented. The spinner bulkhead had multiple bends. The feather stop was intact. The tips of 
two propeller blades were separated and each blade had bending and twisting with leading 
edge damage.
The engine was examined by individuals from Honeywell under the supervision of an FAA 
inspector. There was evidence of impact damage to the engine. The engine gear case was 
separated at the compressor inlet, the engine propeller shaft was not free to rotate, and the 
engine power section rotated with resistance. There was rotational scoring through 360 
degrees on the propeller shaft immediately aft of the propeller shaft lock nut with 
corresponding rotational scoring damage on the forward inner bore of the sun gear. Rotational 
scoring was found through 360 degrees on the forward face of the propeller shaft roller 
bearing. Rotational scoring was present on the inside diameter of the compressor section 
mainshaft with corresponding rotational scoring damage on the High Speed Pinion (HSP)-to-
power coupling shaft. Evidence of rotational scoring was also located on the first stage 
compressor impeller shroud surface and additional locations in the compressor section. There 
were metal spray deposits on the suction side of the first, second, and third stage turbine stator 
vanes and metal spray deposits on the suction side of the first and second stage turbine rotor 
blades. No pre-impact anomalies were noted with the engine. Within the gearbox section, there 
were four sets of witness marks, two witness marks per set with each set separated by 90 
degrees, on the propeller shaft lock nut with corresponding metal transfer to two teeth of each 
planet gear. The ring gear retainers that were intact and in place exhibited witness marks 
consistent with the planet gear teeth profile. There was a witness mark on the forward face of 
the propeller pitch control housing corresponding to the locking clip on the propeller shaft.
The engine fuel control unit, propeller governor, and P2T2 sensor were examined at Woodward 
Governor Company under the supervision of an FAA inspector. No preimpact anomalies were 
noted with any of the units.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Unknown or undetermined (Defining event)
Page 4 of 6CEN10LA236
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/15/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/25/2009
Flight Time:
8259 hours (Total, all aircraft), 650 hours (Total, this make and model), 100 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 55 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AERO COMMANDER
Registration:
N5531X
Model/Series:
S2R 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
1731R
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/19/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
119 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
10350 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Garrett
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
TPE331-2-201A
Registered Owner:
AUFDERHEIDE FLYING 
SERVICE INC
Rated Power:
715 hp
Operator:
AUFDERHEIDE FLYING 
SERVICE INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN10LA236
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SGT, 224 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
25 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1555 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
340°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.9 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
30°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
De Witt Municip, AR (5M1)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
De Witt Municip, AR (5M1)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1530 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
DeWitt Municipal Airport (5M1)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
190 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Daniel Baker
Adopted Date:
05/21/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Scott Ford; FAA; Little Rock, AR
Publish Date:
05/21/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75926
Page 6 of 6CEN10LA236
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
