This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Ft Lauderdale, FL
Accident Number: ERA17LA121
Date & Time: 03/02/2017, 1034 EST
Registration: N340DW
Aircraft: CESSNA 340
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
On March 2, 2017, about 1034 eastern standard time, a privately owned and operated Cessna 
340A, N340DW, was substantially damaged when the landing gear collapsed during landing at 
the Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport (FXE), Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The airline transport 
pilot was not injured. The local flight departed FXE about 0930. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the post maintenance test flight, which 
was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the pilot, the purpose of the flight was to perform a post maintenance check. He 
departed FXE to the northwest, and performed "maneuvers and aircraft systems checks" 
before returning to FXE. On approach for runway 9, he observed a "three-green landing gear 
down indication." During the landing roll, the left main landing gear collapsed, the left 
propeller struck the runway, and the airplane veered off the left side of the runway and came to 
rest in the grass.
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that the airplane had been 
substantially damaged. The left wing aft spar was bent, the left wing tip tank, wing flaps, and 
leading edge were impact damaged, and the left propeller blade tips were curled back.
The pilot stated that the airplane had previously experienced a landing gear collapse, had 
undergone repairs, and this was the first flight since those repairs.
According to airplane maintenance records, the airplane had undergone extensive 
maintenance in December of 2015, including replacement of the left aileron, left inboard and 
outboard flaps, and removal, inspection, and servicing of all three landing gear. According to a 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector, FAA records indicated the landing gear 
collapse occurred in the Bahamas, on April 21, 2014. The airplane's most recent annual 
inspection was completed on January 19, 2017. At the time of the inspection, the airplane had 
accrued 3,977 total hours of operation.
The wreckage was retained by the NTSB for further examination.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CESSNA
Registration: N340DW
Model/Series: 340 A
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: SOUTHERN AIRCRAFT
CONSULTANCY INC TRUSTE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: FXE, 14 ft msl
Observation Time: 1053 EST
Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 29°C / 19°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 7 knots / , 190°
Lowest Ceiling: Broken / 3200 ft agl
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.09 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Departure Point: Ft Lauderdale, FL (FXE)
Destination: Ft Lauderdale, FL (FXE)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 None
Latitude, Longitude: 26.197222, -80.170833 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Douglass P Brazy
Additional Participating Persons: Carlos Enriquez; FAA/FSDO; Miramar, FL
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
