National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Mercey Hot Springs, CA
Accident Number: GAA17CA171
Date & Time: 03/01/2017, 1130 PST
Registration: N801SX
Aircraft: Smith Douglas J. Sonex
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Landing area undershoot
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The sport pilot reported that he was landing on an airfield and overflew the runway multiple times searching for a wind sock.
He watched another airplane land to the south, and he made his approach to the south also.
He reported that his altitude was too high during his first approach, so he aborted the landing.
He asserted that, "This should have alerted me that there was a tailwind."
He flew one traffic pattern and made a second approach with the power at idle and full flaps.
He established his approach, but the airplane sank quickly and touched down short of the runway and nosed over.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the canopy, the vertical stabilizer, and the rudder.
The pilot reported that there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
According to the Airport Facility Directory, the airfield was equipped with a wind indicator.
However, no wind indicator could be located on or near the airfield by the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The sport pilot's unstabilized approach with a tailwind, which resulted in touchdown short of the runway and a subsequent nose-over.
Registration: N801SX Model/Series: Sonex Ltd. Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: 2008 Amateur Built: Yes Airworthiness Certificate: Experimental Light Sport Serial Number: 0801 Landing Gear Type: Tricycle Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 02/23/2017, Condition Certified Max Gross Wt.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94816
