According to the pilot, the airplane began drifting to the left just after takeoff. He attempted to 
correct the drift; however, the flight controls had no effect. The airplane then began banking to 
the right until it impacted the ground, coming to rest inverted next to a hangar. A postaccident 
examination of the airplane did not reveal any preimpact abnormalities that would have 
prevented the normal use of the flight controls.
The pilot's loss of aircraft control for undetermined reasons.
On October 1, 2010, about 1240 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Yost 
Glasair SH-2, N2117S, collided with terrain immediately after takeoff from runway 18 at Seven 
Lakes Airport (62GA), Jackson, Georgia. The certificated private pilot and passenger sustained 
minor injuries. The airplane sustained substantial damage. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight to Henry Tift Myers Airport 
(TMA), Tifton, Georgia. The flight was operated under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91.
The pilot reported to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that after the airplane 
became airborne, it began to drift to the left. He attempted to correct the airplane with the 
flight controls; however, the controls had no effect. The airplane began to bank to the right and 
continued until the right wing struck the ground.
In a written statement, a witness reported that the airplane became airborne, banked about 80 
degrees to the right, and then banked further to the right. The wingtip struck the ground, and 
the airplane cart wheeled off the right side of the runway.
An FAA inspector that responded to the accident location reported that the airplane came to 
rest about 20 feet outside of an airport hangar. The airplane's engine was impact separated and 
located inside the hangar.
According to the airport manager, the airplane had accrued approximately 600 hours in the 
previous three years, and that the owner sublet part of a hangar at the airport. He could not 
remember the previous time the airplane had flown but thought it was earlier in the week.
The pilot reported approximately 500 hours total flight time as pilot in command, about 140 
hours of which were in the accident airplane make and model. His most recent flight review 
was completed in November, 2008. His most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was 
issued January, 28, 2009. 
The tailwheel equipped airplane was built in 1984, and had accumulated about 500 hours total 
flight time at the time of the accident. The airplane's most recent conditional inspection was 
completed in June 2010. 
An FAA inspector examined the airplane on October 4, 2010 at a local salvage facility. Both 
wings exhibited impact damage to the leading edge. The right wing aileron remained attached 
at the inboard attach point and the left wing aileron remained attached at the attach points. 
The right flap was impact separated at the attach point. Continuity was confirmed to all flight 
control surfaces from the control column. Continuity was confirmed throughout the engine and 
compression was confirmed on all of the cylinders utilizing the thumb compression method. 
No preimpact malfunctions or abnormalities were noted that would have precluded normal 
operations.
