Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Antelope Island, UT
Accident Number:
WPR09FA141
Date & Time:
03/03/2009, 0840 MST 
Registration:
N3683X
Aircraft:
STEPHENSON ZODIAC 601 XL
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aircraft structural failure
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Radar data and a performance study depicted the airplane flying on a steady northerly course 
adjacent to mountains at 113 knots calibrated airspeed. The pilot changed course slightly to fly 
close to or over the mountains. The airplane subsequently experienced an in-flight breakup. All 
of the airplane's structural components and flight control surfaces were located at the main 
impact site. There was no evidence of excessive airspeed or maneuvers that would lead to a 
structural overload and failure of the wings. Turbulence was present in the area, although it 
was not believed to be severe and likely did not contribute to the failure. 
An examination of the airplane wreckage revealed that the left wing spar had buckled upward 
near the fuselage and the left wing had wrapped around the fuselage near the cockpit. There 
was compression buckling of the lower spar cap of the left wing's rear spar and compression 
buckling of the upper and lower spar caps of the right wing's rear spar. The compression 
damage to both rear spars and the upward buckling of the left wing's main spar are evidence of 
upward and downward bending of both wings. The upward and downward bending of the 
wings is consistent with aerodynamic flutter. The structural loading at the inboard section of 
the left wing was further increased as the trailing edges of the outboard sections moved up and 
down. Ultimately the left wing failed as it bent upward near the root. Aerodynamic flutter can 
occur when there is insufficient stiffness in the structure or when the flight controls are not 
mass-balanced. Counterbalanced flight controls can protect less stiff surfaces at higher 
airspeeds. The ailerons did not have counterbalances, which would have offered direct 
protection from aerodynamic flutter.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The in-flight failure of both wings due to aileron flutter. The aileron flutter was the result of 
inadequate wing stiffness and the lack of aileron counterbalances.
Page 2 of 10WPR09FA141
Findings
Aircraft
Wing structure - Failure (Cause)
Wing structure - Design (Cause)
Ailerons - Failure (Cause)
Ailerons - Design (Cause)
Page 3 of 10WPR09FA141
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 3, 2009, about 0840 mountain standard time, an experimental amateur-built 
Stephenson Zodiac 601XL, N3683X, collided with mountainous terrain following the in-flight 
failures of both wings and an  uncontrolled descent on Antelope Island, approximately 12 miles 
southwest of Syracuse, Utah. The commercial pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was 
killed. The airplane was owned by a private party and was being operated by the pilot as a 
visual flight rules (VFR) personal/pleasure flight under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was 
filed for the flight. The flight originated from Tooele, Utah, approximately 15 minutes prior to 
the accident with an intended destination of Bountiful, Utah. 
Family members alerted the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that the airplane was 
overdue and an alert notice (ALNOT) was issued. Search and Rescue personnel discovered the 
wreckage later that evening in a remote area on the western side of Antelope Island, Utah. The 
wreckage came to rest on sloping terrain, approximately 1,600 feet below a ridgeline. 
According to FAA radar data, a radar target associated with the accident airplane departed 
Tooele and proceeded north toward Antelope Island; altitude data was not available. The final 
radar target was depicted over Antelope Island at 0838 about 0.5 miles south of the wreckage 
location. 
Calculations using both radar and meteorological data indicate that the flight was steadily 
progressing northward at 113 knots calibrated airspeed (KCAS).  Details can be found in the 
Antelope Island Performance Study located in the public docket for this accident. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 37, held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single engine land, multi-
engine land and instrument ratings. His most recent FAA second class medical certificate was 
issued on June 19, 2006. Examination of the pilot's logbook revealed that he had accumulated 
approximately 371 hours of flight experience, 9.1 hours of which were in the accident airplane. 
The pilot's first logbook entry for the accident airplane was dated November, 8, 2008. The pilot 
noted within that entry that it was the airplane's maiden flight.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was an experimental amateur built Zodiac 601XL, serial number 6-5136. The all-
metal 2-place airplane incorporated a low-wing, flexible skin ailerons, and fixed tricycle 
landing gear. The airplane was equipped with a 120 horsepower Jabiru six-cylinder engine. 
According to the pilot's logbook, the airplane had completed 9 flights totaling 9.1 hours of flight 
time. The builder of the airplane reported that the tensions of the control cables were set before 
the first flight in accordance with instructions provided by Zenith Aircraft, the kit manufacture. 
The cable tensions were then rechecked approximately 6 flight hours before the accident flight 
and no change was noted.
The accident airplane was classified as an experimental category amateur-built airplane, and 
was assembled by the owner from a manufactured kit supplied by Zenith Aircraft, Mexico, 
Missouri. A designated airworthiness representative (DAR) issued the airplane a special 
airworthiness certificate on November 3, 2008. The pilot was completing phase one flight-
Page 4 of 10WPR09FA141
testing when the accident occurred. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather conditions reported at Salt Lake City International Airport (KSLC), located about 
17 miles southeast of the accident site, at 0853, indicated wind from 160 degrees at 17 knots, 
visibility of 10 statute miles, a few clouds at 7,000 feet, broken clouds at 20,000 feet, 
temperature 13 degrees Celsius (C), dewpoint 0 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.93 
inches of Mercury. Surface winds in the areas near the airplane's flight path surrounding Salt 
Lake were generally from the south at 11 to 14 knots, with gusts from 18 to 22 knots. Prevailing 
wind was generally from the south at about 14 knots, gusting to 20 knots. Turbulence was 
reported in the area at the time of the accident. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Safety Board investigators responded to the accident. All of the airplane's structural 
components and flight control surfaces were located at the main impact site. A complete copy 
of the examination notes are contained in the public docket for this accident.
Fuselage 
The main wreckage consisted of the fuselage, wings, empennage and engine. Aft crushing with 
accordion type bending features was noted along the longitudinal axis, from the engine 
compartment, aft to the empennage. The propeller hub was in place and remained attached to 
the crankshaft propeller flange. Both propeller blades were sheared at the hub. The engine 
remained attached to the mounting assembly and associated firewall structure. Extensive 
fragmentation and impact related damage was noted to the instrument panel and cockpit 
controls.
Wings
The left wing was buckled, bent upward, and folded over the cockpit. The upper spar cap, 
approximately 3 feet from the wing to fuselage attachment point, was bent forward relative to 
the lateral axis. The upper leading edge skin panel rivets were sheared in multiple locations 
along the forward spar. The upper spar chord, aft facing flange, was bent down and pressed flat 
against the aft side of the spar cap and associated spar web. The rear spar was bent upward 
approximately one foot outboard of the rear spar fuselage attachment bolt. The bottom rear 
spar cap was buckled near the aileron/flap junction. The upper wing skin exhibited 
compression wrinkling (mid span) from the upward bend in rear spar, diagonally, outboard 
and forward, to the front spar. 
The upper spar cap remained attached to the fuselage carry thru structure. There were multiple 
bends in the cap with associated 180-degree rotation of the cap sections, in a counter clockwise 
direction when viewed looking outboard. The spar cap was separated from the spar web. 
The lower spar cap at the wing to fuselage attachment point consisted of two flat non-flanged 
spar caps. Both had fractured in tensile static overload about 2-inches outboard of the 
attachment point. The fractures corresponded with the location of the outboard sections of the 
spar. The lower portion of the spar, below the fastener location, exhibited upward and aft 
bending. The upper portion of the spar, above the fastener location, exhibited upward and aft 
bending. The aft bending was more pronounced on the lower fracture, below the attachment 
fastener. 
Page 5 of 10WPR09FA141
The rear spar web remained attached to the fuselage at the rear attach point. The spar web 
fractured, in static overload, in an upward and outboard direction, at the attachment hole. The 
portion of the rear spar that fractured remained attached to the wing and was deformed and 
bent around the head of the rear spar attachment bolt. 
The right wing remained attached to the fuselage at both the forward upper and lower spar 
caps. The leading edge exhibited damage consistent with ground impact. The middle and 
outboard sections of the wing exhibited severe compression damage to the leading edge. The 
upper and lower wing skins were ballooned outward and separated from the wing ribs. The top 
and bottom rear spar caps were buckled near the aileron/flap junction.  The rear spar web 
fractured in static overload at the attachment hole in a forward direction.
Both rear spar caps exhibited compression damage at the area where the flap and aileron met. 
The compression buckling on both the top and bottom spar caps of the right rear spar was 
consistent with the outboard section of the trailing edge bending both upward and downward.  
The compression buckling on the bottom spar cap of the left rear spar was consistent with the 
outboard section of the trailing edge bending downward. The bending trailing edge spars 
introduced large torsion loads into the entire wing structure. 
In addition, the type of damage sustained by the rear spar would normally have to occur prior 
to the failure of the left wing spar. The attachments at the root of the wing provided the 
structural resistance to the aerodynamic loads that produced the damage to the rear spar. Once 
the capability to resist the aerodynamic loads was eliminated, the bending loads in the 
structure dropped dramatically. The type of damage to the rear spars is not typically consistent 
with an aerodynamic static overload. While each type of damage noted above may be 
individually found in cases of aerodynamic static overload, the total numbers of examples and 
opposite directions of failure are more consistent with aerodynamic flutter. Details of the NTSB 
Structures Study can be found in the public docket for this accident.
Empennage
The empennage was bent forward, and canted to the left. Both horizontal stabilizers were bent 
in a downward direction. Both spar caps were bent and fractured. The fracturing occurred at 
the outboard end of the front spar cap doublers. The top surfaces of the stabilizers exhibited 
impact damage. Aft crushing and leading edge damage was noted to the vertical stabilizer.
Control Surfaces
The left aileron bell crank remained attached to the aft section of a wing rib. The rib was bent 
inboard and separated from the wing skin. The aileron push rod remained attached to the bell 
crank and deflected the left aileron to the full trailing edge down position. There was evidence 
of over travel to the access hole on the rear spar where the push rod passes thru the spar. 
The right aileron bell crank and rib were pulled inboard. The aileron push rod remained 
attached to the bell crank and deflected the right aileron to the full trailing edge up position. 
There was evidence of over travel to the access hole on the rear spar where the push rod passes 
thru the spar. 
The left wing flap remained attached to the piano hinge. The inboard third of the hinge halves 
had opened up and allowed the flap to separate from the wing with no evidence of bending. 
The flap was bent upward in the areas where the wing trailing edge was also bent upwards. 
The right wing flap remained attached to the piano hinge and associated wing. Nominal 
Page 6 of 10WPR09FA141
damage was noted. Both of the slots that hold the flap actuator pins were elongated at the time 
of manufacture. 
Landing Gear
The main landing gear and nose gear were in place and remained attached to their respective 
mounting brackets. Impact related damage was noted to the assembly. 
All of the fracture surfaces that were examined exhibited features consistent with static 
overload, with no evidence of metal fatigue or material weakness. There was no evidence of 
multiple loading, motion or cyclic motion in the left wing, right wing, or empennage. There was 
no evidence of a pre or post crash fire.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Aileron/Wing Design
The ailerons were designed to protect from a flutter event through the use of high aileron 
control cable tension. The high cable tension alters the dynamic interaction between the wing 
and aileron, similar to increasing the stiffness of the wing. After several accidents in Europe, 
the United Kingdom Light Aircraft Association designed and flight tested ailerons fitted with 
counter balances. Counter balances are considered a more direct mitigation strategy to prevent 
aileron flutter.
Previous Accidents
The NTSB has conducted accident investigations involving four other Zodiac 601 XL airplanes 
where structural failure was noted as a concern. On February 8, 2006, a CH 601 XL (NTSB 
case number LAX06LA105), crashed into terrain near Oakdale, California, after its wings 
collapsed as the airplane entered the traffic pattern of the nearby airport. On November 4, 
2006, a CH 601 XL (NTSB case number LAX07FA026), broke up during cruise flight near 
Yuba City, California. On April 7, 2008, a CH 601 XL (NTSB case number NYC08FA158), 
broke up in flight near Polk City, Florida. On March 3, 2009, a CH 601 XL (NTSB case number 
WPR09FA141, broke up during cruise flight near Antelope Island, Utah. The details of each of 
these investigations are available at http://www.ntsb.gov/ntsb/query.asp.
Structures Study
Safety Board investigators conducted extensive examinations of the airplane wreckage from 
this accident and other similar accidents. In addition, material was used from the results of 
flight and static testing, accident investigation reports, and special studies conducted by several 
investigative and certification authorities from the United States, United Kingdom, 
Netherlands, and Germany. 
Zodiac 601XL Accident Rates 
The fatal accident and in-flight breakup rates of the Zodiac 601XL airplanes were compared to 
the rates for general aviation. The fatal accident rate for 601XLs, excluding breakups, is about 5 
to 11 times greater than that for general aviation. The in-flight breakup rate for 601XLs is about 
200 to 500 times greater than general aviation as a whole.
There are distinct differences in the nature of the breakups between the two groups. The 601XL 
group has distinct evidence of flutter in most cases without evidence that the airplanes 
Page 7 of 10WPR09FA141
departed controlled flight. A general aviation airplane that breaks up in flight typically involves 
a loss of control or sometimes metal fatigue. Flutter is rarely cited as a primary cause of general 
aviation in-flight breakups. Details can be found in Accident Rates for Zodiac 601XL Airplanes 
located in the public docket for this accident. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicological testing on the pilot. No traces of ethanol or drugs were detected. An 
autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Office of the Medical Examiner, Salt Lake City, 
Utah. The autopsy report attributed the cause of death to "Blunt Force Injuries."
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
NTSB Recommendation
On April 14, 2009, the NTSB issued eight recommendations to the FAA; one of which was 
classified as urgent. The urgent recommendation stated, in part, "that the FAA should prohibit 
further flight of the Zodiac CH-601XL, both S-LSA [Special Light-Sport Aircraft] and 
experimental, until such time that the FAA determines that the CH-601XL has adequate 
protection from flutter. The Board also recommended that FAA should give significant 
consideration to the benefits of installing mass-balanced ailerons and should also address the 
adequacy of cable tension values specified by Zenair." 
On November 6, 2009, the most recent Zodiac 601XL breakup occurred at Agnos, AR. Flutter 
was cited as the cause of that breakup.  
On November 7, 2009, the FAA issued Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin (SAIB) CE-
10-08, regarding "airworthiness concerns on all variants of Zodiac CH601XL" aircraft and wing 
structure modifications. The SAIB states, in part, that to prevent potential catastrophic 
structural failure owners and operators are recommended to obtain and install the kit 
manufacturers structural modification kit. The SAIB indicates that the modification kit 
addresses the structural design changes required to meet a safe condition for flight.
Safety Alert/Safety Directive
On November 7, 2009, in reaction to the subject accident and FAA review of the airframe 
design, Aircraft Manufacturing and Design, LLC, under the advisement of Zenair, released a 
Safety Alert/Safety Directive to all Aircraft Manufacturing & Development and Aircraft 
Manufacturing & Design, LLC of Zodiac 601 XL and CH 605 airplanes. It was also suggested 
that owners and operators of the CH 601 XL and CH 650 experimental amateur built airplanes 
also comply with this alert/directive. This document provided corrective actions intended to 
strengthen and stiffen the wing in order to decrease the likelihood of structural overload and 
aerodynamic flutter. In addition, the document provided for the installation of aileron counter 
balances that also decrease the likelihood of aerodynamic flutter of the ailerons. This 
alert/directive required all owners of the SLSA 601XL to comply with the mandatory upgrade 
to the wing structure and aileron counterbalance weights before the next flight. The airplanes 
certificated as experimental, amateur built, are not required to comply with the Safety 
Directive. 
In addition to the upgrade kit, this Safety Alert/Directive also advised owners and operators to 
Page 8 of 10WPR09FA141
check flight control cable tension, check for aileron free play, and to check flap free play prior 
to every flight. The owner/operators were also asked to ensure that their air speed indicators 
indicated the correct speeds, ensure that the canopies latched correctly, and that luggage was 
also secured before flight. The FAA issued a Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin on 
November 7, 2009, in response to the subject accident and in response to recommendations 
issued by the NTSB. The Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin (SAIB) CE-10-08: Wings: 
Zodiac CH 601 XL and CH 650 Wing Structural Modifications. This SAIB recommended that 
all owners of the SLSA Zodiac CH 601 XL and CH 650 airplanes comply with the safety alert 
/directive issued by Aircraft Manufacturing & Design, LLC. In addition, the SAIB 
recommended that amateur built and experimental aircraft, which share design characteristics 
with the CH 601 XL and the CH 650, also comply with this safety alert/directive.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Aircraft structural failure (Defining event)
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
37, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Sport Pilot Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/19/2006
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/20/2007
Flight Time:
350 hours (Total, all aircraft), 14 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 9 of 10WPR09FA141
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
STEPHENSON
Registration:
N3683X
Model/Series:
ZODIAC 601 XL 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
6-5136
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/11/2008, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
14 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Jabiru
ELT:
C91  installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
3300
Registered Owner:
DENNIS STEPHENSON
Rated Power:
120 hp
Operator:
Kirk Babbitt
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSLC, 4220 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0853 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
140°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 7000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 20000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
17 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Tooele, UT (KTVY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Bountiful, UT (BTF)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0818 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
40.959167, -112.230278
Page 10 of 10
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis J Hogenson
Adopted Date:
11/29/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Lyndsay Carlson; FAA FSDO; Salt Lake City, UT
Publish Date:
11/29/2011
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
