Page 1 of 11
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Arcata, CA
Accident Number:
WPR09FA146
Date & Time:
03/01/2009, 2300 PST 
Registration:
N521DS
Aircraft:
DIAMOND AIRCRAFT IND INC DA-40
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Controlled flight into terr/obj 
(CFIT)
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot was executing an over-water instrument approach to Runway 14 on a dark night in an 
area of moderate to heavy precipitation and light to moderate turbulence. Based upon the 
airplane's descent profile, recorded radar data, local ocean currents, and the ultimate 
distribution of debris along the beach, the airplane impacted the ocean's surface about one-half 
mile offshore and about seven statute miles northwest of the Arcata Airport. In the forty-two 
hours immediately preceding the accident, the pilot had flown about twenty hours and forty-
five minutes, and had crossed four time zones. There was no record of the pilot acquiring a 
weather briefing relating to his destination on the day of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain proper altitude and glidepath while executing a night instrument 
approach. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's fatigue.
Findings
Aircraft
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause)
Circadian rhythms or jetlag - Pilot (Factor)
Alertness/Fatigue - Pilot (Factor)
Environmental issues
Dark - Effect on operation
Page 2 of 11WPR09FA146
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 1, 2009, about 2300 Pacific Standard Time, a Diamond DA-40, N521DS, impacted 
the waters of the Pacific Ocean while its pilot was executing an RNAV/GPS approach to 
Runway 14 at Arcata Airport, Arcata/Eureka, California. The commercial pilot and his 
passenger were killed in the accident sequence, and the airplane, which was owned by Mitchell 
Enterprises Inc., was destroyed by the impact. The Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
personal pleasure cross-country flight, which was operating in night visual meteorological 
conditions (VMC), departed Bakersfield, California, at 1936. The pilot was on an instrument 
flight rules (IFR) flight plan, and had been issued a clearance for the approach into Arcata, 
Airport. There was no report of an emergency locator transmitter (ELT) signal. Debris from the 
wreckage was first discovered on a nearby beach four days after the accident.
According to family members, the pilot spent a number of hours on Friday, February 28, 2009, 
looking on the internet and calling around his local area in an effort to locate an airplane to use 
on a cross-country flight from Florida to Les Vegas. Although his first choice was a twin engine 
airplane, he was not able to find one available. He first contacted the owner of N521DS about 
1100, on that Friday. He inquired about renting the airplane for a multi-day cross-country 
flight, and arranged for a checkout by the owner's check pilot the next morning, and for rental 
of the airplane beginning on that same day (Saturday). On Saturday morning the pilot and his 
passenger arrived at Plant City Airport about 0800. The passenger stayed in the office area of 
the airplane's owner while the pilot went through the pre-rental process. That process included 
having his log books reviewed by the check pilot, undergoing 30 minutes of ground checkout, 
and an in-flight checkout lasting one hour. The pilot then completed the rental agreement, put 
$1,000.00 cash on deposit, and gave the owner his credit card number for billing the flight 
time beyond the $1,000.00 deposit. 
According to the owner, during the rental/checkout process, the pilot said that he was building 
time, and that he and his passenger were going to fly to Las Vegas, and would return on 
Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday, depending on the weather. According to the check pilot, the  
checkout went well, with the pilot displaying good knowledge of the airplane, as well as good 
piloting skills.
The pilot and his passenger departed Plant City Airport about 1100 Eastern Standard Time, 
and arrived at Mobile Regional Airport, Mobile, Alabama, about 1340 Central Standard Time 
(CST), for a leg flight time of about three hours and forty minutes. They stayed on the ground 
at Mobile for about one hour and fifty minutes, and then departed there about 1530 CST. They 
arrived at Huntsville Municipal Airport, Huntsville, Texas, about 1920 CST, for a leg flight time 
of about three hours and fifty minutes. 
After landing at Huntsville, the pilot had 39 gallons of 100 low-lead aviation fuel added to the 
fuel tanks. According to the Huntsville Aviation employee who pumped the fuel, the pilot 
initially stated that after refueling they were going to continue on. But, according to that 
employee, during the refueling process the pilot and his passenger started discussing how tired 
each one of them was, and they eventually made the decision to stay in Huntsville overnight. 
The owner of Huntsville Aviation then drove them to a local hotel, arriving there about 2000 
CST. As he was leaving them at the hotel, they mentioned that after they checked in, they were 
Page 3 of 11WPR09FA146
going to walk to one of the adjacent restaurants for dinner before returning to the hotel.
On the second morning of the trip, about 0700 CST, when the first Huntsville Aviation 
employee arrived at the airport, the pilot and his passenger where already at the airplane. The 
pilot was observed performing his preflight inspection, after which he and his passenger came 
into the Huntsville aviation office, reportedly to get warm. They then went back out to the 
airplane, and the pilot began to taxi out for takeoff about 0715.
The next known location of the airplane was in Sedona, Arizona, where later that day it took on 
31.6 gallons of fuel, before departing that location about 1730 Mountain Standard Time (MST). 
Although the airplane's arrival time at Sedona (an airport without a control tower) could not be 
determined, the investigation did reveal that while at Sedona the pilot made a phone call to his 
mother, ate a meal, and filed two flight plans through the CSC DUATS system. The first flight 
plan, which was for a leg from Sedona, Arizona  to Palmdale, California, was filed at 1607 MST. 
The second flight plan, which was filed at 1700 MST, was for a leg from Palmdale, California, to 
Arcata, California. 
Although the pilot had filed from Sedona to Palmdale, upon reaching Palmdale he continued 
on to Meadows Field, Bakersfield, California, which is located about 65 nautical miles 
northwest of Palmdale. He arrived there at 1841 Pacific Standard Time (PST), for a leg flight 
time of about two hours and fifteen minutes. Then, at 1900, the pilot took on 29.0 gallons of 
100LL aviation fuel from an Atlantic Aviation fueling truck, and departed for Arcata at 1936 
PST.  An annotation at the top of the refueling slip indicated that the Bakersfield refueling was 
a "top off."
After departing Bakersfield, the pilot picked up his instrument flight rules (IFR) clearance, 
whereupon he was cleared to his filed altitude of 8,000 feet, with a route clearance of direct to 
Arcata. At 2002 PST, while in the vicinity of Visalia, California, he contacted Oakland Flight 
Watch to inquire about some reports of turbulence that he overhead while airborne. Although 
the pilot only asked for the turbulence information, the Flight Watch briefer responded with a 
more expanded weather update. He informed the pilot that there were AIRMET's (Airmen's 
Meteorological Information) in effect for low level wind shears and moderate turbulence below 
18,000 feet, with icing from the freezing level to 20,000 feet. The briefer further advised him 
that he was moving into an area of moderate precipitation, but that he would move into an area 
of isolated widely scattered precipitation once he passed Stockton, California. He also indicated 
that pilot reports were indicating icing in the central California area at an altitude range of 
about 15,000 to 18,000 feet. He also told the pilot that there was a pilot report of moderate 
turbulence at 4,000 feet about five miles southeast of Tracy, California. The briefer informed 
him that there was light rain north of Stockton, with clouds scattered to broken about 4,100 to 
5,000 feet. He also informed the pilot that the current conditions in Arcata were light rain, 
winds from 150 degrees at 10 knots, gusting to 20 knots, visibility 9 miles, scattered clouds at 
5,000 feet, a broken ceiling at 6,000 feet, and an overcast ceiling at 9,500 feet. At the end of 
the update the controller asked, "Is that what you needed, or can I help you with anything 
else?"  The pilot then indicated that that was all he needed, and thanked the briefer for his 
help. The pilot then continued on direct to his destination.
As the pilot proceeded into the northwest corner of California, he was advised to switch from 
Oakland Center to Seattle Center. When he first made contact with the Seattle Center, the pilot 
advised the controller that his transmissions were "broken up." In response the controller said 
that the Center transmissions should get better as the pilot continued on toward Arcata. About 
Page 4 of 11WPR09FA146
four minutes after the pilot's first contact with Seattle Center, the controller gave him the 
altimeter setting (29.67) and asked him what his altitude was. The pilot responded that he was 
indicating 9,300 feet, and the controller then reminded him that his last assigned altitude was 
10,000 feet, and then asked if he was "–having difficulty." The pilot then explained that he was 
climbing back to his assigned altitude, that it was very turbulent, with a lot of ups and downs 
and moderate to severe turbulence. 
About two minutes later, the controller advised the pilot that crews of other aircraft had 
reported light to moderate turbulence while on the ILS (Instrument Landing system) approach 
to Arcata. He then cleared him to descend to 9,000 feet, and then about 30 seconds after that, 
he asked the pilot if he knew what approach he wanted into Arcata. The pilot replied with 
"negative," and then asked what approach others were doing at the time. The controller 
advised him that most pilots coming from the south (as he was) were doing the ILS and circling 
to runway 14. The pilot started to respond with, "I guess I can," but then appeared to terminate 
his statement mid-sentence, and then said the he would get back to the controller with the 
approach he wanted. The controller then advised him that there had been a couple of pilots 
that had chosen to shoot the RNAV/GPS approach from the north to Runway 14. The pilot 
responded with, "Yeh, we can do an RNAV/GPS for 14." 
The controller then cleared the pilot direct to CULDU (the initial approach fix for the 
RNAV/GPS 14 approach), spelling out CULDU phonetically for the benefit of the pilot. The 
pilot responded by asking the controller to say the letters again (for CULDU), and the 
controller responded by spelling out CULDU phonetically again, and explaining to the pilot 
that CULDU was the initial approach fix for the RNAV/GPS approach to runway 14. The pilot 
then stated that it was "– really turbulent right now," and then asked if he could get back to the 
controller for "–that information." The controller approved that request, and then about 
fifteen seconds later the pilot transmitted, "Alright, can you repeat that fix again?" The 
controller again stated that the fix was CULDU, that it was the initial approach fix, and then 
again spelled it out phonetically. 
There was no response from the pilot for the next one minute and twenty seconds, and then he 
asked the controller to verify that the fix was CUDLU (note misspelling). The controller advised 
the pilot that that was "very close" and that the fix was named CULDU (the controller again 
spelling it phonetically). The pilot responded with, "Okay, I got it this time. Thank you."
The controller then advised the pilot that the radar depiction of area weather showed moderate 
to heavy precipitation over the Arcata area, and advised him that those conditions would be 
along his route of flight the whole time he was inbound. The controller then repeated the fact 
the rain intensity was showing as moderate to heavy. 
About three minutes later, the controller cleared the pilot to descend and maintain 8,000 feet, 
and the pilot read back the clearance. The controller then told the pilot that the 8,000 feet was 
the IFR minimum altitude, and that he needed to try to hold that altitude the best he could. He 
further stated that the pilot could go above it, but that to go below it, "–would be bad." The 
pilot then acknowledged that transmission.
About six minutes later the pilot was cleared to 7,000 feet, and about two minutes after that he 
was cleared to 6,000 feet. About 90 seconds after being cleared to 6,000 feet, the controller 
reminded the pilot that weather radar was showing moderate to heavy precipitation between 
his present location and CULDU. The pilot acknowledged that transmission, and then stated 
Page 5 of 11WPR09FA146
that he saw the area of precipitation with his onboard equipment. The controller then advised 
him that turns to both the left and the right was approved if the pilot needed to go around some 
of the weather. The pilot then advised the controller that he was going to turn toward the west, 
to a heading of 250 degrees, and then he would come back to CULDU. The controller 
acknowledged that transmission, and advised the pilot that on that heading he (the controller) 
would be able to get the pilot to a lower altitude sooner. The controller then told the pilot to 
continue on his heading of 250 degrees, and then cleared him to descend to 5,000 feet. About 
two minutes after clearing the pilot to 5,000 feet, the controller advised the pilot that the 
Arcata altimeter was 29.67, and requested that the pilot, "–maintain at or above 5,000 feet, 
please." The pilot responded to that call by saying that he was indicating 4,900 feet, and that he 
was climbing back up.  The controller then advised the pilot that he would be able to clear him 
direct to CULDU in about a minute and a-half.
About one minute and thirty seconds after being cleared down to 5,000 feet, the pilot was 
cleared to descend to 4,000 feet, and to proceed direct to CULDU. About 90 seconds later, the 
controller told the pilot to cross CULDU at or above 4,000 feet, and that he was cleared for the 
RNAV/GPS  14 approach to Arcata airport. The pilot read back the clearance, but read back the 
altitude limit as, "at or below 4,000 feet," instead of, "at or above 4,000 feet." The controller 
repeated the altitude clearance limit, and the pilot then correctly acknowledged it.
Recorded radar data shows that the pilot then proceeded to CULDU, executed a course reversal 
outbound (northwest) of  CULDU in order to intercept the inbound course. Then about seven 
minutes after being cleared for the approach, while back inbound to CULDU at 3,600 feet, the 
controller advised the pilot that radar service was terminated, that he should report his IFR 
cancellation or down time to the controller on the controller frequency, and that he was then 
cleared to switch to the Arcata CTAF (Common Traffic Advisory Frequency). The pilot 
acknowledged that clearance, and then apparently switched his radio to the CTAF frequency.
Although the controller cleared the pilot to switch frequencies, he (the controller) continued to 
monitor the progress of the approach. About three minutes after he had cleared the pilot off of 
his frequency, the controller noticed that the airplane had descended to an altitude of 1,400 
feet, but that it had not yet reached UYFOR (the final approach fix, with a published minimum 
crossing altitude of 2,100 feet). About a minute and a-half later, after seeing the airplane 
continue to descend while still not yet at UYFOR, the controller attempted to contact the pilot 
over the Seattle Center frequency. Over the next twelve minutes, the controller attempted 
contact with the pilot ten separate times. The first five times he transmitted the call sign 
"November 521 Delta Sierra," and the next five time he used the call sign, "Diamond 521 Delta 
Sierra." After being unsuccessful at making contact with the pilot during that twelve minute 
period, the controller contacted Oakland Radio over the land line telephone, and requested 
that the Oakland Radio operator attempt to contact the pilot at Arcata via Oakland Radio's 
radio frequency there. That attempt was unsuccessful, and no further contact was made with 
the pilot. The last radar mode C radar target from the airplane was recorded at 4 degrees, 
04.66 minutes North, 124 degrees, 10.63 minutes West (about one-tenth mile from UYFOR), at 
300 feet above the ocean surface. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The 30 year old pilot held a commercial pilot certificate, with ratings of Airplane Single Engine 
Land (ASEL), Airplane Multiengine Land (AMEL), and Instrument Airplane (INSTA). He held 
a C/CL-65 Type Rating, with limitations of Second-In-Command (SIC) privileges only, and 
Page 6 of 11WPR09FA146
circling approaches in visual meteorological conditions (VMC) only. He also held a certified 
flight instructor (CFI) certificate, with a rating for flight instruction in single engine land 
airplanes. His last aviation medical certificate, a First Class, was issued on March 20, 2008, 
with no restrictions or limitations. A resume he completed in October of 2008, indicated that 
he had accumulated 104 hours of night time, 513 hours of cross-country time, and a total 
instrument time (both actual and simulated) of 88 hours. The resume also indicated that he 
had 336 hours of experience with the Garmin G1000 integrated flight instrument system (the 
system present in the accident airplane).
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The airplane was a Diamond DA-40, serial number 40.621, manufactured in May of 2006. It 
was registered to Mitchell Enterprises of Plant City, Florida, and was equipped with the 
optional 50 gallons of usable fuel system. Its last annual inspection was completed on 
September 26, 2008, and its last 100-hour inspection was completed on February 17, 2009. 
The last update of the airplane's onboard navigational and airfield database (Diamond G1000 
software version 0321.9, in accordance with Garmin Service Bulletin 0805A) was performed on 
December 19, 2008. At the time of the last 100-hour inspection, the airplane's tachometer read 
651.9 total hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 2253 aviation surface weather observation (METAR) for Arcata Airport recorded winds 
from 190 degrees at eight knots, six statute miles visibility, light rain, fog, scattered clouds at 
1,900 feet, a broken ceiling at 2,800 feet, an overcast ceiling at 3,400 feet, a temperature of 13 
degrees Celsius, a dew point of 12 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 29.69 inches of 
mercury. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Based upon its descent profile, recorded radar data, local ocean currents, and the ultimate 
distribution of component parts along the beach, the airplane is assumed to have impacted the 
ocean's surface about one-half mile offshore (west) of Megwi Point (about one statute mile west 
of the town of Trinidad, and about seven statute miles northwest of Arcata Airport). Pieces of 
the airplane washed ashore in an area from Trinidad in the south, to Agate Beach  (just north 
of Patrick Point State Park) in the north. Components were located on the beaches within this 
area up to about two weeks after the accident. 
Altogether about a dozen pieces of the airframe were found. Three of the pieces contained 
build-up identification tags, two of which identified the part as coming from a DA-40, and the 
other containing data indentifying it as coming specifically from DA-40 serial number 40.621. 
The single longest piece was made up of the leading edge and forward upper wing skin of the 
left wing. This piece measured about seven feet long, starting at the wing root, and was about 
nine inches wide. It had torn lose from the aft area of the upper wing skin along a very irregular 
and jagged line. There were two other pieces of left wing skin, one measuring about one foot by 
one foot, and the other measuring about one foot by two feet. The fracture lines on these two 
pieces indicated that they fit into the lower inboard structure of the left wing. There was one 
other section of wing skin that measured about two feet by two feet, and contained a portion of 
the wing leading edge along one of its borders, but its location on the wing, or which wing it 
was associated with, could not be determined.
Six of the pieces came from the area around the baggage compartment, which is located in the 
Page 7 of 11WPR09FA146
aft part of the cabin. Four of the pieces made up the majority of the baggage compartment 
access panel. One of these pieces contained the data tag that identified it as having come 
specifically from the accident airplane. There was one piece of baggage compartment lower 
perimeter trim, and a portion of the left (port) side baggage compartment perimeter bulked 
(with its three readily identifiable louvered vent holes). 
The only clearly identifiable piece of exterior fuselage structure, which measured about two feet 
by four feet, was from the left side, starting just behind the lower half of the firewall, and 
running rearward to a point just aft of the bottom end of the rear bow of the entry canopy.
In addition to the aforementioned structural debris, there was a seat cushion from one of the 
two front seats, and several small broken/torn pieces of white or black composite structure that 
could not be identified as to location on the airplane.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
DUTY DAY AND FLIGHT TIMES
On the first day of the trip, the pilot accumulated about eight hours and thirty minutes of flying 
time. This included the one hour checkout, the leg from Plant City, Florida, to Mobile, 
Alabama, and the leg from Mobile, Alabama, to Huntsville, Texas. His "duty day," calculated 
from when he arrived at the Plant City Airport (0800 EST) until he departed the Huntsville, 
Texas, airport for the hotel that night (1945 CST/2045 EST) was about twelve hours and forty-
five minutes.
On the second day, the flight duration and flight track for the flight legs between Huntsville, 
Texas, and Sedona, Arizona, could not be determined. But, based upon a comparison with the 
ground speed maintained over the other known legs of the trip, the estimated flight time 
between Huntsville, Texas, and Sedona, Arizona, would be about eight hours and forty-five 
minutes, with at least one refueling stop over the total straight line distance of about 855 
nautical miles. The pilot's "duty day" for the second day of the trip began with the preflight of 
the airplane at Huntsville, Texas, at 0700 CST (0500 PST), and ended with the airplane 
impacting the ocean off Arcata, California, about 2300 PST. 
The elapsed time from the pilot's arrival at the Plant City Airport in Florida (0800 on Saturday 
morning) until the impact with the ocean off Arcata, California, (2300 on Sunday night) was 
forty-two hours. During that forty-two hour period, the pilot accumulated about twenty-two 
hours and 45 minutes of flying time, and was "on duty" for thirty hours and forty-five minutes.
ACQUISITION OF WEATHER DATA
As part of the investigation the NTSB IIC contacted both contract DUATS (Direct User Access 
Terminal System) providers and Lockheed Martin (Automated Flight Service Station provider) 
to determine whether the pilot used the services of any of these entities to acquire weather data 
on the day of the accident. Although the pilot had filed flight plans for the last two legs of his 
flight with CSC DUATS, the records of  all three providers indicated that on the day of the 
accident the pilot had not sought a weather briefing from any of their facilities (except for 
aforementioned in-fight contact with Oakland Radio to check on reports of turbulence). 
DELAY OF SEARCH AND RESCUE EFFORTS
During the time that the pilot of N521DS was executing the RNAV/GPS approach for Runway 
14 at Arcata, but no longer in radio contact with Seattle Center (he had been cleared to switch 
Page 8 of 11WPR09FA146
over to Arcata Common Traffic Advisory Frequency), the Seattle Center controller noticed that 
N521DS was below the specified altitude for the portion of the approach it was on. The 
controller notified his supervisor of that situation, and the supervisor then observed three 
radar sweeps showing the airplane between 100 and 200 feet above the ocean. Soon thereafter 
radar contact with the airplane was lost. At that time, the supervisor had the high altitude 
sector controller ask aircraft he was working to monitor their radios for an Emergency Locator 
Transmitter (ELT) signal, of which none was heard.
The supervisor then made phone contact with the Arcata Airport Manger, who was at home 
because of the time of night. The Center Supervisor advised the Airport Manger that N521DS 
had been lost from radar, and that it needed to be determined if  N521DS, "a Diamond Jet," 
had arrived safely at Arcata. The supervisor gave the Airport Manager his number to call back 
with an arrival confirmation and also asked that if the pilot was located on the ground, that he 
be asked to call the Center Supervisor about his failure to close his flight plan.
About five minutes after the initial call, the Center Supervisor realized that N521DS was not a 
jet, but instead was an airplane with a single reciprocating engine. He therefore called the 
Airport Manger back in order to correct the aircraft type information. During that phone call 
the Airport Manger told the Center Supervisor that N521DS was on the ground at Arcata 
Airport. The supervisor repeated the statement back to the Manger ("N521DS is on the 
ground?"), and the Manager responded with "yes," and that someone at the airport was going 
to give the pilot the Center Supervisor's phone number, and that the pilot would be giving him 
a call. When the Center Supervisor completed his shift, he left the information about 521DS 
and the contact with the Arcata Airport Manager with the Operations Manager In Charge 
(OMIC).
After the Center Supervisor's first call to the Airport Manger, the Airport Manger made phone 
contact with an Airport Service Worker Supervisor (ASWS) at Arcata Airport. During the 
investigation, the NTSB Investigator-In-Charge (IIC) conducted a series of interviews with 
both the Airport Manger and with the ASWS, but due to significant conflicts in their written 
and oral statements, the content of their phone conversation could not be positively 
determined. The NTSB IIC determined that the areas of conflict between the statements of the 
two individuals included, but was not limited to, what information the Airport Manger 
supplied the ASWS, what exactly the Airport Manger asked the ASWS to do, whether the ASWS 
was advised the airplane had been lost from radar, whether the ASWS was supposed to call the 
Airport Manager back, whether the ASWS was advised the airplane was not a jet, whether the 
ASWS was given the airplane's full registration number, and whether there was more than one 
call from the Airport Manger to the ASWS.
Regardless of the content of the phone conversation between the Airport Manger and the 
ASWS, according to the ASWS, he checked the Arcata Airport ramp areas for an airplane with a 
registration number ending in DS (Delta Sierra), with the intention of telling the pilot to 
contact Seattle Center at the number the Airport Manager had provided. The ASWS further 
stated that after not locating the subject airplane or pilot, he made an entry in the Airport Daily 
Log. A review of that log revealed an entry that stated, "J. H. (Airport Manager's initials) called 
@ 11:15 P.M.- Asked me to locate pilot who just landed to call Seattle Center to cancel flight 
plan. The plane and pilot were nowhere to be found."
The next morning (March 2) when the Airport Manger went to the Airport Fire Station (where 
the Airport Log was kept), the Manger was told by another individual that the ASWS had not 
Page 9 of 11WPR09FA146
located the airplane or talked with the pilot the night before. After the Airport Manger 
confirmed that information, by talking with the ASWS, the Airport Manger made a phone call 
to Seattle Center. That phone call was made about 0900, and at that time the Center was 
advised that the report that N521DS had landed at Arcata Airport the night before was 
erroneous, and that no contact had yet been made with the pilot. Ultimately, the Humboldt 
County Sheriff's Department was contacted by the California State Office of Emergency 
Services (OES) about 1100. A local search was then initiated by the Sheriff's Department.
DISPOSITION OF WRECKAGE
The NTSB did not take custody of the recovered debris. Instead it was shipped directly to the 
facility of Plain Parts, in Pleasant Grove, California, where it was held for determination of 
ultimate disposition by the Regional Adjuster of GAB Robins, a representative of the insurer of 
the airplane.
History of Flight
Approach-IFR final approach
Controlled flight into terr/obj (CFIT) (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
30, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/20/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1203 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 10 of 11WPR09FA146
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
DIAMOND AIRCRAFT IND INC
Registration:
N521DS
Model/Series:
DA-40 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
40.621
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/17/2009, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2535 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
652 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
652 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
C126 installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-MIA
Registered Owner:
MITCHELL ENTERPRISES INC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
MITCHELL ENTERPRISES INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
Plant City Airport Services
Operator Designator Code:
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KACV, 200 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2253 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
140°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 1900 ft agl
Visibility
6 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 2800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
190°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.69 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Moderate - Rain; Fog
Departure Point: 
Bakersfield, CA (KBFL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Arcata Airport, CA (KACV)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1936 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Arcata (KACV)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
221 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
Global Positioning System
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 11 of 11WPR09FA146
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
41.065000, -124.169722 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Orrin K Anderson
Adopted Date:
12/15/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Marcus Carr; FAA FSDO; Oakland, CA
Publish Date:
12/15/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
