The pilot, who is also an aircraft mechanic, had just completed a 100-hour inspection on his 
airplane, and he inadvertently left the magneto P-leads disconnected.  While in cruise flight, 
the engine lost power, and the pilot made a successful emergency landing in a field.  The pilot 
stated that he reconnected the P-leads, checked the magnetos, and attempted a takeoff from 
the field.  He stated that the acceleration was 'normal;' however, when the airplane lifted off of 
the ground it 'skipped and settled two or three times.'  The pilot aborted the takeoff 'too late to 
keep from plowing through some small trees.'  The pilot stated that he misjudged the distance 
required to takeoff from the soft field. 
The pilot's inadequate preflight planning and his delay in aborting the takeoff. 
 On July 1, 2000, at 1630 central daylight time, a Mooney M20K airplane, N231RR, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted a fence and trees during takeoff from a field near 
Godley, Texas.  The commercial pilot, who was the registered owner of the airplane and the 
sole occupant, received minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight 
plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The flight 
originated from Cleburne, Texas, at 1600, and was destined for Fort Worth, Texas.
According to a written statement provided by the pilot, who is also an aircraft mechanic, he had 
just completed a 100-hour inspection on his airplane and "inadvertently left the magneto 'P' 
leads disconnected after the mag[neto] check."  The pilot stated that he experienced a loss of 
engine power while en route to Fort Worth and performed a successful emergency landing in a 
field.  The pilot stated that he "reconnected the 'P' leads, checked the mag[netos] and 
attempted a takeoff-estimating that I had plenty of takeoff distance."  He reported that the 
wind was calm and the fuel tanks were almost full.  He added that the ground was slightly soft.  
The pilot stated that the acceleration was "normal;" however, when the airplane lifted off of the 
ground it "skipped and settled two or three times."  The pilot aborted the takeoff "too late to 
keep from plowing through some small trees."  The pilot reported that he "misjudged the 
distance required on the (slightly) soft field."  The FAA inspector stated that the left wing was 
separated from the airplane and the right wing was structurally damaged.
