The airplane was landing when it ran off the end of the runway and struck a parked airplane 
and the airport perimeter fence. The pilot said that, "after touchdown I tapped [the] brakes 
lightly and got no response.  I applied heavier pressure but got no brakes other than very light 
response."  The airplane went off the end of the runway and across the parking ramp striking a 
parked airplane and the airport perimeter fence. The parked airplane received minor damage 
to the left aileron.  A postaccident examination revealed that the brake travel was restricted by 
a support bar installed above the brake pedals.  No other anomalies were found that could be 
associated with a preexisting condition. 
the obstructed brake pedals and the unavailable brakes to the pilot.  Factors were the parked 
airplane and the fence. 
 On July 1, 2000, at 1645 eastern standard time, an amateur built McCann Wheeler 
Express/FT, N521MC, piloted by a commercial pilot was substantially damaged during contact 
with a parked airplane and the airport perimeter fence while landing on runway 13 (2,910 feet 
by 100 feet, asphalt) at the Smith Field Airport, Fort Wayne, Indiana.  The personal flight was 
operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, and was operating on an instrument flight 
rules flight plan.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 
pilot reported no injuries to himself or his one passenger.  The flight departed the Allen County 
Airport, Iola, Kansas at 1330.
In a written statement the pilot said that, "after touchdown I tapped [the] brakes lightly and 
got no response.  I applied heavier pressure but got no brakes other than very light response."  
The airplane went off the end of the runway and across the parking ramp striking a parked 
airplane and the airport perimeter fence. The parked airplane received minor damage to the 
left aileron.
A postaccident examination by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector revealed that a 
support bar installed above the brake pedals could restrict the brake travel.  The inspector said 
that this condition was noticed when his feet were raised about 2 inches above the cockpit 
floor.  No other anomalies were found that could be associated with a preexisting condition.
