During a high speed, low pass over the runway, the pilot heard a loud 'bang' and felt the 
airplane vibrate.  He declared an emergency, and executed a precautionary landing to a grass 
field near the south end of the airport.  During the landing, the left wing contacted a fence, and 
the airplane spun around 180 degrees collapsing the right main landing gear. Examination of 
the airplane revealed the propeller spinner separated in flight. 
The in-flight separation of the propeller spinner.  A factor was the lack of suitable terrain for 
the precautionary landing. 
 On July 1, 2000, at 0845 central daylight time, a Bushby Midget Mustang amateur-built 
experimental airplane, N6402G, was substantially damaged when it impacted a fence during a 
precautionary landing at the Richard Lloyd Jones Jr. Airport near Tulsa, Oklahoma.  The 
aircraft was registered to and operated by the pilot.  The private pilot, who was the sole 
occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a 
flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The 
local flight departed the Richard Lloyd Jones Jr. Airport at an unknown time.
According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB From 6120.1/2), the 
pilot was approved by air traffic control for a high speed, low pass over runway 19L.  As the 
airplane neared the end of the runway, the pilot heard a loud "bang" and felt the airplane 
vibrate.  He declared an emergency, and executed a precautionary landing to a grass field near 
the south end of the airport.  During the landing, the left wing contacted a fence, and the 
airplane spun around 180 degrees collapsing the right main landing gear.  The pilot stated that 
"inspection showed spinner broke and hit prop - not engine failure."  
According to the FAA inspector, who examined the airplane in a hanger, the propeller spinner 
separated in flight.  Examination of the aircraft revealed that the fuselage was twisted, and the 
left wing tip fuel tank and left wing tip were separated from the left wing.
