The student pilot was practicing landings solo when the accident occurred.  According to a 
statement by the student pilot, 'When I flared the airplane floated and I relaxed the yoke to 
level it back with the runway then suddenly plane hit the ground hard and bounced back in the 
air.  That totally got me by surprise.  After that plane bounced 2-3 more times and settled back 
on the runway.  After that I heard rattling sounds as plane rolled on the runway.' 
the misjudged flare and the inadequate recovery from the bounced landing performed by the 
student pilot. 
 On July 1, 2000, at 2000 central daylight time (CDT), a Cessna 152, N6432M, piloted by a 
student pilot on a solo flight, sustained substantial damage during a hard landing at the 
Lincoln Municipal Airport (LNK), Lincoln Nebraska.  The flight was being operated under the 
provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, and was not operating on a flight plan.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The student pilot reported no injuries.  The 
local flight departed LNK at 1915 CDT.
In a written statement, the pilot stated, "I was approaching runway 17L for my second touch 
and go that evening.  There was no wind or any other kind of weather hazard.  I had already set 
up the plane in landing configuration.  Flaps were fully down, airplane was aligned with the 
runway centerline, airspeed indicator showing between 60 and 65 knots.  I was going to make a 
routine landing, or so I thought.  When I flared the airplane floated and I relaxed the yoke to 
level it back with the runway then suddenly plane hit the ground hard and bounced back in the 
air.  That totally got me by surprise.  After that plane bounced 2-3 more times and settled on 
the runway.  After that I heard rattling sounds as plane rolled on the runway.  Thinking that 
something was wrong I asked control tower's permission to taxi back to ramp.  When I got out 
of the plane I noticed that front tire was flat and bearings had come loose around the nose 
wheel axle."
A post accident examination of the aircraft revealed damage to the firewall.
