The student pilot departed on his first solo flight, completed a traffic pattern and returned for 
landing on Runway 06.  He reported that on short final for the runway, an encounter with a 
gust of wind resulted in his loss of runway alignment and a hard landing with a 'side load' on 
the landing gear.  A bystander noticed wrinkling of the airplane's skin as the airplane taxied 
and a subsequent examination of the airplane revealed substantial damage to the airframe. The 
student pilot reported that there were no mechanical deficiencies with the airplane.  The winds 
reported at the time of the accident were from 010 degrees at 5 knots. 
the student pilot's inadequate compensation for winds that resulted in his failure to maintain 
runway alignment and a hard landing. 
 On July 1, 2000, at 1130 Eastern Daylight Time, a Cessna 172H, N1688F, was substantially 
damaged during landing at the Potomac Airfield (VKX), Friendly, Maryland.  The student pilot 
was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the solo instructional flight 
that originated at VKX, approximately 1120.  No flight plan was filed for the flight conducted 
under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement, the student pilot said:
"...I embarked upon my first supervised solo flight...  This was to be a set of three takeoffs, 
completions of the traffic pattern, and landings.
"On final in the first flight, as I cleared the houses at the end of the runway, an updraft seemed 
to push the tail of the plane up and the aircraft to the right.  I corrected to put the airplane back 
on the centerline.  However, the landing was somewhat hard and with a side load.  The airplane 
bounced twice.  Although it veered to the left of the runway, the plane did not enter the grass.  
A bystander noticed that the skin on the plane was dented.
In a written statement, the student pilot's flight instructor stated he supervised the flight from 
the ground.  According to the flight instructor:
"The first take-off and pattern was performed very well.  On his first approach to land, an 
updraft at the end of the runway pushed [the student] off of the centerline.  While correcting 
for the centerline, [the student] ballooned above the runway, added power to compensate, but 
still landed with an extreme side load due to the correction to get back on centerline.
"Afterwards, [the student], thinking that he had only landed hard, began to taxi back for his 
second circuit.  While taxiing, an observer pointed out a dent in the aircraft.  The flight was 
discontinued immediately to survey the damage [to] the aircraft."
In a telephone interview, the student pilot stated there were no mechanical deficiencies with 
the airplane.  He reported 39 hours of total flight experience, all of which was in the Cessna 
172.
Weather reported at the Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport, 7 miles northwest of 
Potomac Airfield was scattered clouds at 7,000 feet with winds from 010 degrees at 5 knots.
