While in cruise flight, the airplane encountered icing conditions. The pilot contacted ARTCC 
and requested various altitudes to avoid further icing. However, the airplane was unable to 
maintain altitude, and the pilot requested vectors to the nearest airport. Approach control 
cleared him to intercept the ILS. At approximately 15 feet above the ground, he flared and the 
airplane "dropped hard onto the runway." As he added power, the airplane drifted to the left 
and struck a runway and a taxiway light. The pilot stated that he was able to taxi the airplane 
back onto the runway and then park it on the ramp. An initial inspection of the airplane 
revealed that it had an accumulation of ice on the leading edges of both wings, that in some 
places was up to as much as 2 and 1/2 inches thick.
the pilot's failure to maintain the proper decent rate during the flare resulting in a hard 
landing. Contributing factors icing conditions and accumulations of wing ice.
On May 2, 2001, at approximately 1330 mountain daylight time, a Cessna T206H, N72582, was 
substantially damaged during landing at Front Range Airport, Watkins, Colorado. The 
instrument rated private pilot and passenger were not injured. Instrument meteorological 
conditions prevailed. An IFR flight plan was filed for this personal flight being conducted 
under Title 14 CFR Part 91. The flight departed Marv Skie-Lincoln County Airport, Tea, South 
Dakota, at approximately 1000.
According to the pilot, he encountered icing conditions while en route to Centennial Airport, 
Englewood, Colorado. He contacted Denver Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and 
requested various altitudes to avoid further icing. However, he was unable to maintain altitude 
and requested vectors to the nearest airport. Denver approach control cleared him to intercept 
the ILS for runway 26 at Front Range. It was his first time landing at the airport, and at 
approximately 15 feet above the ground, he flared and the airplane "dropped hard onto the 
runway." As he added power, the airplane drifted to the left and struck a runway and a taxiway 
light. The airplane sustained damage to the nose and right landing gear wheel pants, the 
elevator's right hand balance weight skin, the cargo door and substantial damage to the 
underside of the fuselage and empennage.
The pilot stated that he was able to taxi the airplane back onto the runway and then park it on 
the ramp. An initial inspection of the airplane revealed that it had an accumulation of ice on 
the leading edges of both wings, that in some places was up to as much as 2 and 1/2 inches 
thick.
The weather conditions at the time of the accident were: winds, from 360 degrees, at 12 knots; 
visibility, 2 and 1/2 mile; altimeter setting, 30.05 inches of  mercury; temperature, 1 degree 
celcius/33 degrees Fahrenheit; ceiling, broken at 5,000 feet and overcast at 10,000 feet, with 
light rain and fog.
