The airplane was substantially damaged when it was struck by an aircraft tug during passenger 
boarding.  The aircraft was parked and was being prepared for departure. The driver of the tug 
was moving the vehicle into position in order to connect the aircraft tow bar in preparation for 
pushback.  He said that when he placed the tug into gear, it lurched forward into the parked 
aircraft.  He said that pieces of the aircraft protruded through the windshield of the vehicle and 
pinned him into his seat.  He said that he was unable to shift the vehicle into reverse and his leg 
was pinned on the accelerator pedal.  Other ground workers in the area attempted to shut off 
the tug's engine.  The driver said that the vehicle continued to drive forward until the engine 
was finally shut off.  During the event, the pilot of the aircraft had applied the brakes when he 
noticed the unplanned movement of the airplane.  The aircraft was pushed backward about 30 
feet causing damage to the nose section of the fuselage. Subsequent to the accident, the tug was 
placed on jacks and a check performed.  During the check it was found that the normal engine 
shutoff switch would not shut the engine off if the engine was operated at high throttle settings.  
It was further discovered that at high throttle settings, the brake system was not able to stop 
the rotation of the drive wheels.  No anomalies were found during this test that would explain 
the lurching described by the tug driver.  The tug had been involved in a previous incident 
where an aircraft was damaged.  A report of the previous incident showed that the tug lurched 
when the driver was attempting to move the tug into position to connect to the aircraft. The tug 
manufacturer does not have records of operational problems associated with that model tug.  
The manufacturer also said that they were not aware of a history of lurching problems 
concerning the model tug in question.  It was found that the distance from the cab of the tug to 
the nose of a DC-9 aircraft when the tow bar is attached is 4 feet 2 inches.
The partial failure of the aircraft tug for undetermined reasons.
On May 01, 2001, at 1437 central daylight time, a Douglas DC-9-31, N9333, operated by 
Northwest Airlines, Inc. as flight 682, was substantially damaged when it was struck by an 
aircraft tug during passenger boarding.  The 14 CFR Part 121 flight was parked at gate D3 at the 
Minneapolis-St. Paul International/Wold-Chamberlain Airport, Minneapolis, Minnesota and 
was bound for the Philadelphia International Airport, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  No injuries 
were reported by the 4 crewmembers or 38 passengers that had boarded the aircraft.  The 
driver of the tug and a food service worker received minor injuries.
The aircraft was parked and was being prepared for departure by various ground workers 
including the tug driver and workers restocking the aircraft food supply. The driver of the tug 
said that he was moving the vehicle into position in order to connect the aircraft tow bar in 
preparation for pushback.  He said that when he placed the tug into gear, it lurched forward 
into the parked aircraft.  He said that pieces of the aircraft protruded through the windshield of 
the vehicle and pinned him into his seat.  He said that he was unable to shift the vehicle into 
reverse and his leg was pinned on the accelerator pedal.  Other ground workers in the area 
attempted to shut off the tug's engine.  The driver said that the vehicle continued to drive 
forward until the engine was finally shut off.  During the event, the pilot of the aircraft had 
applied the brakes when he noticed the unplanned movement of the airplane.  The aircraft was 
pushed backward about 30 feet causing damage to the nose section of the fuselage.  A food 
service worker was injured when he jumped from his vehicle which was parked next to the 
aircraft.
Subsequent to the accident, the tug was placed on jacks and a check performed.  During the 
check it was found that the normal engine shutoff switch would not shut the engine off if the 
engine was operated at high throttle settings.  It was further discovered that at high throttle 
settings, the brake system was not able to stop the rotation of the drive wheels.  No anomalies 
were found during this test that would explain the lurching described by the tug driver.  
Subsequent to the testing, the throttle system of the tug was replaced as a precautionary 
measure by the airline.
During the course of the investigation, it was found that the tug had been involved in a 
previous incident where an aircraft was damaged.  A report of the previous incident was 
obtained. The driver of the tug during the previous incident reported that the tug lurched when 
he was attempting to move the tug into position to connect to the aircraft.
The manufacturer of the tug said, during a telephone interview, that they do not have records 
of operational problems associated with that model tug.  He also stated that he was not aware 
of a history of lurching problems concerning the model tug in question.
It was found that the distance from the cab of the tug to the nose of a DC-9 aircraft when the 
tow bar is attached is 4 feet 2 inches.
