According to the flight instructor and pilot receiving instruction, the student was 
demonstrating a commercial flight maneuver, at 2,100 feet agl, when they smelled an odor 
similar to "electrical burning."  The instructor told the student to terminate the maneuver and 
return to the airport.  While the student was terminating the maneuver, visible smoke 
appeared in the cabin, and heat was felt coming from beneath the instrument panel.  The 
instructor assumed control of the airplane.  The engine was shut down and a forced landing 
was executed to a field.  During the landing, the airplane encountered soft terrain, nosed over 
and came to rest inverted.   A plastic hydraulic reservoir, from the hydraulic power pack, was 
found melted and laying on the cockpit floor.  The hydraulic power pack was examined and 
functionally tested at Aero Electric Inc., Wichita, Kansas, under supervision of the FAA.  
According a report from Aero Electric, the power pack and its related components operated 
within manufacturer's specifications.
the in-flight fire for an undetermined reason, which resulted in a forced landing.  A 
contributory factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
On May 3, 2001, at 1300 central daylight time, a Cessna 172RG airplane, N9696B, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following an in-flight fire near Washington, 
Oklahoma.  The airplane was registered to Christensen Aviation Inc., of Wilmington, Delaware, 
and operated by Airman Flight School, Inc., of Norman, Oklahoma.  The flight instructor and 
private pilot receiving instruction sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
instructional flight.  The local flight originated from the University of Oklahoma Westheimer 
Airport, Norman, Oklahoma, at 1230.
According to the flight instructor and pilot receiving instruction, the student was 
demonstrating a commercial flight maneuver at 2,100 feet agl, when they smelled an odor 
similar to "electrical burning."  The instructor told the student to terminate the maneuver and 
return to the Westheimer Airport.  While the student was terminating the maneuver, visible 
smoke appeared in the cabin and heat was felt coming from beneath the instrument panel.  The 
instructor assumed control of the airplane.  The engine was shut down, and a forced landing 
was executed to a field.  During the landing, the airplane encountered soft terrain, nosed over 
and came to rest inverted.   
According to an FAA inspector, who examined the airplane, a plastic hydraulic reservoir from 
the hydraulic power pack was found melted and laying on the cockpit floor.  He stated that the 
left wing-tip, the right wing strut, and the vertical stabilizer were structurally damaged.  He 
added that the engine firewall was buckled.  
The hydraulic power pack was examined and functionally tested at Aero Electric Inc., Wichita, 
Kansas, under supervision of the FAA.  According a report from Aero Electric, the power pack 
and its related components operated within manufacturer's specifications.  
