Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
VAN NUYS, CA
Accident Number:
LAX99TA066
Date & Time:
01/02/1999, 2115 PST 
Registration:
N58126
Aircraft:
Bell 205A-1
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Public Aircraft
Analysis 
During a night training flight over mountainous terrain the pilot heard a loud 'clunking' sound, 
which was accompanied by vibrations.  The engine then emitted a loud grinding, metallic 
grating sound.  Simultaneously, warning lights, engine chip lights, and the rpm decay light 
became illuminated.  The pilot lowered the collective and entered an autorotation but did not 
have sufficient airspeed and altitude to reach a dirt road, so he turned down a canyon and 
performed a hard flare and near-vertical descent with little forward speed.  The helicopter 
landed hard and came to rest on rough uneven terrain surrounded by trees and high 
vegetation.  Postaccident examination revealed that the engine power turbine as viewed from 
the exhaust exhibited damage.  The number 4 turbine wheel was missing all of its blades and 
the blades on the number 3 turbine wheel were damaged.  Scoring was evidenced on the inside 
diameter of the turbine case in the area of the Nos. 3 and 4 turbine wheels.  All the vanes and 
inner and outer supports of the second stage power turbine nozzle were displaced and/or 
missing, and fragments of the outer vane support were torn and distorted.  The third stage 
turbine nozzle exhibited extensive damage on the trailing edges of the vanes and on the 
shroud/outer housing.  Metallurgical examination of the turbine components disclosed 
features indicative of overload fractures without evidence of material defects or fatigue. The 
metallurgist concluded that the overall type and degree of engine damage was indicative of a 
component failure in the second stage power turbine nozzle area; however, the cause of the 
component failure was not determined. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to an undetermined component failure in the second stage power 
turbine nozzle area.  Factors in the accident were the mountainous/hilly nature of the terrain 
and the dark night lighting conditions which precluded the pilot from selecting a suitable 
forced landing area. 
Page 2 of 6LAX99TA066
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) TURBOSHAFT ENGINE,FREE(POWER) TURBINE - FAILURE
2. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY
4. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION
Page 3 of 6LAX99TA066
Factual Information
 On January 2, 1999, at 2115 hours Pacific standard time, a Bell 205A-1, N58126, landed hard 
during a autorotation in Rustic Canyon, about 7 miles southwest of the Van Nuys, California, 
airport.  The forced landing was precipitated by a loss of engine power during a climb following 
takeoff.  The aircraft sustained substantial damage.  The commercial pilot and one 
crewmember were not injured.  The other crewmember sustained serious injuries.  The public-
use helicopter was being operated by the Los Angeles City Fire Department as a training flight 
at the time of the accident.  The flight originated at the Van Nuys Airport about 2000, and a 
company visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan was on file.  Night visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.
The pilot reported that the purpose of the flight was to practice "Night-Sun" operations.  After 1 
hour of training the pilot landed the helicopter on a dirt road so the crewmembers could switch 
seats.  He reported that after conducting a crew briefing, he lifted off and began a climb to the 
north.  The pilot stated that approximately 10 to 15 seconds later, and about 75 feet agl, he 
initiated a left turn to the west.  He reported that almost immediately after beginning the turn 
he heard a loud "clunking" sound, which was accompanied by vibrations.  The engine then 
emitted a loud grinding, metallic grating sound.  Simultaneously, warning lights, engine chip 
lights, and the rpm decay light became illuminated.  The pilot reported that he immediately 
lowered the collective and entered an autorotation.  He stated that he did not have sufficient 
airspeed and altitude to reach the dirt road, so he started a 180-degree left turn down the 
canyon.  He informed the crew that they had an engine failure and would be going to the 
bottom of the canyon.  The pilot reported that after reaching treetop level, he performed a hard 
flare and near-vertical descent with little forward speed.  The helicopter landed hard and came 
to rest on rough uneven terrain surrounded by trees and high vegetation.
The pilot reported that after egress of the aircraft, he did not smell or see smoke, nor did he 
note any fuel leakage.  He further stated that the engine and rotor blades were stopped.  The 
pilot reported that he had not experienced any mechanical abnormalities with the aircraft prior 
to the onset of the engine problem.
The helicopter was recovered from the site with a hoist assembly and was examined on January 
7, 1999 by the Safety Board with technical assistance from Bell Helicopters and Allied Signal.  
Examination of the airframe revealed that the main cabin assembly was intact.  The belly of the 
aircraft exhibited dents and crushing damage.  The cockpit area and flight controls appeared 
undamaged.  The pilot's seat appeared to be bent downward approximately 1 inch at the 
forward edge.  The copilot's seat appeared undamaged.
The main rotor mast and controls had been removed from the transmission.  The transmission 
was still mounted to the airframe and it was noted that the transmission input quill rotated 
freely in the freewheel direction (counter-clockwise) but would not rotate in the drive 
direction.  The main driveshaft was intact.
The tailboom was intact but had been removed from the fuselage.  The upper right tailboom 
attachment fitting displayed a fracture; the fractured portion remained attached to the 
tailboom assembly.  A portion of the fuselage mounted tailboom attachment fitting was present 
at the upper right-side corner of the forward bulkhead of the tailboom.  The right-side 
synchronized elevator assembly was damaged and had been pushed aft in the tailboom 
structure.  The tail rotor assembly was still mounted to the top of the vertical fin.  Drive and 
Page 4 of 6LAX99TA066
control continuity was established from the fuselage aft to the tail rotor assembly.  One tail 
rotor blade exhibited a cut approximately 1/16 inch wide and 3/4 inch deep in the leading edge.
The engine was still attached to the airframe.  Both legs of the engine mount bipod on the right 
side of the engine were bent aft.  The forward and inner legs of the engine mount were also 
bent.  The engine controls and accessories remained intact.  The engine power turbine as 
viewed from the exhaust exhibited damage.  The number 4 turbine wheel was missing all of its 
blades and the blades on the number 3 turbine wheel were damaged.  Scoring was evidenced 
on the inside diameter of the turbine case in the area of the Nos. 3 and 4 turbine wheels.  The 
engine was removed from the airframe and shipped to Allied Signal Corporation for further 
testing.
The engine was examined on January 25 and 26, 1999, under the supervision of the Safety 
Board.  Disassembly of the engine revealed that all the vanes and inner and outer supports of 
the second stage power turbine nozzle were displaced and/or missing, and fragments of the 
outer vane support were torn and distorted. The third stage turbine nozzle exhibited extensive 
damage on the trailing edges of the vanes and on the shroud/outer housing.  The Allied Signal 
metallurgist reported that this damage was indicative of secondary damage resulting from the 
separations of the third stage blades and the fourth stage nozzle.  Almost all of the fourth stage 
turbine nozzle was missing, except for portions of the outer band.  The metallurgist was not 
able to determine the exact cause of the damage; however, he noted that the remaining features 
on the fourth stage nozzle were indicative of an overload fracture mode.
He further concluded that the separations of the blades on both the third and fourth stage 
turbine wheel assemblies were indicative of an overload fracture mode.  No material defects or 
fatigue cracks were observed on the overload fractures. 
The metallurgist concluded that the overall type and degree of engine damage was indicative of 
a component failure in the second stage power turbine nozzle area; however, the cause of the 
component failure was not determined.  All other damage observed was concluded to be 
secondary.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/28/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300 hours (Total, this make and model), 2800 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 80 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX99TA066
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N58126
Model/Series:
205A-1 205A-1
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
30136
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
15
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/09/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
10200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
33 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
6361 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
T53-13B
Registered Owner:
CITY OF LOS ANGELES
Rated Power:
1400 hp
Operator:
CITY OF LOS ANGELES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Bright
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
16°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
VAN NUYS, CA (VNY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2000 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious, 2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JEFF         RICH
Adopted Date:
11/30/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
DALE   HANSON; VAN NUYS, CA
JACK   SUTTLE; FORT WORTH, TX
PHIL   HENSLEY; PHOENIX, AZ
ROD   WILMOT; LOS ANGELES, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
