Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SHELBYVILLE, TX
Accident Number:
FTW99LA059
Date & Time:
01/01/1999, 1705 CST 
Registration:
N234CG
Aircraft:
Cessna 421C
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
4 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During a precautionary landing following a loss of electrical power, the pilot turned the 
airplane to avoid colliding with a pickup truck, and the airplane impacted trees.  The pilot 
reported that while IMC, at 14,000 feet msl, he started preparing for ice penetration and 
turned on the two propeller anti-ice switches.  The right propeller anti-icing circuit breaker 
popped, and when the circuit breaker was reset, the airplane experienced a total electrical 
failure.  The pilot initiated an emergency descent, and entered into VFR conditions at about 
1,500 feet.  After about 30 minutes of trying to locate an airport, with it getting dark and 
thunderstorms in the area, the pilot elected to land on a narrow road with trees on both sides.  
Testing of the alternator system revealed discrepancies with the left alternator, both voltage 
regulators, and the right alternator out sensor. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The total failure of the aircraft's electrical system.  Factors were the thunderstorms, the dusk 
light condition, and the lack of suitable terrain for the precautionary landing. 
Page 2 of 6FTW99LA059
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM,ALTERNATOR - FAILURE
2. (C) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM,VOLTAGE REGULATOR - FAILURE
3. ANNUNCIATOR PANEL LIGHT(S) - NOT ACTIVATED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
4. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - THUNDERSTORM
5. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DUSK
6. PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
7. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
8. OBJECT - VEHICLE
9. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6FTW99LA059
Factual Information
 On January 1, 1999, at 1705 central standard time, a Cessna 421C twin-engine airplane, 
N234CG, was substantially damaged during a precautionary landing near Shelbyville, Texas.  
The airline transport pilot was not injured and his four passengers sustained minor injuries.  
The airplane was registered to and operated by Metro Redevelopment, Inc. of Omaha, 
Nebraska.  Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed, and an IFR flight plan was filed 
for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal cross-country flight.  The flight 
originated from the Lakefront Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana, at 1520, with a destination of 
Omaha, Nebraska.
The pilot reported that while in instrument meteorological conditions, at 14,000 feet msl, he 
advised Houston Center that "I may have to go up soon, to avoid ice as my thermometer had 
dropped [to] 6 degrees below zero, and I needed to make it go to below 10 degrees Centigrade 
BELOW Zero to avoid ice."  After about a minute, he started preparing for ice penetration and 
"flipped" the two propeller anti-ice switches.  Turning on the second switch popped the right 
propeller anti-icing circuit breaker.  When he reset the circuit breaker, the airplane 
experienced a total electrical failure.  He then initiated an emergency descent and entered into 
VMC at about 1,500 feet.  The pilot further reported that he flew around about 30 minutes 
trying to locate an airport; however, with it getting dark and thunderstorms in the area, he 
elected to land on a road.  The pilot stated that he made a few "S" turns to observe traffic, and 
during the approach to the road, the aircraft "hit several power lines and cables and flew under 
another double set."  During the landing on the narrow road, with trees on both sides, he 
turned the airplane left to avoid colliding with a pickup truck, and the airplane impacted trees.
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that both wings were damaged.  The 
right main landing gear, nose landing gear, and 5 feet of the nose area forward of the bulkhead 
was separated from the aircraft.
On January 22, 1999, the alternator system was tested under the supervision of an FAA 
inspector.  Testing of the alternators revealed that the left alternator was "bad"; however, there 
was 12 volts at the AUX terminal.  The right alternator checked out "okay."  "Both the left and 
right regulators tested bad and they would not regulate the voltage."  The alternator out 
sensors were then tested.  "The left sensor checked okay, and the right sensor checked bad."  
According to the FAA inspector, "the right sensor had an open circuit and would not have 
turned on the light on the annunciator panel.  The left sensor would not have turned on the 
light on the annunciator panel because the alternator was producing voltage at the AUX 
terminal, and that would have kept the circuit open on the sensor."
Page 4 of 6FTW99LA059
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
77, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/09/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
15119 hours (Total, all aircraft), 290 hours (Total, this make and model), 15000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 49 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 18 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N234CG
Model/Series:
421C 421C
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
421C0267
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
8
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/20/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
97 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2894 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
GTSIO-520-L1B
Registered Owner:
METRO REDEVELOPMENT, 
INC.
Rated Power:
375 hp
Operator:
METRO REDEVELOPMENT, 
INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW99LA059
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OCH, 355 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
34 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1655 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
250°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2900 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
140°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
NEW ORLEANS, LA (NEW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
OMAHA, NE (MLE)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1520 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
4 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DOUGLAS    D WIGINGTON
Adopted Date:
06/22/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
THOMAS J LATSON, JR.; HOUSTON, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW99LA059
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
