Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SANTA BARBARA, CA
Accident Number:
LAX99LA067
Date & Time:
01/03/1999, 1627 PST 
Registration:
N3585V
Aircraft:
Cessna 140
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane was performing touch-and-go landings and had just lifted off to climb on the 
runway heading when the engine abruptly lost power at 150 feet above ground level. The pilot 
attempted to execute a turn and lower the nose to maintain airspeed.  The engine was faltering 
and producing partial power, then cycling and producing no power.  The pilot did not have 
sufficient altitude to make the runway and the airplane nosed over and came to rest in a marsh 
located near the runway.  Examination of the engine found that the right magneto to engine 
timing was 17 degrees before top dead center of cylinder number one.  The Lycoming engine 
data plate specifies that the engine to magneto timing be set at 25 degrees.  The left magneto 
was inoperative and further investigation found that the primary coil circuit was internally 
shorted.  Review of the maintenance records disclosed that the last annual inspection was 
accomplished on May 5, 1998, about 40 hours prior to the accident.  No entries were found 
detailing maintenance on the magnetos after the annual. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to an internal left magneto coil primary circuit short.  Factors were 
insufficient altitude and inadequate terrain to make an emergency landing. 
Page 2 of 6LAX99LA067
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO - SHORTED
2. (C) IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO - TIMING IMPROPER
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
3. ALTITUDE - INADEQUATE
----------
Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT
Page 3 of 6LAX99LA067
Factual Information
 On January 3, 1999, at 1627 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna 140, N3585V, nosed over 
and came to rest inverted in a marsh following a touch-and-go landing attempt at the Santa 
Barbara, California, airport.  The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the commercial 
pilot/owner and his passenger received minor injuries.  The flight was being flown under CFR 
Part 91 when the accident occurred.  The personal flight originated in Santa Paula, California, 
at 1550, and a flight plan was not filed for the flight.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that he was cleared for touch-and-go's on runway 15L.  He stated he had just 
lifted off and was proceeding to climb on the runway heading when the engine power "abruptly 
reduced to no power" at 150 feet agl.  He said he executed a gradual turn to the right, and 
lowered the nose to maintain forward airspeed.  He said that the engine was faltering and 
producing partial power, and then no power.  He said the airplane struck the ground with a 
slight nose low attitude.
The airplane was removed from the site and relocated to a nearby aircraft wreckage yard.  At 
the request of the Safety Board, the wreckage was examined under the supervision of a Van 
Nuys, California Flight Standards District Office aviation inspector and a Textron Lycoming 
engine representative.  According to the Textron Lycoming engine representative, the engine 
did not display any evidence of premishap catastrophic mechanical malfunction or fire.
The bottom spark plugs were removed and examined by the engine representative.  He noted 
that the spark plug electrodes were undamaged from any foreign object ingestion.  The 
crankshaft was rotated by hand utilizing the propeller, and was free and easy to rotate in both 
directions.  Thumb compression was observed in proper order on all four cylinders.  
The right magneto was found securely clamped.  The magneto to engine timing was observed at 
17 degrees before top dead center (BTDC) of cylinder number one.  The Lycoming engine data 
plate specifies the engine to magneto timing be at 25 degrees BTDC.
The left magneto, S4LN-21, 10-51360-37, s/n 0010469 was found securely clamped.  The 
impulse coupling was heard clicking during rotation of the crankshaft.  During the magneto to 
engine timing check, the timing light would not illuminate on the syncrophaser during rotation 
of the crankshaft.  The magneto to engine timing could not be ascertained.  The magneto was 
removed for further examination.  The drive was observed to be intact and properly saftied.  
The contact assembly (points) was undamaged and was observed to operate normally during 
hand rotation of the drive.  Further examination of the magneto coil revealed that the primary 
circuit was internally shorted.  A complete copy of the Textron Lycoming report is appended to 
this report.
Review of the maintenance records disclosed that the last annual inspection was accomplished 
on May 5, 1998, about 40 hours prior to the accident.  No entries were found detailing 
maintenance on the magnetos after the annual.
The wreckage was released to the registered owner at the conclusion of the engine examination 
on March 1, 1999.
Page 4 of 6LAX99LA067
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/28/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1044 hours (Total, all aircraft), 800 hours (Total, this make and model), 982 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 23 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 13 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N3585V
Model/Series:
140 140
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
14750
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/05/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
40 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
817 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-235-C1
Registered Owner:
RUSSELL T. EVANS
Rated Power:
108 hp
Operator:
RUSSELL T. EVANS
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX99LA067
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SBA, 10 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1639 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
SANTA PAULA, CA (SZP)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (SBA)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1550 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
SANTA BARBARA AIRPORT (SBA)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
10 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
15L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4179 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Touch and Go
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DEBORAH    L CHILDRESS
Adopted Date:
06/23/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
JOEL   HARRIS; VAN NUYS, CA
MARK   PLATT; VAN NUYS, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX99LA067
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
