The pilot had practiced two takeoffs and landings at his base airstrip, then departed the pattern 
and flew to another airstrip for five touch-and-go landings.  He then flew back to his base 
airstrip and established the airplane on an approach to runway 29.  The pilot stated that while 
on final approach, the airplane's angle of descent was low, and he added power to maintain 
altitude.  After clearing the trees at the end of the runway, he then leveled the nose for a short 
field landing.  The pilot stated that the airplane did not respond and he 'pulled the stick full aft 
and made a hard landing.'  After landing, the airplane veered right, and the right wing struck 
trees along the side of the runway.  The pilot estimated that the winds were from 300 degrees 
at 22 knots, gusting to 25.  The sod strip was about 4,000 feet long, 100 feet wide, and 
surrounded by 75-foot high trees on all sides. 
the pilot's improper flare and failure to maintain directional control during landing. 
 On March 1, 1996, at 1500 eastern standard time, a Bellanca 7KCAB, N7807S, was 
substantially damaged during landing at a private airstrip near South Wales, New York.  The 
private pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight 
that originated from South Wales, at 1400.  No flight plan had been filed for the flight 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
    In the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot stated that he performed 2 takeoffs and landings at the 
South Wales Airport.  He then departed the pattern and flew to another airstrip where he 
performed five touch and go landings.  The pilot then flew back to South Wales and established 
the airplane on an approach to runway 29.  
    He further stated:
"...I made a normal approach to runway 29 and found my angle of descent was too low, so I 
added power to maintain altitude.  After clearing the trees at the end of runway 29, I leveled 
the nose for a short field landing.  The plane did not respond...I pulled the stick full aft and 
made a hard landing.  The aircraft then made a turn to the right and...the right  wing struck a 
tree...When I exited the aircraft I saw the tail wheel was bent to the right..."
    The pilot reported that the winds were from 300 degrees at 22 knots, gusting to 25.  
    According to a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, the runway was 4,000 feet long, 
100 feet wide, and surrounded by 75 foot high trees on all sides.
