At the completion of a cross-country flight, the pilot made a normal landing. After touchdown, 
the aircraft swerved to the left and departed the side of the runway. As the aircraft departed the 
runway, the pilot elected to go around. After rolling across a grass area, the aircraft struck a 
fence and nosed over. Examination of the aircraft provided evidence that the left main tire was 
flat, and the valve stem was missing. Tire marks were found on the runway that were consistent 
with the track of the aircraft. 
Failure of the pilot to maintain directional control of the airplane after the left main tire went 
flat during the landing roll. The flat tire was a related factor. 
 On March 2, 1996, at 1030 mountain standard time, a Cessna 182A, N6344B, nosed over 
during landing roll at Walsenburg, Colorado.  The private pilot and passenger were not injured 
and the aircraft sustained substantial damage.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for 
this personal flight conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91 and a VFR flight plan was filed.  The 
flight departed Edgewood, New Mexico, at 0830.
According to the pilot, a normal landing was made from a left base at the destination airport.  
On touch down, the aircraft veered left and control inputs provided no relief to the left swerve.  
As the aircraft departed the side of the runway, the pilot said he elected to go around and 
power was added.  The aircraft rolled across a grass area, struck a barb wire fence and then 
entered an area covered with sage brush.  The nose landing gear collapsed and the aircraft 
nosed over.
Examination of the aircraft by the pilot and an FAA inspector provided information that the 
left main tire was flat and the valve stem was missing.  There was no observed damage to the 
left tire or rim.
Witness marks on the runway consisted of black scuff marks which departed the side of the 
runway into the grass area.  The marks were consistent with the traced path of the aircraft.
Wind at the closest reporting station, 37 miles south of the accident site was from 320 degrees 
at 18 knots with gusts to 24 knots.  Pilot reported wind at the accident site was 260 to 300 
degrees estimated at 10 knots with minimal gusts.
