According to the pilot, she had just landed after a local flight with a passenger. While taxiing 
toward the terminal, a person, who was standing on the ramp, adjacent to the taxiway, 
approached the airplane from the left (pilot's) side. The pilot then stopped the airplane, idled 
the engine, and had a brief conversation with the person. During the conversation, the pilot 
agreed to embark the person after her current passenger exited the airplane, and take the 
person for a short flight. While conversing, the person was located aft of the left wing strut, and 
the pilot's door was open. Several spectators, who were observing the activity from the ramp 
area, reported that after the conversation with the pilot, the person turned to wave at them, 
and then walked into the propeller. 
Failure of the pilot to ensure that the other person (outside the airplane) remained clear of the 
operating propeller, and failure of the other person to maintain awareness of the hazardous 
condition.  A factor relating to the accident was: the other person diverted his attention to 
spectators, who were standing nearby. 
 On March 2, 1996, at 1715 central standard time, a Cessna 150F,  N8642S, registered to a 
private owner, and operated under Title  14 CFR Part 91, was standing with the engine 
operating, when a  potential passenger outside the airplane contacted the propeller,  at Jasper 
County Airport, Jasper, Texas.  Visual meteorological  conditions prevailed and no flight plan 
was filed.  The rental  airplane sustained minor damaged, and the private pilot-in- command 
and one passenger were not injured.  The person who  contacted the propeller sustained 
serious injuries.  The personal  flight was intended to embark the potential passenger, and fly 
in  the local area.
According to the pilot, she had just landed after a local sight- seeing flight with a passenger.  As 
she was taxiing toward the  terminal, a person, who was standing on the ramp adjacent to the  
taxiway, approached the airplane from the left (pilot's) side.   She then stopped the airplane, 
idled the engine, and had a brief  conversation with the person who approached the airplane.  
During  the conversation, the pilot agreed to embark the person after her  current passenger 
got out of the airplane, and go for a short  flight in the local area.  During the conversation, the 
person  was located aft of the left wing strut.         
Several spectators, who were observing the activity from the ramp  area, reported that, after the 
conversation with the pilot, the  person turned to wave at them, and then walked into the  
propeller.
