The pilot and passenger departed a remote airstrip on a commuter flight in marginal VFR 
conditions.  The pilot reported that he was crossing low hills about 1,000 feet AGL and 
encountered turbulence and a possible loss of engine power. The engine did not run rough but 
the airplane continued to descend until impact.  The airplane struck a snow covered hill about 
15 miles west of the destination airport.  The passenger reported that the majority of the flight 
was conducted with limited downward visibility.  Just prior to impact, the passenger reported 
white-out conditions, and no terrain was visible.  The airplane received damage to the landing 
gear, fuselage, and wings.  The pilot and passenger were rescued about 4 hours after the 
accident.  The destination airport reported weather conditions that included a 1,300 feet 
overcast sky and a visibility of 10 miles in light snow.  The operator reported no engine 
malfunction. 
the pilot's continued VFR flight into instrument meteorological conditions and his failure to 
maintain adequate altitude/clearance from terrain.  Low ceilings and snow covered terrain 
were factors in the accident. 
 On March 2, 1996, about 1330 Alaska standard time, a wheel equipped Piper PA-32-301, 
N8374T, collided with terrain about 15 miles west of Nome, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) scheduled domestic commuter flight under Title 14 CFR 
Part 135 when the accident occurred.  The airplane, operated as flight number 3321 by Grant 
Aviation Inc., Emmonak, Alaska, sustained substantial damage.  The certificated commercial 
pilot was not injured.  The sole passenger received minor injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.  VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.  The flight 
originated from Teller, Alaska, at 1300.
On March 2, 1996, about 2110, in a telephone interview with the National Transportation 
Safety Board, Investigator-in-Charge (IIC), the pilot reported that after departure from Teller, 
he encountered moderate turbulence and followed the coast in a southeastern direction until 
turning eastbound toward Nome.  He climbed to 2,500 feet mean sea level (MSL) to cross an 
area of low hills located to the west of Nome.  The hills varied from 1,000 to 1,500 feet msl.  
The pilot indicated that there were strong winds from the northeast.  As he was crossing the 
hills, the airplane began losing altitude.
The pilot indicated that he thought the engine was losing power and pushed the throttle, 
propeller control, and mixture control full forward.  The engine did not quit, run rough or 
sputter.  The pilot reported that he activated the engine boost pump but did not pull the 
alternate air source.  The airplane continued to lose altitude and the pilot slowed to about 75 
knots before touching down on snow covered terrain.  The airplane received damage to the 
landing gear, fuselage, and wings.  The operator submitted a pilot/operator report (NTSB form 
6120.1/2) and indicated on the form that the airplane did not experience a mechanical 
malfunction.
On March 8, 1996, about 0918, in a telephone interview with the passenger, he reported to the 
IIC that he boarded the airplane in Brevig Mission, Alaska, after missing an earlier flight.  The 
flight proceeded to Teller without incident.  After departure from Teller, the flight proceeded 
west and then south over sea ice.  The passenger described the weather as dense, white-out 
conditions with limited downward visibility.  He recalled occasionally seeing sea ice and brush 
and also observed Sledge Island (8 miles southwest of the accident site).  The forward visibility 
was described as..."dirty, cloudy, whiteness."
The passenger indicated that his first indication that the airplane had crashed was when the 
airplane suddenly stopped and he sustained a cut on his forehead.  He recalled the pilot 
commenting..."If only he'd been 10 feet higher...we'd have made it and we'd be drinking coffee 
in Nome now."  The pilot and passenger were rescued by search personnel from Nome about 
1700.
At 1254, the weather conditions at Nome were reported, in part:  Sky conditions and ceiling, 
measured 1,300 feet broken, 2,900 feet overcast; visibility, 10 miles in light snow; temperature, 
32 degrees F; dew point, 29 degrees F; wind, 120 degrees at 12 knots; altimeter, 30.38 inHg.
At 1351, the weather conditions at Nome were reported, in part: Sky conditions and ceiling, 
measured 1,300 feet broken, 1,800 feet broken, 3,200 feet broken, 4,000 feet overcast; 
visibility, 10 miles; temperature, 33 degrees F; dew point, 29 degrees F; wind, 110 degrees at 12 
knots; altimeter, 30.39 inHg; remarks, snow showers, west through northwest.
