The pilot stated that during cruise flight about 400 feet mean sea level he heard the engine 
decelerate then heard the engine-out audio.  He maneuvered the helicopter for an autorotative 
landing in a clearing, but after observing uneven terrain he elected to zero his forward 
airspeed.  After a hard landing the helicopter rocked forward causing the main rotor blades to 
contact the tailboom.  Fuel quantity was sufficient to sustain engine operation and visually no 
contaminants were noted.  The helicopter was recovered and the engine was started several 
times using the fuel supply in the fuel tank with no discrepancies noted.  The engine was 
removed from the helicopter and tested at the manufacturers facility with no discrepancies 
noted.  The power turbine governor (PTG) and the main fuel control and engine driven fuel 
pump were removed for bench testing.  The only discrepancy noted was a failed roll pin for the 
throttle level stop in the PTG.  The PTG manufacturer states that the failed roll pin would not 
effect operation of the unit. 
Improper cyclic and collective input by the pilot-in-command resulting in the hard landing 
during the autorotative landing.  Contributing to the accident was the total loss of engine 
power due to undetermined reasons. 
 On March 1, 1996, about 1515 eastern standard time, a Bell 206L4, N6248X, registered to the 
Bell Helicopter Textron, Inc., experienced total loss of engine power during cruise flight and 
was substantially damaged during an autorotative landing near Chiefland, Florida.  Visual 
meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 
CFR Part 91 business flight.  The commercial-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  
The flight originated about 1300 central standard time from the Marianna Municipal Airport, 
Marianna, Florida.
     The pilot stated that during cruise flight about 400 feet mean sea level, in VMC, he first 
heard the engine decelerate then heard the engine out audio announcement.  He verified that 
the throttle was full open then lowered the collective control for an autorotative landing.  He 
observed a clearing and initiated a 180-degree turn but when the flight was near the ground, he 
observed uneven terrain and elected to zero his forward speed.  The helicopter then landed 
hard and rocked forward, causing the main rotor blades to contact the tailboom.  The 
helicopter had been operated for about 1.3 hours since fueling and a total of 74.8 hours since 
manufacture.
     Postaccident examination of the helicopter by an FAA airworthiness inspector revealed 
sufficient fuel to sustain engine operation.  Visual examination of a sample of fuel obtained 
from the fuel tank revealed no evidence of contamination.  The helicopter was recovered and 
the engine was started and operated several times using the fuel supply in the fuel tank with no 
discrepancies noted.  Vacuum test of the fuel system revealed no evidence of preimpact failure 
or malfunction.  The engine was removed from the helicopter for further tests.
     The engine was placed in a test stand at the manufacturer's facility and operated with no 
discrepancies noted.  The engine-driven fuel pump with attached main fuel control and the 
power turbine governor (PTG) were removed and sent to the manufacturer's facility for bench 
tests which revealed no failure or malfunction that would have prevented normal engine 
operation.  The only discrepancy noted was a sheared PTG throttle lever stop roll pin.   
According to Allied Signal personnel, failure of the roll pin has previously been determined to 
occur due to over torque of the outer lever attachment nut.  The failure did not affect operation 
of the throttle input from the cockpit.
     Review of the helicopter historical records revealed that the power turbine governor was 
installed on 12/15/95, and had accumulated 70.5 hours since new.
