During an approach to a pre-selected area, while at approximately 100 yards from the landing 
site, at an airspeed of 20 knots, the pilot elected to execute a go-around, when he concluded 
that his approach was too steep and too fast. The pilot told an FAA inspector that the engine 
lost power during the go-around sequence, and while attempting to land on another clear area 
about 150 yards from the previously selected spot, the helicopter landed hard. The pilot further 
stated that 'the tailboom impacted the ground first, followed by the aft portion of the skids, 
which impacted the ground vertically.'  The reason for the reported loss of engine power could 
not be determined. 
the reported loss of engine power during a go-around for undetermined reason(s). 
 On March 2, 1996 at 0823 central standard time, a Bell 206B-III helicopter, N312RS, 
registered and operated by Lori Incorporated of Tulsa, Oklahoma, as a Title 14 CFR Part 91, 
was destroyed following a forced landing and post crash fire near Chandler, Oklahoma.  Visual 
Meteorological Conditions prevailed for the personal flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  
The pilot sustained minor injuries and his passenger was not injured.  The flight originated 
from Tulsa, Oklahoma, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident.
In the narrative portion of the enclosed NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot stated that he selected a 
clear grassy area adjacent to the lodge's parking lot, which he intended to land on.  During his 
approach to the pre-selected area, while at approximately 100 yards from the landing site, at an 
airspeed of 20 knots, the pilot elected to execute a go-around when he concluded that his 
approach was too steep and too fast.
The pilot told the FAA inspector that the engine lost power during the go-around sequence, 
and while attempting to land on another clear area about 150 yards from the previously 
selected spot, the helicopter landed hard.  The pilot further stated that "the tailboom impacted 
the ground first, followed by the aft portion of the skids, which impacted the ground vertically."
A post-impact fire destroyed the helicopter within seconds after coming to rest.  The reason for 
the loss of engine power could not be determined.  On the enclosed report, the pilot stated that 
he had accumulated a total of 112.3 flight hours in rotorcraft, of which 28.4 were in the Bell 
206 (17.7 within the preceding 90 days).
