The accident flight was the airplane™s first flight with a newly installed engine. The pilot 
executed a normal takeoff and, during initial climbout, the engine began to overheat. 
Subsequently, engine power diminished and the pilot made a forced landing into the trees at 
the end of the runway. Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration 
inspector revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction. Due to the extensive fire 
damage of the automobile engine, the reason for the loss of engine power could not be 
determined.
A loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
On September 1, 2009, about 1314 central daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Hahn 
R-W22 Tiger Moth Replica, N318JT, lost engine power and collided with trees at Smyrna 
Airport (MQY), Smyrna, Tennessee. The airline transport-rated pilot received minor injuries. 
The airplane was substantially damaged by impact forces, and post crash fire. The flight was 
operated as a personal flight under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 
91, and no flight plan was filed. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident. The flight was originating at the time of the accident. 
The pilot stated that this was the airplane™s first flight with a newly installed engine. The owner 
of the airplane informed the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that the engine 
was purchased from a local salvage yard, and that it was taken from a 1997 Geo Metro. The 
pilot stated that he taxied to the end of runway 32, which is 8037 feet long. He said that during 
the initial climbout, he was conducting engine and instruments checks when he noticed that 
the engine began to overheat. Subsequently the engine power diminished, and the airplane 
only climbed to approximately 200-300 feet agl. The pilot said that at that time he was unable 
to maintain altitude and therefore he made a forced landing in the trees at the end of the 
runway. A post crash fire ensued and the airplane was totally consumed by the fire. The pilot 
did not report any flight control malfunctions prior to the accident.
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that the airplane collided with trees 
at the end of the runway. The airframe and flight control system components revealed no 
evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction. Due to the extensive fire damage of the 
automobile engine, the reason for loss of engine power could not be determined.
