Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Perry, KS
Accident Number:
CEN10FA364
Date & Time:
07/01/2010, 0750 CDT 
Registration:
N3071T
Aircraft:
BEECH F33A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported a loss of engine power to an air traffic controller and was then provided 
vectors to an airport located 10 miles south of the airplane's position. The radar track 
illustrated the airplane reversed course back to the east and then to the south towards the 
airport. According to a witness in the area, the airplane was extremely low and started to turn 
or rotate when the nose dropped and he lost sight of the airplane; the airplane impacted an 
open field in a nose low attitude. Recorded engine data revealed that the fuel flow dropped to 
zero and cylinder head temperature and rpm decreased. An examination of the airframe and its 
related systems revealed no anomalies. An examination of the engine revealed that the engine 
driven fuel pump was seized and could not be rotated by hand. Further examination revealed 
that foreign particles in the bearing resulted in the seizure of the fuel pump. The source of the 
foreign particles was not determined. The emergency procedures checklist for a loss of engine 
power included the activation of the auxiliary fuel pump. The switch was in the off position at 
the accident site. An examination of the auxiliary fuel pump revealed no anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the engine driven fuel pump causing a loss of engine power and the pilot's failure 
to maintain aircraft control resulting in an inadvertent stall. Contributing to the accident was 
the pilot™s failure to follow the emergency procedures checklist and utilize the electric fuel 
boost pump which would have restored engine power.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel pumps - Failure (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Use of checklist - Pilot (Factor)
Page 2 of 8CEN10FA364
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 1, 2010, approximately 0750 central daylight time, a Beech F33A single engine 
airplane, N3071T, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain five miles east 
northeast of Perry, Kansas. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident. The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 on an instrument flight rules flight plan. The commercial pilot and his 
passenger were fatally injured. The cross country flight departed Charles B. Wheeler 
Downtown Airport (KMKC), Kansas City, Missouri, and was en route to St. Johns Industrial 
Air Park (KSJN), St. Johns, Arizona. 
According to records provided by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), N3071T was in 
radio communications with Kansas City Air Route Traffic Control Center (ZKC). At 0740:55 
N3071T contacted ZKC and reported an altitude of 7,000 feet, climbing to an altitude of 8,000 
feet. At 0742:40 the pilot reported that he ﬁlost an engineﬂ and requested immediate vectors 
for the nearest airport. The controller provided a heading of 080 thinking that the pilot wanted 
to return KMKC. 
At 0743:34 the controller verified that the pilot wanted to return to KMKC and the pilot stated 
yes unless there was a closer airport. The controller stated that Lawrence was 10 miles to the 
south of the pilot™s position, offered weather information for the airport, and cleared the pilot 
to descend to 4,000 feet. The pilot told the controller that he was not going to make Lawrence 
and the controller responded with obstacles in the area and a heading for Lawrence. The 
controller continued to provide landmarks and headings to the pilot to aid him in finding the 
Lawrence airport.
At 0747:42 the controller asked the pilot if he could see any ﬁplace to put down.ﬂ The pilot 
responded that there were several roads and that he wanted to keep it away from the trees. At 
0748:06 the pilot reported he had a road directly in front of him. No further transmission were 
received or recorded from the pilot.
Long range radar data, provided by the FAA, depicted the accident flight from the time of 
departure from KMKC to the time of the accident. The airplane initially climbed to 7,400 feet 
mean sea level (msl), and then began to descend after reporting the loss of engine power. 
Shortly after the report of engine failure, the flight track illustrated a course reversal of 180 
degrees in a right hand turn. The track then continued around to an approximate heading of 
south towards the Lawrence airport, and continued in this direction until the track ended. 
Radar contact was lost at 0749 at 1,300 feet.
A witness in the area observed the airplane flying from the north towards the south at a ﬁreally 
lowﬂ altitude. The witness indicated that the nose of the airplane rose up and then came down. 
He commented that he momentarily saw the belly of the airplane and then the airplane 
disappeared from view behind the trees. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 56, held a commercial pilot certificate with an airplane single engine land, 
multiengine land, and instrument ratings. In addition he held a private pilot certificate with 
helicopter rating. He was issued a third class airman medical certificate on April 7, 2009. The 
Page 3 of 8CEN10FA364
certificate contained the limitation ﬁmust wear corrective lenses.ﬂ
The pilot™s most recent insurance application, dated October 16, 2009, reflected a total time of 
3,000 hours; 1,500 hours of which were logged in the make and model of the accident airplane. 
He reported his biennial flight review was successfully completed on April 7, 2009. The pilot™s 
logbook was not available for review.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane, a Beech F33A (serial number CE-1158), was manufactured in 1987. It 
was registered with the FAA on a standard airworthiness certificate for utility operations. A 
Teledyne Continental Motors IO-520-BB engine rated at 285 horsepower at 2,700 rpm 
powered the airplane. The engine was equipped with a three-blade, McCauley propeller.
The airplane was registered to Syracuse Aviation Services, LLC., operated by the pilot, and was 
maintained under an annual inspection program. A review of the maintenance records 
indicated that an annual inspection had been completed on October 9, 2009, at an airframe 
and tachometer time of 2,233.63 hours. 
The Tornado Alley Turbo Inc., Rammer Intercooler System was installed on March 30, 2007, 
at an airframe total time of 1,920.99 hours. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest official weather observation station was Lawrence Municipal Airport (KLWC), 
Lawrence, Kansas, located 6.75 nautical miles (nm) southeast of the accident site. The 
elevation of the weather observation station was 833 feet msl. The routine aviation weather 
report (METAR) for KLWC, issued at 0752, reported, winds 110 degrees at 6 knots, visibility 9 
miles, sky condition  clear, temperature 20 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 16 degrees C, 
altimeter 30.26 inches.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The accident airplane was equipped with a JPI engine data monitoring (EDM) 800 unit (serial 
number 24855). The EDM was sent to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
Vehicle Recorders Laboratory in Washington, D.C., for download. Approximately 33 minutes 
of data from the accident flight was recovered. Parameters recorded included exhaust gas 
temperature, cylinder head temperature, manifold pressure, engine rpm, oil temperature, and 
fuel flow. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted the ground, to the north of a line of trees, in an open field characterized 
by short vegetation and rolling terrain.
The accident site initiated with a long narrow ground scar, oriented east/west, with the 
propeller in the center of the ground scar. The point of the ground scar furthest to the east 
contained green lens fragments, white paint chips, and the housing of a navigation light. This 
scar extended from its point of initiation west for 23 feet to the crater containing the propeller 
assembly. The crater was four feet in diameter. The spinner was oriented down with the blades 
bowed up slightly. The second portion of the ground scar extended to the west in a slight V 
shape for 20 feet. Red lens fragments were located at the west most point of the ground scar. 
White paint chips were contained through the entire length of the scar.
Page 4 of 8CEN10FA364
The propeller was a three-bladed McCauley propeller. The blades were arbitrarily labeled ﬁA,ﬂ 
ﬁB,ﬂ and ﬁCﬂ for identification purposes. Blade A was bowed aft slightly, exhibited 45 degree 
chordwise scratching and leading edge polishing. Blade B was bowed aft slightly, and exhibited 
a slight S bend. The leading edge was polished and the face of the blade was unremarkable. 
Blade C was bowed aft and then forward slightly. The face of the blade exhibited slight 45 
degree scratches and leading edge polishing. The propeller spinner exhibited circular crushing.
An area 90 feet in diameter surrounding the propeller and ground scar was discolored 
consistent with fuel blight. A debris field extended from the ground scar to the west towards 
the main wreckage. Debris located in this field included various engine components, torn 
metal, engine cowling, fragmented Plexiglas, and both wing tip tanks.
The main wreckage included the left and right wing, the empennage, fuselage, and the engine 
assembly. 
The fuselage included the cabin area, four seats, and the instrument panel. The forward 
windscreen was fragmented and the frame and structure surrounding the forward fuselage and 
front two seats was bent, broken, and fragmented. The instrument panel was broken and 
partially fragmented. The landing gear actuator was in the retracted position. The auxiliary fuel 
pump switch was in the off position. The fuel selector valve contained trace amounts of fuel 
and was free of contamination and water. The fuel screen was clear of contaminants. 
The right wing included the right aileron, right flap assembly, and right main landing gear. The 
entire leading edge exhibited aft accordion crushing. The wing was bent up, and partially 
fragmented. The fuel tank was compromised and was empty. The aileron control cables were 
continuous from the control surface inboard to the flight control yoke. The landing gear was in 
the retracted position.
The left wing included the left aileron, left flap assembly, and left main landing gear. The entire 
leading edge exhibited aft accordion crushing. The fuel tank was compromised and was empty. 
The aileron control cables were continuous from the control surface inboard to the flight 
control yoke. The landing gear was in the retracted position.
The empennage, to include the horizontal stabilizer, vertical stabilizer, elevator, and rudder, 
remained attached to the fuselage. The skin was buckled along an aft rivet line and the 
empennage was bent slightly to the right. The elevator, rudder, and vertical stabilizer were 
without damage and unremarkable. The elevator and rudder control cables were continuous 
from the control surfaces forward to the flight control yokes. 
The right outboard leading edge tip of the horizontal stabilizer exhibited a slight bend and had 
dirt embedded within the edge. The belly of the airplane illustrated aft oil streaking from the 
wings aft to the navigation light on the bottom of the tail cone.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The autopsy was performed by the Shawnee County Coroner™s Office on July 2, 2010, as 
authorized by the Jefferson County Coroner™s office. The autopsy concluded that the cause of 
death was due to multiple traumatic injuries.
The FAA™s Civil Aerospace Medical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
toxicological tests on specimens that were collected during the autopsy (CAMI Reference 
#201000143001). Results were negative for all tests conducted. 
Page 5 of 8CEN10FA364
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Engine
The engine and its accessories were transported to a facility in Mobile, Alabama, for 
examination by investigators from the NTSB, Hawker Beechcraft, Teledyne Continental 
Motors, and Tornado Alley. 
The engine driven fuel pump was removed from the engine revealing the drive coupling had 
broken. The basic fuel pump could not be rotated by hand. The fuel pump had a data tag 
bearing the name of ﬁFliteCraft Turbo - Pagosa Springs, CO - P/N 632818-11 - S/N 
H078636RB.ﬂ 
Further examination of the engine revealed normal operating signatures and no anomalies that 
would have precluded the engine from producing design horsepower at the time of the 
accident.
Fuel Pumps
The engine driven fuel pump and drive coupling were shipped to the NTSB Materials 
Laboratory in Washington, D.C., for further examination. 
Examination of the fracture surfaces on the drive coupling pieces revealed flat fractures 
perpendicular to the coupling™s longitudinal axis. The fracture surfaces exhibited 
circumferential swirl-like features on the fracture face consistent with predominately shear 
stresses associated with a torsional overload fracture of a ductile metal. 
The fuel pump was carefully disassembled to determine why the rotor would not freely rotate. 
At the point when the rotor shaft and bearing were removed from the bearing housing it was 
noted that the rotor shaft was no longer frozen in place as it had been up to that point. Care 
was taken not to allow the components to move relative to each other while performing the 
final sectioning operation on the bearing to reveal the interior surface of the bearing and outer 
diameter of the rotor shaft. During the disassembly, but prior to performing the first sectioning 
operation, it was noted that the bearing and the drilled hole in the bore where the bearing was 
installed were in the correct alignment such that fuel could pass through and lubricate the 
bearing. No evidence of relative motion between the bearing and bore was observed. 
Additionally, the vanes of the impeller were examined and found to have small chips missing 
from the outboard edges. No other deteriorated components or foreign debris were found 
within the fuel pump assembly during the examination.
After sectioning, the interior surfaces of the bearing were examined and small particles were 
observed adhering to the surfaces. One half of the bearing exhibited more particles than the 
other half. The particles had a silver/gray appearance and were reflective. Energy dispersive 
spectroscopy revealed that the particles were not all the same but typically contained iron, 
aluminum, silicon, chrome, nickel, and molybdenum.
The rotor shaft did not have any evidence of significant surface defects although light scoring 
and polishing wear were evident on the shaft™s outer diameter.
The source of the particles was not determined.
An examination of the electric fuel boost pump revealed no anomalies. When power was added, 
it functioned as designed.
Page 6 of 8CEN10FA364
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
JPI Engine Data Monitoring Unit
The accident airplane was equipped with an engine data monitoring unit. The information 
downloaded from this unit depicted that fuel flow dropped to zero 26 minutes into the flight. 
Engine rpm and exhaust gas temperature decreased at the same time. The accident flight 
continued for approximately 6 additional minutes before the unit stopped recording.
Aircraft Performance
According to the Emergency Procedures section of the Beech Aircraft Flight Manual, the glide 
distance of the accident airplane would have been 1.7 nautical miles or 2 statute miles per 
1,000 feet of altitude above terrain. This distance is based upon the maximum glide 
configuration which consists of the landing gear and flaps being retracted, the cowl flaps 
closed, the propeller set at low rpm, and the airspeed set at 105 knots. According to Hawker 
Beechcraft, the airplane should have been able to glide 10.88 miles in a no-wind scenario.
The Emergency Procedures section of the Beech Aircraft Flight Manual also directed the pilot 
to select the fuel boost pump to the on position following a loss of engine power.
History of Flight
Enroute-climb to cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of control in flight
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Private
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/07/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/07/2009
Flight Time:
3000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1500 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 7 of 8CEN10FA364
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N3071T
Model/Series:
F33A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
CE-1158
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable -
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/09/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2233.6 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO 520 BB
Registered Owner:
SYRACUSE AVIATION 
SERVICES LLC
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KLWC, 833 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0752 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
9 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.26 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Kansas City, MO (KMKC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
St Johns, AZ (KSJN)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.085556, -95.300278
Page 8 of 8
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jennifer Rodi
Adopted Date:
06/13/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Bobby Warren; FAA FSDO; Wichita, KS
Brian Weber; Hawker Beechcraft Corp; Wichita, KS
John Kent; Teledyne Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
David Landreth; Tornado Alley Turbo Inc; Ada, OK
Bruce A Lampert; NATCA; Denver, CO
Publish Date:
06/13/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=76499
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
