National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: N. Myrtle Beach, SC
Accident Number: MIA08LA158
Date & Time: 08/01/2008, 1546 EDT
Registration: N3424M
Aircraft: PIPER PA-12
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Fuel exhaustion
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Banner Tow
 Analysis The pilot flew the airplane for 45 minutes after filling the fuel tanks, then secured the airplane.
Before the next departure, the operator advised the pilot twice to fuel the airplane; however, it was not fueled.
The pilot departed on a banner-tow flight, during which time he reported monitoring the fuel level.
Approximately 1 to 2 minutes after noticing the left and right fuel quantity gauges indicated "1/4" and "1/3" capacity respectively, the engine sputtered once then lost power.
He notified air traffic control, released the banner, and ditched the airplane.
Examination of the airplane revealed that no fuel was present in the airplane's fuel tanks or carburetor.
An unquantified amount of fuel was found in the gascolator.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion as a result of the pilot's inadequate fuel planning.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 banner-tow flight from CRE.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the certificated commercial pilot sustained minor injuries.
The flight originated about 1300, from CRE.
The pilot stated that earlier that day the fuel tanks were filled and he flew the airplane for 45 minutes, while remaining in the traffic pattern.
He secured the airplane and after landing, the operator reportedly advised the pilot twice to fuel the airplane before departure.
It was not fueled, and the pilot elected to depart on a banner-tow flight.
While monitoring the fuel level during the flight, he noticed the left and right fuel quantity readings were "1/4" and "1/3," respectively.
Approximately 1 to 2 minutes later, or at 1545, the engine sputtered once then quit.
He notified CRE air traffic control tower that he would attempt to land on the runway and released the banner.
After realizing that he was unable to reach the airport, he elected to ditch the airplane.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed no fuel or water in the airplane's fuel tanks.
The gascolator contained an unquantified amount of fuel only, and the carburetor contained only water.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
