National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Anchorage, AK
Accident Number: ANC08LA094
Date & Time: 08/01/2008, 1630 AKD
Registration: N2357U
Aircraft: CESSNA 172
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was landing on runway 25, and indicated that just as the main landing gear tires touched down, the airplane was struck by a strong wind from the right.
The pilot attempted to correct for the wind, and added engine power, but the airplane departed the left side of the runway.
The nose gear collapsed when it encountered soft terrain along the side of the runway, which spun the airplane around about 180 degrees.
The wind conditions were reported as 280 degrees (true) at 11 knots.
In the "Recommendation" (How could this accident have been prevented) section of the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, the pilot noted he could have utilized "Better use of aileron and rudder for directional control."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during the landing flare/touchdown, which resulted in a runway excursion and collapse of the nose gear.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross- country personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the pilot.
The commercial certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Homer Airport, Homer, Alaska, about 1430.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on August 5, the pilot reported that he was landing on runway 25 at Merrill Field.
During the landing flare, just as the main landing gear tires touched down, the airplane was struck by a strong wind from the right.
The pilot attempted to correct for the wind, and added engine power, but the airplane departed the left side of the runway.
The nose gear collapsed when it encountered soft terrain along the side of the runway, which spun the airplane around about 180 degrees.
At 1634, an aviation routine weather report (METAR) at Merrill Field was reporting, in part: Wind, 280 degrees (true) at 11 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, 5,000 feet broken; temperature, 61 degrees F; dew point, 52 degrees F; altimeter, 28.89 inHg.
In the "Recommendation" (How could this accident have been prevented) section of the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, the pilot noted he could have utilized "Better use of aileron and rudder for directional control."
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
