Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Anguilla, MS
Accident Number:
ATL01LA063A
Date & Time:
06/02/2001, 0800 CDT 
Registration:
N257LA
Aircraft:
Air Tractor 502B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
Two agricultural airplanes, an Air Tractor 502B and a Cessna 188, collided in flight at low 
altitude over a field. The Cessna was working a field, and the Air Tractor was ferrying between 
aerial application sites when the collision occurred. Examination of both wreckage revealed 
that the right wing of the Cessna collided with the right elevator of the air tractor. The collision 
altitude was not determined. The right -a-way rule states that the airplane  to the right has the 
right-a-way. Valium was also detected in tissue samples from the Air tractor pilot. The sun 
position limited the visibility of the Cessna  pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Failure of both pilots to maintain visual lookout, resulting in an in-flight collision. The air 
tractor pilot operated the positioning flight at an altitude below 500 feet agl. Valium was 
detected in the toxicological examination of the Air Tractor  pilot.
Page 2 of 6ATL01LA063A
Findings
Occurrence #1: MIDAIR COLLISION
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOTS OF BOTH AIRCRAFT
2. (C) VFR PROCEDURES - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. USE OF INAPPROPRIATE MEDICATION/DRUG - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 6ATL01LA063A
Factual Information
On June 2, 2001, at 0800 central daylight time, an Air Tractor 502B, N257LA, and a Cessna 
188, N731KG, collided in flight two miles north of Anguilla, Mississippi. The agricultural flights 
were operated by Nick's Flying Service, Inc., and Anguilla Flying Service, Inc., respectively, 
under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident. Both airplanes were destroyed, and the Cessna was consumed by post-
crash fire. Both commercial pilots were fatally injured. The Air Tractor departed a private 
airstrip at Rolling Fork, Mississippi, about 0735, and the Cessna departed a private airstrip in 
Anguilla, Mississippi, about 0750. 
According to information recovered  from Anguilla Flying Service, Inc., the Cessna had 
departed the private airstrip about 10 minutes before the accident, and was spraying a field 
adjacent to the east side of the field over which the collision occurred. The review of 
information from the operator revealed that  the Cessna appeared to have been on a easterly 
heading for the initial swath run to a field about 500 feet east of the in-flight collision. 
According to information recovered from Nick's Flying Service, Inc., the Air Tractor had 
completed an aerial application operation to a field four miles north of the accident site, and 
was enroute to another field miles south of the accident site. Reportedly, the Air Tractor, the 
Air Tractor was flying enroute  at a low altitude between the two locations, and the south 
bound direct flight path placed  the airplanes over the accident site.  The altitude at which the 
collisions occurred was not determined, however the Cessna was operating in accordance with 
FAR Part 137.49 for altitude and object clearance. 
Examination of the accident site showed that, the in-flight collision resulted in both airplanes 
colliding with the ground in a steep, nose-down, nearly wings-level attitude. The Cessna was 
consumed by post-crash fire.
Further examination of the accident site found the Air Tractor wreckage approximately 947 
feet south of what was determined to be the mid-air impact point. The Cessna wreckage was 
located approximately 426 feet east of the mid-air impact point. The airplanes' ground-impact 
points were approximately 1,004 feet apart. An area approximately 50 feet in diameter 
contained the Air Tractor's outboard piece of the right horizontal stabilizer and the right 
elevator, as well as the Cessna's right wingtip faring and a portion of the right aileron. Also 
present were scattered paint chips, rivet heads, and small pieces of sheet metal.   
Examination of the wreckage also revealed that the propellers assemblies from both airplanes 
showed evidence of power-on rotation at impact. Continuity of flight controls was not 
established on the Cessna due to extreme fire damage. Continuity of flight controls was 
confirmed on the Air Tractor. No mechanical irregularities and no pre-collision failures were 
noted of either airplane during the investigation. 
The sun inclination and azimuth for the accident location was 48.8 degrees inclination at 93.2 
degrees.
Dr. Steven T. Hayne, FCAP, of the Mississippi State Medical Examiner's Office, Brandon, 
Mississippi, conducted postmortem examinations of both pilots on June 3, 2001. 
The FAA's Toxicology and Research Laboratory in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
forensic toxicology on both pilots. Forensic toxicology performed on specimens from the Air 
Page 4 of 6ATL01LA063A
Tractor pilot detected 0.047 (ug/ml, ug/g) diazepam (valium-sedative) in the blood, 0.06 
(ug/ml, ug/g) nordiazepam in the blood, 0.172 (ug/ml, ug/g) nordiazepam in the urine, as well 
as the presence of temazepam and oxazepam in the urine. Forensic toxicology performed on 
specimens from the Cessna pilot detected quinine in the kidney and liver.
A review of the Federal Aviation Regulations disclosed that when converging airplanes at the 
same altitude, the airplane to the right has the right -a-way.  The FARs further states that the 
minimum safe altitude over other than congested areas  is 500 feet above the surface except 
over sparsely populated areas, and in those cases the aircraft may not operate closer that 500 
feet to any person, vessel, vehicle, or structure (FAR Part 91,113,  91.119).
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Private
Age:
25, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/28/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/07/2001
Flight Time:
2700 hours (Total, all aircraft), 200 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Air Tractor
Registration:
N257LA
Model/Series:
502B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
502B-0257
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/08/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9700 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
188.7 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
4178 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
P76A-34AG
Registered Owner:
Dewby, Inc.
Rated Power:
750 hp
Operator:
Dewby, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
Nick's Flying Service, Inc.
Operator Designator Code:
Page 5 of 6ATL01LA063A
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KGWO, 162 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0753 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
9 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
190°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.83 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Rolling Fork, MS 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0730 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Angilla Flying Service (PVT) 
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
100 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2200 ft 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Phillip Powell
Adopted Date:
02/20/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Allen M Davis; Federal Aviation Administration, Jackson FSDO-07; Jackson, MS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ATL01LA063A
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
