Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fairbanks, AK
Accident Number:
ANC01LA063
Date & Time:
06/01/2001, 1700 AKD 
Registration:
N9311T
Aircraft:
Cessna 180
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
4 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The certificated commercial pilot, with three passengers aboard, departed from a remote lake 
in a float-equipped, single engine airplane.   While in level, cruise flight, the engine began to 
run rough, and lose power.  Emergency procedures restored partial engine power momentarily, 
followed by a complete loss of engine power.  The airplane collided with trees during a 
subsequent forced landing,  and sustained substantial damage to the fuselage, wings, and 
empennage.  An FAA inspector examined the airplane and reported that both fuel tanks were 
empty.  The pilot reported that the fuel gauges installed in his airplane would consistently 
provide an inaccurate fuel quantity reading. He added that prior to departure, he visually 
checked the quantity of fuel in the wing fuel tanks by using a fuel measuring device, but later 
added that the fuel level reading may have been in error due to the airplane's attitude while 
moored.      
 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to refuel the airplane, his inadequate preflight planning/decision making, 
and subsequent fuel exhaustion during cruise flight.
Page 2 of 6ANC01LA063
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. (C) REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
4. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6ANC01LA063
Factual Information
On June 1, 2001, about 1700 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Cessna 180 airplane, 
N9311T, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing about 20 miles west of 
Fairbanks, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal  
flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The certificated commercial 
pilot, and the three passengers aboard, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight originated about 1630, from a remote lake 
located about 15 miles north of Nenana, Alaska, and was en route to Fairbanks.    
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge on June 1, the pilot reported that while in level, cruise flight, the engine 
began to run rough, and lose power.  He said that after performing emergency procedures, he 
was able to restore partial engine power momentarily, followed by a complete loss of engine 
power.  The airplane collided with trees during a subsequent forced landing,  and sustained 
substantial damage to the fuselage, wings, and empennage.
           
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector from the Fairbanks Flight 
Standards District Office, traveled to the accident scene on June 4, and examined the airplane.  
The inspector reported the airplane's fuel system, including both wing fuel tanks, were intact 
and were not breached.  He reported that both fuel tanks were empty, and added that the total 
amount drained from the airplane's gascolator was about 5 ounces.  Examination of the fuel 
from the gascolator revealed it was clean and bright, and did not contain any visible 
contaminants.
In the Pilot/Operator report (NTSB form 6120.1/2) filed by the pilot on June 16, he reported 
that the fuel gauges installed in his airplane would consistently provide an inaccurate fuel 
quantity reading.  He added that prior to departure, he visually checked the quantity of fuel in 
the wing fuel tanks by using a fuel measuring device.  He wrote, in part: "This procedure 
indicated that I had 18 gallons of 100LL, in retrospect this reading may have been in error due 
to the unknown attitude of the aircraft, as the act of getting out on the wing may have tipped 
the wing in that direction or attitude of the floatplane in the water caused the indication of 
more fuel than there actually was."  
Page 4 of 6ANC01LA063
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/23/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/28/1999
Flight Time:
1920 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1411 hours (Total, this make and model), 1846 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N9311T
Model/Series:
180 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
5081
Landing Gear Type: 
Float
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2820 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10.5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5349.1 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-470-L
Registered Owner:
Donald D. Kirk
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
Donald D. Kirk
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ANC01LA063
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 10000 ft agl
Visibility
100 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
240°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Nenana, AK (ENN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Fairbanks, AK (AK28)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1630 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 None
Latitude, Longitude:
64.783333, -148.551667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Clinton  O Johnson
Adopted Date:
05/21/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Cary J Meier; Federal Aviation Administration; Fairbanks, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC01LA063
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
