Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Gustavus, AK
Accident Number:
ANC07LA022
Date & Time:
03/03/2007, 1610 AST 
Registration:
N5134V
Aircraft:
Hughes 369D
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The helicopter was being operated as a visual flight rules on-demand passenger flight under 
Title 14, CFR Part 135.  The purpose of the flight was to tranquilize moose for capture and 
collaring.  The company's chief pilot said a moose was shot with a tranquilizer dart from the 
helicopter, and that the helicopter was used to block the moose from moving into a hazardous 
area.  The pilot of an airplane orbiting above said the moose charged the helicopter, and that as 
the helicopter attempted to evade the moose, the moose reared, or jumped, contacting the 
helicopter's tail rotor.  The helicopter pilot reported a loss of directional control, and made a 
hovering autorotation to the ground.  The flex coupling between the drive shaft and the tail 
rotor gearbox failed, and the spinning drive shaft cut the tail boom and separated the tail from 
the rest of the airframe.  According to the chief pilot, the company's practice had been for the 
helicopter to hover/maneuver about 10 feet above the ground, and no closer to the darted 
animal than 10 feet horizontally.  He said the pilot and scientist aboard felt the distances were 
appropriate.  He said this was the first incident of extreme, erratic, behavior on the part of a 
darted animal, and that due to this incident, the company has revised its procedure, and now 
requires the pilot to maintain 30 feet of altitude above the ground and 30 feet horizontally 
from a darted animal.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The inadequate clearance from a tranquilized moose while hovering in ground effect, and the 
operator's inadequate procedures for such operations, which resulted in an in-flight collision 
with the moose.  Factors associated with the accident were the moose, a sheared tail rotor drive 
shaft, and the resultant lack of tail rotor anti-torque control.
Page 2 of 6ANC07LA022
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: HOVER - IN GROUND EFFECT
Findings
1. (F) OBJECT - ANIMAL(S)
2. (C) CLEARANCE - INADEQUATE
3. (C) PROCEDURE INADEQUATE - COMPANY/OPERATOR MANAGEMENT
----------
Occurrence #2: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: HOVER - IN GROUND EFFECT
Findings
4. (F) ROTOR DRIVE SYSTEM,TAIL ROTOR DRIVE SHAFT - SHEARED
5. (F) TAIL ROTOR/ANTI-TORQUE CONTROL - NOT AVAILABLE
----------
Occurrence #3: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED
Page 3 of 6ANC07LA022
Factual Information
On March 3, 2007, about 1610 Alaska standard time, a Hughes 369D helicopter, N5134V, 
sustained substantial damage while hovering in ground-effect, when its tail rotor was struck by 
a moose during a game management operation, about 1 mile southwest of the Gustavus 
Airport, Gustavus, Alaska.  The helicopter was being operated by Temsco Helicopters Inc., 
Ketchikan, Alaska, as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, 
CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The commercial certificated pilot and sole 
passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company flight 
following procedures were in effect.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 5, the chief pilot for the operator said the helicopter was 
involved in a moose tagging operation for the Alaska State Department of Fish and Game.  He 
said the moose was shot with a tranquilizer dart from the helicopter, and that the helicopter is 
used to block the moose's path to prevent them from running into water and drowning, or 
running into an area where the tranquilized animals cannot be handled safely.  He said the 
helicopter was hovering, waiting for the animal to "go down."  The chief pilot said that the pilot 
of an airplane was orbiting above, and saw the moose charge the helicopter.  According to the 
chief pilot, the airplane pilot stated that as the helicopter attempted to evade the moose, the 
moose reared, or jumped, contacting the helicopter's tail rotor.  The airplane pilot said that the 
helicopter made three complete 360 degree rotations before it landed.
The helicopter pilot reported that he was not aware that the moose contacted the tail rotor.  He 
indicated he had a loss of directional control, and said that he made a hovering autorotation to 
the ground.  According to the chief pilot, the flex coupling between the drive shaft and the tail 
rotor gearbox failed.  He said the spinning drive shaft cut through the tail boom adjacent to the 
gearbox, and separated the tail from the rest of the airframe.
On April 2, the chief pilot told the IIC that their past practice had been for the helicopter to 
hover/maneuver about 10 feet above the ground, and no closer to the darted animal than 10 
feet horizontally.  He said this past practice had served them well, and the pilot and scientist 
aboard the helicopter felt the distances were appropriate.  He said this was the first incidence 
of extreme, erratic, behavior on the part of a darted animal.  In a written statement to the 
NTSB dated March 14, the chief pilot reported that due to this incident, the company had 
revised its procedure, and now requires the pilot to maintain 30 feet of altitude above the 
ground, and 30 feet horizontally from a darted animal.
Page 4 of 6ANC07LA022
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
26, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2006
Flight Time:
2700 hours (Total, all aircraft), 415 hours (Total, this make and model), 2600 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 44 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 23 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Hughes
Registration:
N5134V
Model/Series:
369D 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1103D
Landing Gear Type: 
Emergency Float; Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/01/2006, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
9041 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250C20B
Registered Owner:
Temsco Helicopter Inc.
Rated Power:
420 hp
Operator:
Temsco Helicopter Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Commuter Air Carrier 
(135); On-demand Air Taxi 
(135)
Operator Does Business As:
Temsco Helicopters
Operator Designator Code:
HXSD
Page 5 of 6ANC07LA022
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
-8°C / -16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Gustavus, AK (PAGS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1230 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
58.426667, -135.704444
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Lawrence R Lewis
Adopted Date:
06/27/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Charles Wisner; Juneau FSDO-05; Juneau, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC07LA022
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
