Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Willimantic, CT
Accident Number:
ERA12LA131
Date & Time:
01/01/2012, 1211 EST 
Registration:
N667JH
Aircraft:
HANEY JOHN F B SEASTAR XP
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Before the experimental, amateur-built, amphibious biplane's first test flight, the 
pilot/owner/builder ran the engine for about 20 minutes. He then taxied to the runway and 
departed. He flew for about 25 minutes before returning to the airport. After landing, he then 
taxied back to the runway, departed, circled the field for an additional 20 minutes, then 
returned to perform a touch-and-go landing. After touching down, adding power, and 
beginning the initial climb, the engine lost partial power and the engine's rpm decreased to 
about 3,000 rpm. Because the airplane was past the departure end of the runway, the pilot 
performed a water landing on a nearby reservoir. During the landing, the left lower wing struck 
the water and separated from its mounting location. After the airplane slowed, the pilot noticed 
that the engine was still running; however, when he advanced the throttle, the rpm would 
initially increase and then immediately decrease to 2,000 rpm. Examination of the airplane 
and engine revealed no mechanical failure or malfunction that would have precluded normal 
operation. It was further noted that the engine was not equipped with a carburetor heat system 
or insulated fuel hoses, as recommended by the engine manufacturer. Due to the ambient air 
temperature at the time of the accident, it was improbable that vapor lock caused the partial 
loss of power. Review of a carburetor icing probability chart revealed that weather conditions 
were conducive for serious carburetor icing. Therefore, it is likely that had a carburetor heat 
system been installed and the pilot had applied carburetor heat before his initial power 
reduction, the formation of carburetor ice would have been prevented.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power due to carburetor icing. Contributing to the accident was the lack 
of an installed manufacturer-recommended carburetor heat system.
Page 2 of 9ERA12LA131
Findings
Aircraft
Intake anti-ice, deice - Design (Factor)
Fuel control/carburetor - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Personnel issues
Installation - Owner/builder (Factor)
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Effect on equipment (Cause)
Page 3 of 9ERA12LA131
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2012 about 1211 eastern standard time, an experimental, amateur-built Seastar 
XP, N667JH, was substantially damaged during a forced water landing after a partial loss of 
power during initial climb at Windham Airport (IJD), Willimantic, Connecticut. The private 
pilot/owner was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed for the local personal flight that was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
According to the pilot, he ran the amphibious biplane's engine up for approximately 20 
minutes before the airplane's first test flight. He then taxied to runway 27 and took off. He flew 
for about 25 minutes before returning to IJD. After landing he taxied back to the runway 27 
and took off once again and "circled" the field for an additional 20 minutes. He subsequently 
landed on runway 27, but this time elected to do a "touch and go" After touching down, adding 
power, and initiating the initial climb, the engine lost partial power, the engine's rpm 
decreased from approximately 5,500 rpm to approximately 3000 rpm, and there was a 
decrease in cylinder head temperature. He realized that he was past the departure end of the 
runway and elected to perform a water landing on the Willimantic Reservoir which was close to 
the end of the runway. He realized that he had too much speed and not enough area to land in 
and turned 90 degrees to the right and then to the right again to reduce his airspeed. After the 
2nd right 90 degree turn, the left lower wing struck the water and separated from the airplane. 
After the airplane slowed to taxi speed the pilot noticed that the engine was still running. 
However, when he advanced the throttle, the rpm would initially increase subsequently the 
engine rpm almost immediately would decrease to 2000 RPM.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and pilot records, the pilot held a private 
pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land, airplane single-engine sea, and 
instrument airplane. His most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued on 
September 2, 2011. He reported that he had accrued 693 total hours of flight experience.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The aircraft was a two-seat amphibious strut braced biplane. The cockpit was contained in the 
hull and floats were attached to its lower wings. The ailerons were located in the upper wings 
and the tail was conventional, with the horizontal stabilizer mounted half way up the tail fin.
It was constructed primarily of fiberglass, carbon fiber, Kevlar, and aluminum, and was 
reinforced by fiberglass/PVC foam bulkheads.
It was powered by a 100-horsepower Rotax 912 ULS engine mounted on the upper wing pylon, 
aft of the cockpit, in a pusher configuration. The engine utilized a dual carburetor system and 
primarily used automotive fuel.
According to the pilot and FAA records, the airplane was purchased as a kit from Amphibian 
Airplanes of Canada   (AAC) and imported into the United States. The airplane's engine was 
also sold to the pilot by AAC. At the time of the accident, the airplane had accrued 
approximately 50 minutes of operation, and the engine had accrued approximately 3 total 
hours of operation. 
Page 4 of 9ERA12LA131
Review of the FAA's Listing of Amateur-Built Aircraft Kits did not list AAC as being evaluated 
and found eligible in meeting the "major portion" requirement of 14 CFR Part 21. Review of 
airworthiness and registration documents, as well as interviews of AAC's owner by 
Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSBC) investigators also revealed that AAC was not 
actually manufacturing the kit but was purchasing parts and kits from EDRA Aeronautica of 
Brazil (EDRA), rebranding, and then selling the airplane as the "AAC Seastar".  
Further inquires revealed that the airplane design had originated in France in 1983 as the 
Hydroplum. Over the intervening years the airplane had gone through a series of design 
changes which included changes in materials, powerplants, and size. It had been manufactured 
by multiple entities including the Societe Morbihannaise d'Aero Navigation (SMAN), Billie 
Marine, Stone Engineering, and eventually starting in 1996 by EDRA when EDRA purchased 
the design from SMAN. The airplane since that time has been marketed as the Paturi, and the 
Super Petrel, and was offered in kit form or as a fully assembled airplane.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1151 recorded weather observation at Bradley International Airport (BDL), Windsor Locks, 
Connecticut, located 25 nautical miles northwest of the accident site, included wind from 160 
degrees at 7 knots, 10 miles visibility, few clouds at 3,500 feet above ground level (agl), broken 
clouds at 25,000 feet agl, temperature 9 C, dew point 4 C, and an altimeter setting of 29.99 
inches of mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
At the time of the accident IDJ did not have an air traffic control tower and had two runways, 
which were designated as 18/36 and 9/27.  Runway 9/27 was asphalt, and was listed in fair 
condition. The total length was 4,271-feet-long and 100-feet-wide. It was equipped with 
medium intensity runway edge lights and was marked with non-precision markings that were 
in good condition.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Post-accident examination of the wreckage by an FAA inspector revealed that the left lower 
wing was separated from its mounting location and the left upper wing was bent aft 
approximately 30 degrees which resulted in substantial damage. Further examination of the 
airframe and engine revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical malfunctions or 
failures that would have precluded normal operation. The fuel selectors were in the auxiliary 
fuel tank feed, and return positions. The 10-gallon auxiliary fuel cell contained approximately 6 
gallons of automotive gasoline and the 3-gallon header tank contained approximately 1 1/2 
gallons of automotive gasoline.
Continuity was confirmed from the throttle and mixture levers to the engine and both engine 
controls operated freely to their full extent of travel. 
The fuel lines were of a visible tubing design and appeared to be made of Tygon. They were 
covered in some instances with corrugated (ribbed) plastic tubing and in other instances with 
thin sleeves of fiberglass matting.  After removal of the covering, fuel could be seen through 
them though they were slightly discolored and had a yellowish cast. They were non-rigid and 
could be easily pinched closed by hand, and where they should have been secured to their 
fittings with hose clamps they were secured instead with lock wire.
Examination of the fuel filter revealed it was clear and no debris or contamination was visible. 
Page 5 of 9ERA12LA131
Testing of the carburetors revealed that they functioned normally.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Examination of Photographic Evidence
Examination of photographs taken during the post accident examination revealed that the 
engine fuel lines were in close proximity to the engine and though covered in a thin sleeve of 
fiberglass matting by the owner, were not insulated (fire sleeved). Further examination of the 
photographs also revealed that the airplane was not equipped with carburetor heat.
AAC and Rotax Recommendations 
When asked by the TSBC if they recommended to Seastar kit purchasers that they install 
carburetor heat systems and/or fire sleeved engine fuel lines, the owner of AAC who had 
represented himself as the manufacturer of the kits replied that, they would not make those 
recommendations because they had not found either to be necessary and that they would 
inform kit purchasers that they (AAC) had chosen to use stiffer, thicker, black automotive fuel 
lines rather than the "softer PVC-type fuel line recommended by Rotax".
Review of Rotax Guidance revealed however that Rotax recommended installation of 
carburetor heat and insulated fuel lines. This was discovered during review of the Installation 
Manual for Rotax 912 UL Aircraft Engine, which contained a warning that "carburetor icing is a 
common reason for engine trouble and that provisions for preheating of the intake air have to 
be made to prevent formation of ice." It also advised that for prevention of vapor locks, all of 
the fuel lines on the suction side of the fuel pump have to be insulated against heat in the 
engine compartment and routed at a distance from hot engine components, without kinks and 
protected appropriately.
Review of the Operators Manual for Rotax Engine Type 912 Series also revealed that it 
included a warning that "carburetor icing due to humidity could occur on the venturi and on 
the throttle valve due to fuel evaporation which could lead to performance loss and change in 
mixture and that intake air pre-heating is the only effective remedy". 
Use of Automobile Gasoline
According to the pilot, he had been using "Hi Test" automobile gasoline in the airplane as 
recommended by Rotax.
According to Rotax, they recommended the use of automobile gasoline since continual use of 
aviation gasoline would increase wear of the valve seats, and increase deposits in the 
combustion chambers, and lead sediments due to the higher lead content. Therefore they 
recommended that aviation gasoline only be used if vapor lock problems are encountered or if 
other fuel types are not available. They also advised to only use fuel suitable for the respective 
climatic zone and that there is a risk of vapor formation if using winter fuel for summer 
operation.
FAA Guidance
According to the FAA, vapor pressure of autogas can vary widely as formulations are changed 
seasonally, and according to local requirements. High vapor pressure can promote vapor lock 
in aircraft fuel systems causing engine power to be reduced or the engine to completely fail and 
testing by the FAA William J. Hughes Technical Center concluded that autogas with high vapor 
pressure can accelerate the formation of carburetor ice.
Page 6 of 9ERA12LA131
The Pilot's Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge (FAA-H-8083-25A) defines vapor lock as" A 
problem that mostly affects gasoline-fuelled internal combustion engines. It occurs when liquid 
fuel changes state from liquid to gas while still in the fuel delivery system. This disrupts the 
operation of the fuel pump, causing loss of feed pressure to the carburetor or fuel injection 
system, resulting in transient loss of power or complete stalling. Restarting the engine from 
this state may be difficult. The fuel can vaporize due to being heated by the engine, by the local 
climate, or due to a lower boiling point at high altitude."
FAA Advisory Circular 91-51A (Effect of Icing on Aircraft Control and Airplane Deice and Anti-
Ice Systems), also states in part "–there are two kinds of icing that are significant to aviation: 
structural icing and induction icing. Small aircraft engines commonly employ a carburetor fuel 
system or a pressure fuel injection system to supply fuel for combustion. Both types of 
induction systems hold the potential for icing which can cause engine failure. This can occur in 
the carburetor because vaporization of fuel, combined with the expansion of air as it flows 
through the carburetor, causes sudden cooling, sometimes by a significant amount within a 
fraction of a second. Carburetor ice can be detected by a drop in rpm in fixed pitch propeller 
airplanes and a drop in manifold pressure in constant speed propeller airplanes. In both types, 
usually there will be a roughness in engine operation." 
Fuel System Testing
The fuel system on current production Super Petrels is feed by two tanks which are located 
inside the lower wings leading edges and a header tank located behind the passenger seat. The 
two tanks are not interconnected but are connected to a fuel valve which has three positions 
(right wing, left wing, or closed) that feed the header tank. The fuel system also contains a 
shut-off valve located next to the header tank behind the passenger seat.
At the request of the NTSB, temperature mapping of the fuel system of a Super Petrel equipped 
with insulated hoses was conducted by EDRA utilizing four digital thermometers with external 
sensors at the following locations:
1. The Mechanical Fuel Pump
2. The Fuel Manifold
3. The Left Carburetor
4. The Right Carburetor
Temperatures inside of the fuel system hoses from all four locations were recorded during 
engine warm up, before taking off, climb, cruise, and after landing.
Testing revealed that the temperatures remained within approximately 10 degrees of each 
other at all locations, with the most significant change in temperature occurring at the 
mechanical pump during climb, where the difference in temperature was only 11 degrees above 
the normal ambient temperature at that location. 
Review of Regulations
Review of Canadian aviation regulations revealed that the airplane whether manufactured as a 
kit or a production airplane would have required the inclusion of carburetor heat if it was to be 
registered in Canada.
Review of FAA regulations revealed that the airplane, if manufactured as a kit, would not have 
Page 7 of 9ERA12LA131
required the inclusion of carburetor heat. However, if the airplane was manufactured as a 
production airplane, carburetor heat would have been required.
Carburetor Icing Probability Chart
According to the FAA Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin (SAIB) CE-09-35, based on 
the recorded temperature and dew point about the time of the accident, the conditions were 
favorable for serious carburetor icing at cruise power setting.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to FAA's Winter Flying Tips (FAA P-8740-24), partial throttle (cruise or letdown) is 
the most critical time for carburetor ice. The recommended practice is to apply carburetor heat 
before reducing power and to use partial power during letdown to prevent icing and 
overcooling the engine. 
The FAA also advises that to prevent carburetor ice to use carburetor heat during ground 
checks, to use heat in the icing range, and to use heat on approach and descent and to be aware 
of the warning signs of carburetor ice including, loss of rpm (with a fixed pitch propeller) or a 
drop in manifold pressure (with a constant speed propeller), and rough running. 
The pilot response to these warning signs should be to apply full carburetor heat immediately 
(the engine may run rough initially for a short time while the ice melts).
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of engine power (partial)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Dragged wing/rotor/float/other
Aircraft structural failure
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
73, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/02/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/19/2009
Flight Time:
693 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2 hours (Total, this make and model), 650 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Page 8 of 9ERA12LA131
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
HANEY JOHN F B
Registration:
N667JH
Model/Series:
SEASTAR XP 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
133
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/16/2011, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
2 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
912ULS
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
80 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BDL, 173 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
25 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1151 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
315°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 25000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Willimantic, CT (IJD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Willimantic, CT (IJD)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Windham Airport (IJD)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
246 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 9 of 9ERA12LA131
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.741667, -72.189722 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd G Gunther
Adopted Date:
09/05/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Francis Hoban; FAA / FSDO; Windsor Locks, CT
Travis Shelongosky; TSBC; Canada,   
Geoff Guest; Transport Canada; Canada,   
Bernhard Kobylik; VERSA; Austria,   
Jordan Paskevich; Rotech Flight Safety Inc.; Canada,   
Gustavo Delmonte; CENIPA; Brazil,   
Rodrigo Scoda; EDRA Aeronautica; Brazil,   
Brian Boucher; PS-Bird LLC; Port Orange, FL
Publish Date:
09/05/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82595
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
