The commercial pilot of the helicopter stated that the purpose of the flight was to transport a 
telecommunications technician to a cattle ranch on an island. After departing from the airport, 
while flying overwater, the pilot observed a snow squall with near-zero visibility and decided to 
return to the airport. On the return trip, while flying in a mountainous valley, another snow 
squall moved into the area. He stated that due to the deteriorating flight conditions, he 
conducted a precautionary landing to remote, snow-covered terrain to wait for improved flight 
conditions. Once the squall passed, he continued to the airport. Several minutes later, another 
snow squall arrived, and the pilot decided to conduct another precautionary landing. During 
the landing sequence, the main rotor system downwash resulted in whiteout conditions, and 
the pilot was unable to recognize any topographical features. The main rotor blades impacted 
terrain and the helicopter rolled onto its left side. The pilot reported that there were no 
preimpact mechanical failures or malfunctions with the airframe or engine that would have 
precluded normal operation.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate clearance from terrain during a precautionary landing 
in whiteout conditions, which resulted in an in-flight collision with terrain. 
On December 2, 2016, about 1200 Alaska standard time, a Robinson R-22 Beta helicopter, 
N7085K, collided with remote snow-covered terrain while landing, about 10 miles southwest of 
Unalaska, Alaska. The commercial pilot sustained no injury, the passenger sustained minor 
injuries, and the helicopter sustained substantial damage. The helicopter was registered to, and 
operated by, Bering Pacific Ranches Ltd., Calgary, Alberta, Canada, as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) flight under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Deteriorating 
visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no flight plan was 
filed. The flight originated from the Unalaska Airport, Unalaska, about 1100. 
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on December 7, the pilot stated that the purpose of the flight was 
to transport a telecommunications technician to the Fort Glenn cattle ranch on Umnak Island. 
After departing from the Unalaska Airport, while flying overwater past Makushin Bay near 
Cape Starichkof, he observed a snow squall with near zero visibility. The pilot decided to return 
to Unalaska. On the return trip, while flying in a mountainous valley, a snow squall moved into 
the area. He stated that due to the deteriorating flight conditions, he conducted a 
precautionary landing to remote snow-covered terrain to wait for improved flight conditions. 
Once the snow squall passed, he departed to head back to Unalaska. Several minutes later, he 
encountered a second snow squall and decided to conduct another precautionary landing. 
During the precautionary landing sequence, whiteout conditions were present from the main 
rotor system downwash from the previous snow squall, and the pilot was unable to recognize 
any topographical features. The main rotor blades impacted terrain and the helicopter rolled 
onto its left side. Both occupants egressed from the wreckage, a personal locator beacon was 
activated, and the occupants were extracted from the accident site via a U.S. Coast Guard MH-
65D helicopter. 
The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the fuselage, main rotor system, tail boom, and 
tail rotor system.
The pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical failures or malfunctions with the 
airframe or engine that would have precluded normal operation. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
In the NTSB Accident/Incident Reporting Form 6120.1, the pilot reported that he held a 
helicopter instrument rating in addition to instructor ratings for helicopter and instrument 
helicopter. He additionally reported 70 hours of simulated instrument flight time and no hours 
were reported for actual instrument flight time. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter had no onboard weather capability and it was not instrument flight rules-
equipped and certified. The helicopter had a standard skid configuration with no emergency 
floatation system installed.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest official weather observation station is located at the Unalaska Airport, about 10 
miles northeast of the accident site. At 1200, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) 
was reporting, in part: wind 220° (true) at 18 knots, gusting 25 knots; visibility 10 statute 
miles; clouds and sky condition, broken clouds at 1,600 feet; temperature 37° F; dew point 27° 
F; altimeter 30.19 inHg.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The accident helicopter was not equipped, nor was it required to be equipped with an 
emergency locator transmitter. The pilot and passenger were not wearing flight helmets for the 
flight. The helicopter was equipped with 3-point restraint systems for the two seats.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Naval Research Laboratory has published the Forecaster's Handbook for the Bering Sea, 
Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska (1993). This document discusses snowfall and snow cover 
on the Aleutian Islands and states in part:
During winter, snow frequently covers the ground but the depth of coverage rarely exceeds 1 
foot (30 centimeters). High winds, however, cause snow to drift so that depth at an individual 
location is highly dependent on topography. Some depressions may fill to depths exceeding 6 
feet (1.8 meters), and other areas remain relatively free of snow. Because of the relatively mild 
temperatures, the snow is frequently of the wet, heavy type. Annual rainfall for the islands 
averages 40 to 50 inches (102 to 152 centimeters), and, again is heavily influenced by 
topography so that individual locations may have quite different rainfall amounts even though 
they are separated by only a short distance.
