The 64-year-old pilot, who was the airplane owner, departed on a local personal flight in the 
airplane about 45 minutes before the accident. Witnesses saw the airplane at 400-500 ft above 
ground level when it entered a descent, pitched up, rolled right, and then pitched nose down 
impacting the ground. Ground scarring surrounding the airplane was consistent with a near-
vertical nose-down impact attitude, which resulted in the engine separating and coming to rest 
about 20 ft from the airframe. Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no evidence 
of any mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation of the airplane. 
According to his pilot logbook, the pilot had not completed a flight review since 2012, and the 
pilot's last Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman medical certificate was issued in 
2012. At the time of the accident, he was operating an airplane that required a medical 
certificate, but his certification was no longer valid. 
The pilot's personal medical records showed a history of a chronic progressive 
neurodegenerative disease beginning in 2011 with intermittent worsening of symptoms. The 
disease and its symptoms likely impaired his ability to safely operate the airplane. Toxicology 
testing of samples from the pilot detected ethanol at 0.070 gm/dl in vitreous and 0.038 g/dl in 
blood. Although blood levels of ethanol can change after death, the vitreous from an intact eye 
is not subject to significant postmortem changes. Therefore, it is likely the ethanol detected in 
blood and vitreous was from ingestion. The vitreous blood level was well above the FAA 
prohibited level of 0.04 gm/dl, and mild impairment has been shown at blood levels as low as 
0.020 gm/dl. It is likely that the pilot was experiencing some level of impairment from alcohol 
ingestion and that the combination of the pilot's progressive degenerative neurologic condition 
and his use of alcohol impaired his ability to safely operate the airplane and contributed to the 
accident. 
The pilot's failure to maintain airplane control, which resulted in a collision with terrain. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's impairment resulting from the combination of his 
progressive degenerative neurologic condition and his use of alcohol.
