National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Moss Hill, TX
Accident Number: CEN16FA346
Date & Time: 09/03/2016, 1900 CDT
Registration: N787MW
Aircraft: BELLANCA 7ECA
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot and a passenger were conducting a local flight and performing aerobatics.
Witnesses observed the pilot conducting "flybys" and "tricks" in the area.
One witness reported observing the airplane complete "flips and spins" for about 10 minutes before the accident.
Ground-based video footage depicted the airplane flying over the river at low altitude.
The airplane pitched up and entered a steep climb.
As the airplane reached the top of the climb, it yawed to the left and entered a near- vertical descent and gradual left turn.
Shortly before impacting the river, the gradual left turn reversed abruptly into a right, descending turn.
The airplane then impacted the river.
A post-accident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies consistent with a pre-impact failure or malfunction.
According to a friend, the pilot was competent in spins and had received instruction in aerobatic maneuvers.
However, the lack of a formal logbook training record with respect to aerobatics, the investigation could not determine the pilot's level of proficiency in such maneuvers.
Toxicological testing on the pilot was positive for cocaine and its metabolites; cocaethylene, a metabolite formed when cocaine is ingested with alcohol; and levamisole, a drug commonly used to "cut" street cocaine, in urine.
Cavity blood was positive for methamphetamine and its metabolites.
The absence of cocaine in the pilot's blood suggested distant usage.
Accordingly, the acute effects of the drug had likely dissipated.
The level of methamphetamine in the pilot's blood sample was low.
As a result, the presence of any residual effects of the drug could not be determined.
Based on the available information, the investigation was unable to determine whether the pilot was impaired, if at all, at the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's loss of control attempting to recover from a low-level aerobatic maneuver.
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's decision to attempt the low-level maneuver which significantly reduced any margin for error.
The pilot and passenger sustained fatal injuries.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The airplane was registered to a private individual and operated by the pilot as a 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the accident site and the flight was not operated on a flight plan.
The local flight originated from a private airstrip in Cleveland, Texas, at an undetermined time.
Witnesses observed the pilot conducting "flybys" and "tricks" in the area.
One witness reported observing the airplane complete "flips and spins" for about 10 minutes before the accident.
Ground-based video footage depicted the airplane flying over the river at low altitude.
The airplane pitched up and entered a steep climb.
As the airplane reached the top of the climb, it yawed to the left and entered a nearly vertical descent and gradual left turn.
Shortly before impacting the river, the gradual left turn reversed abruptly into a right, descending turn.
The airplane impacted the river in a nearly vertical, nose-down attitude and came to rest inverted and partially submerged in the river.
His primary flight training was completed in the accident airplane, as well as Cessna 152 and 172 airplanes.
The pilot was issued a private pilot certificate on July 13, 2015.
He received a tailwheel airplane endorsement on July 14, 2015.
The logbook also contained a stall awareness/spin competency endorsement dated January 5, 2016.
The logbook did not contain any entries that specifically noted instruction in aerobatic maneuvers.
However, a friend of the pilot's family stated that the pilot had received instruction and was competent in basic aerobatic maneuvers.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information Aircraft Make: BELLANCA Registration: N787MW Model/Series: 7ECA Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: 1976 Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Aerobatic; Normal Serial Number: 1177-76 Landing Gear Type: Tailwheel Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 08/01/2016, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
The exact airplane total time could not be determined because the recording tachometer was damaged consistent with impact forces.
A small beach area was located along the bank of the river immediately south of the highway overpass.
Both river banks were lined with low trees in the immediate vicinity of the accident site.
A post-accident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies consistent with a pre-impact failure or malfunction.
A detailed summary of the airframe and engine examinations is included with the docket material associated with this accident case.
Medical And Pathological Information An autopsy of the pilot was conducted at Forensic Medical Management Services in Beaumont, Texas.
The pilot's death was attributed to blunt force injuries sustained in the accident.
Levamisole is commonly used to cut street cocaine.
Ibuprofen is an over-the-counter analgesic commonly marketed with the names Advil and Motrin.
Methamphetamine is available by prescription for the short-term treatment of narcolepsy and obesity, but is also commonly available on the street.
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Timothy Sorensen Adopted Date: 06/13/2017 Additional Participating Persons: Carl C Thomas; FAA -- Flight Standards; Houston, TX John Butler; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA Publish Date: 11/30/2018 Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93940
