Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Caldwell, ID
Accident Number:
WPR09LA378
Date & Time:
08/01/2009, 1350 MDT 
Registration:
N69KG
Aircraft:
Gray RV-6
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to a family member of the pilot, the airplane had sat on the airport's ramp for about 
a year without having been flown. About a week before the accident, the pilot flew the airplane 
once around the traffic pattern. On the day of the accident, the pilot had removed and 
sandblasted the spark plugs, checked the cylinders for compression, and removed and cleaned 
the air filter; the filter was reported to have had "some goop" on it. A witness reported 
observing the airplane take off, and, as it went by him at 100 to 200 feet above ground level, he 
heard a "popping noise." He subsequently observed the airplane make a quick left turn to a left 
downwind leg, and as the airplane continued on the downwind he observed the nose increase 
in pitch, but it was not climbing. As the airplane came abeam the numbers, it made a steep left 
turn, followed by the nose dropping before it dove into the ground and erupted in flames. The 
airplane was consumed by a post impact fire. A post accident examination of the engine 
revealed no anomalies with the cylinders and valve train. All spark plugs were found to have 
excessive gaps, and all but one failed a bench check when exposed to pressure greater than 80 
psi. A post accident examination of the airframe revealed no anomalies. No aircraft or engine 
logbooks were located during the investigation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed that led to a stall/spin while maneuvering in 
the traffic pattern.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR09LA378
Factual Information
On August 1, 2009, about 1350 mountain daylight time, an experimental built Gray RV-6, 
N69KG, was destroyed following impact with terrain near the Caldwell Industrial Airport 
(EUL), Caldwell, Idaho. The private pilot, the sole occupant, was killed. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local flight, which was conducted in accordance with 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, and a flight plan was not filed.  The flight was originating at 
the time of the accident.
According to a witness who was positioned about midfield on the airport, he observed a tan 
colored with blue trim RV-6 type aircraft depart Runway 12. The witness stated that as the 
airplane passed him at an altitude of about 100 to 200 feet [above ground level] (agl), "–the 
engine of the plane began to make a 'popping' noise." The witness reported that a few seconds 
later the aircraft turned onto a left crosswind, then "quickly" to downwind at an altitude of 
about 200 feet [agl]. The witness further reported that as the airplane continued on downwind 
"–the nose of the RV was increasing its pitch and it was apparent that the RV was not 
climbing. As the RV came approximately abeam the number 12 on its left downwind, it made a 
steep left turn as to land on 12. As this occurred the nose of the RV dropped, and within a few 
seconds I saw it dive into the ground and erupt into flames." Prior to impact the airplane had 
collided with a set of power lines, which bordered the airport on its north perimeter. The 
airplane was consumed by the post impact fire.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation safety inspector who examined the accident 
site reported that the airplane came to rest in an upright position next to an airport perimeter 
fence and inside airport property. The accident site was located about 700 feet northeast of the 
approach end of Runway 12. The fuselage, empennage, and engine were all located together at 
the main impact site. Due to impact forces and thermal damage, control continuity could not 
be confirmed. There were no observed anomalies with the airframe when examined at the 
accident site.   
The airplane's engine was examined under the supervision of the FAA inspector by a 
certificated airframe and powerplant mechanic. The examination revealed no anomalies with 
the cylinders or the valve train as a result of a borescope inspection. Additionally, no stuck 
valves were observed. The examination also revealed that all spark plugs were found to have 
excessive gaps from .028 - .030; the manufacturer recommends .016 - .021. All but one spark 
plug failed a bench check when exposed to pressures above 80 psi. During the examination, the 
oil filter was cut and inspected with an acceptable amount of trace particulate matter noted.
According to the FAA inspector, a family member reported that the airplane had set idle for 
about a year on the airport ramp and had not been flown. The family member stated that about 
a week prior to the accident flight [the pilot] flew it [the airplane] around the airport traffic 
pattern. The family member further revealed that on the morning of the accident flight [the 
pilot] removed the spark plugs, sandblasted them, checked [cylinder] compression, and 
removed the air filter. The family member reported, "The filter had 'goop' on it. [The pilot] 
cleaned it around noon before the accident." No aircraft, engine or pilot logbooks were located 
during the investigation.
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Ada County Coroner's Office, Boise, Idaho, on 
August 3, 2009. According to the autopsy report the cause of death was "–Carbon monoxide 
poisoning and thermal injuries." The FAA's Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Oklahoma 
Page 3 of 5WPR09LA378
City, Oklahoma, performed postmortem toxicology of specimens from the pilot. The specimens 
were negative for cyanide, ethanol, and drugs. The results also revealed 28 percent carbon 
monoxide was detected in the blood.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial)
Approach-VFR pattern 
downwind
Loss of control in flight
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
35, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/09/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
302 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Gray
Registration:
N69KG
Model/Series:
RV-6 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
23069
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
Justin C. Walker
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
Justin C. Walker
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5WPR09LA378
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
EUL, 2432 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1335 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
120°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
5 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
190°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.05 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
33°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Caldwell, ID (EUL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Unknown
Destination: 
Caldwell, ID (EUL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1350 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Caldwell Industrial Airport (EUL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2432 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
12
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5500 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
43.648056, -116.640556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Little
Adopted Date:
03/03/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Patrick Darling; Federal Aviation Administration; Boise, ID
Publish Date:
03/03/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=74419
Page 5 of 5WPR09LA378
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
