Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
West Point, VA
Accident Number:
ERA09LA435
Date & Time:
08/01/2009, 1900 EDT 
Registration:
N1999G
Aircraft:
BEECH B90
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 6 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Skydiving
Analysis 
During a skydiving flight at approximately 14,000 feet, an instructor positioned himself at the 
door opening with his jump student nearby. The student inadvertently pulled the instructor's 
reserve parachute D-ring, deploying the chute and pulling the instructor out of the airplane. 
The instructor contacted the left horizontal stabilizer then descended toward the ground 
coming to rest suspended in a tree by his parachute.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The inadvertent deployment of the instructor's reserve parachute.
Findings
Personnel issues
Incorrect action selection - Passenger (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA09LA435
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 2009, about 1900 eastern daylight time, a Beech B90, N1999G, registered to 
Fayard Enterprises LLC, operated by Rampart Aviation, Inc., was substantially damaged 
during a skydive flight near West Point, Virginia. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 
skydive flight from Middle Peninsula Regional Airport (FYJ), West Point, Virginia. The pilot 
and 5 skydivers were not injured while one skydiver was killed. 
The pilot stated that before takeoff fourteen skydivers boarded the airplane. The flight 
departed and climbed to 14,000 feet where a group of skydivers deplaned. At that point, he felt 
a large thud and a shudder in the flight controls that lasted about 3 seconds. The airplane 
yawed to the left and pitched up, then the flight control feel returned to normal.
According to a student jumper who was on his 26th jump, after the group of skydivers 
deplaned, his instructor positioned himself at the cabin door opening facing inside the cabin, 
and he came in front of his instructor. The student jumper reported that he put his hands on 
the instructor's chest and 1 count before exiting, he noticed the instructor's reserve parachute 
handle was "out." He told the instructor to stop and tried to grab him from the back to bring 
him back into the airplane. The instructor was "–ripped out of the plane..." and he watched the 
instructor hit the tail then noted he fell away from the airplane. He watched the instructor's 
reserve parachute open and by that time he was told to jump solo.
One of the tandem instructor's who was next to exit the airplane reported that the instructor 
positioned himself outside the airplane facing the front of the airplane and appeared to start 
his exit count. The tandem instructor sensed confusion between the accident instructor and 
student jumper and the accident instructor stopped the count on "set." He noticed the two 
briefly communicating, and also noticed the accident instructor trying to grab the plane. While 
the accident instructor was doing this the student jumper appeared to reach out to assist the 
accident instructor and appeared to reach in the area of the accident instructor's left side in the 
vicinity of his reserve parachute ripcord. At that point the accident instructor was "violently 
pulled from the door and I felt him violently strike the tail." The remaining jumpers departed 
the airplane.
The pilot further reported that after the remaining skydivers exited the airplane he turned 
around and noticed a large dent on the leading edge of the left horizontal stabilizer. He 
descended at a slow rate of descent and landed without further incident.
A search for the accident instructor was immediately initiated and his body was located the 
following morning. According to the Virginia State Police Report, the instructor was found 
suspended in a tree by a white colored parachute. The report also indicated that a video 
recorded the event and their review of the video in slow motion revealed the student jumper 
pulled the reserve parachute D-ring.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A surface observation weather report taken at Middle Regional Airport, West Point, Virginia, at 
1902, or approximately 2 minutes after the accident indicates the visibility was 10 statute 
miles, and clear skies existed. The temperature and dew point were 28 and 21 degrees Celsius 
Page 3 of 5ERA09LA435
respectively, and the altimeter setting was 30.03 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the airplane by a FAA inspector revealed substantial damage to the left 
horizontal stabilizer.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A postmortem examination of the skydive instructor was performed by the Office of the Chief 
Medical Examiner, Richmond, Virginia. The cause of death was listed as ﬁCervical Spine 
Fracture at C6 due to Blunt Force Injury of Head and Neck.ﬂ
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens of the skydive instructor by the Department 
of Forensic Science, Commonwealth of Virginia. The toxicology report stated the results were 
negative in the blood and vitreous fluid for tested drugs and volatiles.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
31, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/31/2009
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/12/2009
Flight Time:
4430 hours (Total, all aircraft), 11 hours (Total, this make and model), 3700 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 205 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 75 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 9 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ERA09LA435
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N1999G
Model/Series:
B90 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
LJ-319
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable -
Seats: 
15
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/17/2009, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
10955 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6 SER 578HP
Registered Owner:
FAYARD ENTERPRISES LLC
Rated Power:
550 hp
Operator:
Rampart Aviation, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FYJ, 20 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1902 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.03 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
West Point, VA 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
West Point, VA (FYJ)
Type of Clearance:
Unknown
Departure Time:
 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal, 5 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 6 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.521389, -76.762778 (est)
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
12/20/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
John J Keymont; FAA/FSDO; Richmond, VA
Publish Date:
12/20/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=74425
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
