Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lihue, HI
Accident Number:
WPR09LA386
Date & Time:
08/01/2009, 1445 HST 
Registration:
N44VZ
Aircraft:
AIRBORNE WINDSPORTS PTY LTD 
XT-912-L
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The pilot of the light sport weight-shift-control airplane said that they were descending 
through a "hole in the clouds" when the aircraft encountered severe turbulence, resulting in the 
flight instructor losing control of the aircraft. The flight instructor subsequently deployed the 
aircraft's onboard rocket-propelled parachute system before impacting mountainous terrain 
and coming to rest on a hillside, entangled in surrounding trees. The flight instructor reported 
no anomalies with the airplane prior to or during the flight.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The flight instructor's failure to maintain control of the airplane following an in-flight 
encounter with turbulence during descent.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Instructor/check pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Convective turbulence - Effect on equipment
Page 2 of 5WPR09LA386
Factual Information
On August 1, 2009, about 1445 Hawaii standard time, an Airborne Windsports XT-912-L, light 
sport weight-shift-control airplane, N44VZ, sustained substantial damage following an 
uncontrolled descent and impact with terrain about 12 miles northwest of Lihue, Hawaii. Both 
the flight instructor and his student sustained serious injuries. The airplane was registered to a 
private individual and operated by Birds in Paradise, of Kapaa, Hawaii. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local instructional flight, which was conducted in accordance with 
14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, and a flight plan was not filed. The flight 
departed the Fort Allen Airport (PAK), Hanapepe, Hawaii, about 1400.
In a statement provided to the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), the flight instructor reported 
that after departing with his student on the instructional flight to the east, and after reaching 
an altitude of about 3,000 feet, he turned north toward the Wailiali Crater. The flight 
instructor stated that as he approached the area of the crater, he determined that "–the area 
there provided more than enough VFR (visual flight rules weather) to the ground below, and I 
would begin a slow descent to the crater area." The flight instructor further stated that, 
"Everything was going fine. As I descended my aircraft became violently rocked about in a 
matter of just seconds. I vigorously held the control bar and applied full power to try and take 
the aircraft back up to where it was calm, but to no avail. The control bar was violently ripped 
from my hands with severe force." The flight instructor reported that, "I fought all I could to 
maintain control of the [air]craft. However, as I had clear visual the entire time of my 
surroundings, I paid close attention to the rate of speed at which the ground was approaching. 
It became my final decision, with all other opportunities exhausted, that pulling the parachute 
was going to be the only thing that would save [us]. Upon pulling the chute, maybe just 200 to 
300 feet above the ground, I lost consciousness." The aircraft subsequently impacted a hillside 
with the parachute becoming entangled in the surrounding trees. 
In a statement submitted to the IIC, the student pilot reported that as the flight headed north 
towards the mountains and into overcast skies, the flight instructor said he had found a hole in 
the clouds to drop down [through]. The student pilot stated, "To me, it looked like a 'dark spot' 
[rather] than a hole. Just as [the flight instructor] was about to drop down into the hole, 
another flight instructor for the same company flying nearby radioed, 'No, it's closing up.' " The 
student pilot further stated that as soon as they entered "the hole" the aircraft stopped flying 
and "started bouncing around like popcorn in a popcorn popper." The student pilot reported 
that the aircraft started to rotate in a downward spiral. He then heard the parachute deploy, 
and "One or two seconds later we impacted [terrain]."
The flight instructor reported that the local weather at the time of the accident was wind from 
the northeast at 17 knots, visibility 10 miles, scattered clouds with heights unknown, broken 
clouds at 4,000 feet, temperature, dew point and altimeter setting unknown, and the severity 
of turbulence as extreme.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation safety inspector, the pilot was 
on top of a broken cloud deck trying to find a hole to descend through into a crater. The 
inspector stated that apparently the flight instructor saw what he thought was a hole to 
descend through and started to spiral down through it, but the hole closed up, and at about the 
same time severe updrafts and downdrafts caused the pilot to lose control of the aircraft. The 
inspector reported that after the flight instructor deployed the parachute, the aircraft impacted 
Page 3 of 5WPR09LA386
the side of a mountain cliff, with the parachute getting caught in a tree, which prevented the 
aircraft from sliding further down the cliff.
History of Flight
Enroute-descent
Turbulence encounter
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor
Age:
44, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Sport Pilot
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
None None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
278 hours (Total, all aircraft), 275 hours (Total, this make and model), 145 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
None None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 4 of 5WPR09LA386
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AIRBORNE WINDSPORTS PTY 
LTD
Registration:
N44VZ
Model/Series:
XT-912-L 
Aircraft Category:
Weight-Shift
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental Light Sport
Serial Number:
XT-912-0230
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/26/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
992 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1053 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
ROTAX
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
912UL
Registered Owner:
Gerry Charlebois
Rated Power:
80 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LIH, 153 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
12 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1400 HST
Direction from Accident Site:
165°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 4000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
17 knots / 17 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
17°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Port Allen Airp, HI (PAK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Port Allen Airp, HI (PAK)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1400 HST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
22.102778, -159.471667 (est)
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas Little
Adopted Date:
04/22/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Darett I Kanayama; Federal Aviation Administration; Honolulu, HI
Publish Date:
04/22/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=74456
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
