Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CROSS KEYS, NJ
Accident Number:
NYC01LA047
Date & Time:
12/02/2000, 1132 EST 
Registration:
N757RR
Aircraft:
Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane lifted off the runway at about 70 knots, 3/4 down the length of the 3,500-foot long 
runway.  The pilot/owner was flying the airplane from the right seat.  As the airplane reached 
an altitude of 20-25 feet, the right control wheel broke off in the pilot's hands.  The pilot 
reduced the power to idle, the airplane rolled to the right, impacted a tree, and came to rest 
inverted on the ground.  Examination of the fracture surface on the shaft of the control wheel 
revealed features typical of an overstress separation.  No evidence of fatigue cracking or other 
type of preexisting cracking or deterioration was noted.  The upper portion of the fracture 
intersected the upper hole approximately at a 45-degree angle, indicative of torsional loading 
of the shaft (with the handle portion of the wheel turning to the left - counterclockwise) as the 
shaft fractured.  According to the pilot/owner and the pilot-rated passenger (seated in the left 
seat), the control lock had been installed in the control wheel, and was removed during the 
preflight. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The overstress separation of the control yoke from the control column. 
Page 2 of 6NYC01LA047
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) FLT CONTROL SYST,YOKE/CONTROL STICK - SEPARATION
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
2. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6NYC01LA047
Factual Information
 On December 2, 2000, approximately 1132 Eastern Standard Time, a Cessna 152, N757RR, 
was substantially damaged during takeoff at the Cross Keys Airport (17N), Cross Keys, New 
Jersey.  The certificated commercial pilot/owner and the pilot rated passenger were uninjured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal local 
flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement the pilot said:
"I broke ground with 10 degrees of flaps and leveled off to pick up speed.  My throttle was in at 
full power.  Upon resuming climb, I felt a snap in the control yoke, followed by a second snap.  
With this second snap, was a complete loss of control.  This was verified by turning the yoke 
fully to one side and then the other with no response.  The yoke felt loose, as if there was 
nothing connected.  At this time, I throttled back all the way to idle.  I was still over the runway 
(towards the right side).  Altitude cannot be determined, but believed to be near treetop level.  
Unable to correct for drift, aircraft hit trees on right side of runway.  Aircraft landed in an 
inverted position in a wooded area, just past end of runway.  The yoke was found snapped off at 
the gust lock hole."
In a subsequent telephone interview, the pilot reported that before the accident flight, he 
"locked" the ailerons using "external locks" which connected to the flaps, and a Cessna control 
wheel lock on the control column.  He performed a preflight inspection on the day of the 
accident and removed the control lock from the left control column.  The pilot additionally 
stated that the control lock is designed to fit into only the left control column.  
According to the pilot-rated passenger, during the takeoff the airplane lifted off the ground at 
70 mph, about 3/4 down the length of the runway.  As the airplane reached an altitude of 20-
25 feet, the right control wheel broke off in the pilot's hands.  The pilot pulled the throttle back, 
the airplane rolled to the right, impacted a tree, and came to rest inverted on the ground. The 
passenger reported that a control wheel lock had been installed in the left control column 
previous to the accident flight.  He stated that the pilot performed an extensive preflight 
inspection of the airplane before they departed.  During the inspection, the control wheel lock 
was removed from the control column and placed it in its compartment on the backside of the 
pilot's seat.  
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed it 
came to rest inverted on a heading of 300 degrees.  The right wing was folded against the 
fuselage and the left wing was intact and attached to the fuselage.  The vertical and horizontal 
stabilizer displayed severe impact damage.  The right control wheel was broken off the control 
column at the gust lock hole.
The control wheel and lock were examined at the National Transportation Safety Board 
Materials Laboratory, Washington D.C., on February 2, 2001.  According to the Materials 
Laboratory Factual Report:  
"Examination of the fracture surface on the shaft of the control wheel revealed features typical 
of an overstress separation.  No evidence of fatigue cracking or other type of preexisting 
cracking or deterioration was noted.  The upper portion of the fracture intersected the upper 
hole approximately at a 45 degree angle, indicative of torsional loading of the shaft (with the 
handle portion of the wheel turning to the left - counterclockwise) as the shaft fractured.  Post-
Page 4 of 6NYC01LA047
fracture damage was noted on the exterior of the shaft adjacent to the lower hole and on the 
fracture surface adjacent to the lower hole.  The shaft of the control wheel appeared to be 
constructed from an aluminum material."
"Examination of the lock showed the presence of what appeared to be long term wear on 
portions of the pin, but no evidence of severe recent loading.  The lock pin appeared to be 
constructed from a steel material."
According to the Cessna 152 Pilot's Operating Handbook, the second item on the PREFLIGHT 
INSPECTION checklist is to remove the control wheel lock from the control yoke.  
Additionally, the third item on the BEFORE TAKEOFF checklist is to assure the flight controls 
are "free and correct."
The pilot reported 5,618 hours of total flight experience, 3,000 of which were in the accident 
airplane.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
73, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/09/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
5618 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3000 hours (Total, this make and model), 5513 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 26 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6NYC01LA047
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N757RR
Model/Series:
152 152
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
15279948
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/13/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1670 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
24 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3170 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-235
Registered Owner:
CLAUDE PAOLINELLI
Rated Power:
110 hp
Operator:
CLAUDE PAOLINELLI
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PHL, 22 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
14 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1115 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
300°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
30°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
36°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (17N)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
CROSS KEYS AIRPORT (17N)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
162 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3500 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Page 6 of 6NYC01LA047
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JILL         ANDREWS
Adopted Date:
09/26/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
MIKE   PLANTZ; PHILADELPHIA, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
