National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GRAND COULEE, WA
Accident Number: SEA00LA027
Date & Time: 12/01/1999, 1730 PST
Registration: N4617M
Aircraft: Beech B-19
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During a night cross-country instructional flight, the instructor chose to divert the aircraft to an alternate airport.
While maneuvering in the area of the alternate airport, the aircraft collided with high-voltage power lines 3 miles from the airport.
The power lines are approximately 250 feet AGL.
Both pilots stated they were unable to recall any of the detailed events from the time they diverted to the alternate airport to the time of the accident.
The power lines are displayed on the sectional chart.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from power transmission lines.
Factors include dark night conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 3.
The certified flight instructor (CFI) and student pilot both sustained serious injuries.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was filed for the cross country flight.
The flight originated from the Grant County International Airport (MWH), Moses Lake, Washington, approximately one hour prior to the accident.
In a written statement, the certified flight instructor reported that the intent of the instructional flight was to complete lesson 2-4 in the Training Course Outline (attached).
The lesson called for a cross-country flight with a diversion to an alternate airport.
After reviewing the weather and the student's flight planning, the two pilots departed MWH at 1625 Pacific standard time, with a planned destination of Anderson Field, Brewster, Washington, (S97).
The instructor pilot stated that approximately 20 minutes after departing MWH he instructed the student pilot to divert to Grand Coulee Dam Airport (S97), approximately 25 miles northeast of their location.
The instructor pilot and student pilot both remember making a heading change for the new destination airport.
However, both pilots were unable to recall any of the detailed events between the time of the heading change and the accident.
The aircraft's initial impact point was a series of tower-mounted, high-voltage transmission lines (that are displayed on the sectional chart), located approximately three nautical miles northeast of the airport.
According to Bonneville Power Administration, the height of the power lines are approximately 250 feet above ground level (2,250 feet above mean sea level [MSL]).
According to Douglas County Sheriff's Office, witnesses reported seeing a bright flash, in the vicinity of the power lines, at the approximate time of the accident.
According to a flight navigation log recovered from the accident aircraft, the planned altitude for the cross country flight was 4,500 feet above MSL.
The published elevation for Grand Coulee Dam Airport is 1,590 feet MSL.
Post-accident examination of the aircraft revealed no evidence of a pre-impact mechanical failure or malfunction.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
