National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: DAYTONA BEACH, FL
Accident Number: MIA00LA035
Date & Time: 12/01/1999, 1055 EST
Registration: N35RH
Aircraft: Howard Aircraft Corp. DGA-15P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during an attempted go-around, and the subsequent wing tip strike of the ground and collision with a tree.
A factor in the loss of control was the crosswind conditions present during the landing attempt.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On December 1, 1999, at about 1055 eastern standard time, a Howard DGA-15P, N35RH, registered to a private individual, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed on landing at the Spruce Creek Airport, Daytona Beach, Florida.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane received substantial damage and the commercial-rated pilot and  airline transport-rated passenger were not injured.
The flight departed Flagler County Airport, Bunnell, Florida, about 20 minutes before the accident.
According to the pilot, he had very recently bought the airplane from the passenger, and was in the process of familiarizing himself with its handling characteristics.
They had conducted airborne familiarization en route from Spruce Creek to Flagler, where they landed and fuelled.
They had returned to Spruce Creek, and were conducting takeoffs and landings on runway 05 into a "significant" left crosswind.
On the second landing, intended to be a full stop, the airplane's left main wheel touched down first, the airplane bounced, and the pilot attempted a go-around that resulted in a skid off the left side of the runway into an adjacent tree.
The pilot stated surface winds at Spruce Creek were from 360 degrees at 18 to 22 knots, and severe turbulence.
The pilot stated that he understood that the seller's responsibility was not as a co-pilot or safety pilot, and was a pilot-rated passenger only.
According to FAA personnel, the pilot stated he lost control of the airplane during the go-around attempt, the left wing struck the ground, and the airplane impacted a large oak tree off the left side of the runway.
The temporary registration showing the transfer of ownership was properly displayed, and had been properly forwarded to FAA Aircraft Registry, Oklahoma City.
The passenger made no attempt to take over the controls.
The Daytona Beach FAA ATCT, located 7 miles north of Spruce Creek, reported winds at 1053, were from 010 degrees at 15 knots, gusting to 23 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 56, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Registration: N35RH Model/Series: DGA-15P DGA-15P Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: Yes Airworthiness Certificate: Serial Number: 760 Landing Gear Type: Tailwheel Seats: 4 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 08/02/1999, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
