National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MORRISTOWN, TN
Accident Number: MIA00LA037
Date & Time: 12/01/1999, 1700 EST
Registration: N704YE
Aircraft: Cessna 150M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot was conducting solo touch and go landings, and on his third landing, as he was applying power for the takeoff, the airplane veered left.
Despite his application of right rudder the airplane continued off the left edge of the runway, collapsing the nose landing gear, and striking the terrain with the right wingtip, inducing a left 'cartwheel'.
The airplane came to rest in the grass on it's nose and left wing, having sustained wing spar and firewall damage.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane sustained substantial damage and the student pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The flight departed the same airport about 1 hour before the accident.
According to the student pilot, after his third touch-and-go landing, he applied power for the takeoff and the airplane began a left drift off the runway.
Once into the grass, the right wing struck the ground, and the airplane "cartwheeled" to the left, coming to rest on the nose and left wing.
According to FAA personnel, the pilot stated that when the airplane skidded off the runway edge into soft dirt and grass, he elected to abort the takeoff.
Before he got the airplane stopped, the nose landing gear collapsed, causing damage to both wing spars and the firewall.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 40, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 38 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3732 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-200-A Registered Owner: J.
B. MARSHALL Rated Power: 100 hp Operator: J.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
