National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: AKRON, CO
Accident Number: DEN00LA024
Date & Time: 12/03/1999, 1440 MST
Registration: N5245G
Aircraft: Cessna 305A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said that he was landing on runway 11, and the wind was 010 degrees at 18 knots, gusting to 27 knots.
He said that he applied 'screeching' right brake to maintain directional control, and subsequently the right main landing gear assembly separated from the airplane.
The airplane settled onto its right wing as the airplane turned left into the wind.
Postaccident examination of the wheel assembly, by the pilot, revealed that all four wheel assembly attachment bolts had sheared.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the four bolts which attach the right main landing gear assembly to the landing gear strut.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - FAILURE,TOTAL ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On December 3, 1999, approximately 1440 mountain standard time, a Cessna 305A (L-19 Birddog), N5245G, was substantially damaged during landing at Akron-Washington County Airport, Akron, Colorado.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant on board, was not injured.
The aircraft was being operated under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country flight which originated from Burlington, Colorado, approximately one hour before the accident.
No flight plan had been filed.
The pilot said that he was landing on runway 11, and the wind was 010 degrees at 18 knots, gusting to 27 knots.
He said that he applied "screeching" right brake to maintain directional control, and subsequently the right main wheel landing gear assembly separated from the airplane.
He said that the right "gear leg promptly went away," and the airplane settled onto its right wing as the airplane turned left into the wind.
Additionally, the right main landing gear box was damaged, the right outboard wing spar was bent, and the right aileron was damaged.
Postaccident examination of the wheel assembly, by the pilot, revealed that all four wheel assembly attachment bolts had sheared.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 66, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): Balloon Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
