Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
KEYSTONE, FL
Accident Number:
MIA97LA202
Date & Time:
07/01/1997, 0000 EDT 
Registration:
N772T
Aircraft:
DFL Holdings Inc. TANGO
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot departed on a local flight and did not return. The wreckage was located the following 
day. Examination of the wreckage revealed the airplane collided with trees and terrain 
spinning to the left. Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assembly and 
accessories revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. All 
components necessary for flight were present at the crash site. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
an in-flight loss of control for undetermined reasons. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: UNKNOWN
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 2 of 5MIA97LA202
Factual Information
 On July 1, 1997, at an undetermined time, an experimental DFL Holdings Inc., Model: 
Tango, N772T,  operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed in the vicinity of 
Keystone, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The 
airplane was destroyed and the airline transport rated pilot was fatally injured. The flight 
originated from Keystone Airpark at about 1330 eastern daylight time. 
The airplane was reported as missing on July 1, 1997, and was located on July 2, 1997, in 
the northeast corner of restricted area 2903A.
Examination of the crash site revealed the airplane collided with trees in a nose down 
attitude with little horizontal movement spinning to the left. The left wing was bent slightly up, 
was attached at the forward portion of the wing, and separated 10 to 12 inches on the trailing 
part of the wing. The right wing tip bottom was found two feet forward of the right wing. The 
fuel tanks were ruptured and browning of the  vegetation was present. Torsional twisting, "s" 
bending and chordwise scarring was present on the propeller blades. Tree branches found in 
the vicinity of the crash site exhibited 45-degree "v" cuts
Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assembly and accessories revealed 
no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. All components necessary for 
flight were present at the crash site. For additional information see FAA inspector's statement
Personnel who had known the pilot since college stated, he had the experience and 
talent to fly the tango airplane, but at times had shown less than good judgment performing 
maneuvers at low altitudes and buzzing at tree top level before and after joining the military. 
He was informed about the characteristics of the tango airplane, was instructed not to perform 
aerobatics, power on stalls, or spins, and to consider it as a low g aircraft. After initially flying 
the airplane the pilot informed them that the airplane did a great "pull close" maneuver.
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted on July 3, 1997, by Dr. Margarita 
Arruza, Associate Medical Examiner, Jacksonville, Florida. The cause of death was multiple 
injuries. Postmortem toxicology studies of specimens from the pilot were performed by the 
Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Federal Aviation Administration, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma. These studies were negative for basic, acidic, and neutral drugs. Ethanol 21.000 
mg/dl was detected in the blood, 30.00 mg/dl ethanol was detected in the muscle fluid, 1.00 
mg/dl acetaldehyde was detected in the muscle fluid, 16.000 acetaldehyde was detected in the 
blood, and 5.000 mg/dl n-propanol was detected in the blood.   
The wreckage was released to MSG Ronald Watson, Provost Marshals Office, Camp 
Blanding, Florida, on July 11, 1997. The pilot log books were released to the deceased pilot's 
father, Dr. Richard K. Ames, on August 19, 1997.
Page 3 of 5MIA97LA202
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
35, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/07/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
4218 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3 hours (Total, this make and model), 2335 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 32 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 22 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
DFL Holdings Inc.
Registration:
N772T
Model/Series:
TANGO TANGO
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
001
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A1A
Registered Owner:
DFL HOLDING INC.
Rated Power:
Operator:
DFL HOLDING INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5MIA97LA202
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Not Reported
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GNV, 152 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 3000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 25000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
32°C / 23°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (42J)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
GAINESVILLE, FL (GNV)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1330 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
CARROL     A SMITH
Adopted Date:
04/10/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
CARL F COLEMAN; ORLANDO, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5MIA97LA202
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
