National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: VICKSBURG, MI
Accident Number: CHI98LA052
Date & Time: 12/02/1997, 1330 EST
Registration: N6295Z
Aircraft: Piper PA-46-350P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot reported that the airplane went over a large hump in the runway during the takeoff roll at about 800 feet from the approach end of the runway.
He reported the airplane veered to the left and the 'takeoff was aborted.'
The passenger, who was on board to monitor the instruments, reported that the intended flight was a maintenance test flight.
The passenger reported that the airplane entered a large dip in the runway about 1,200 feet from the approach end of the runway.
He reported the airplane became 'airborne near stall speed.'
The left wing struck the ground.
The airplane departed the left side of the runway at about a 45 degree angle and traveled approximately another 1,000 feet before striking a row of small trees before coming to rest.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inadequate preflight preparation and his failure to maintain directional control during takeoff.
A factor was the uneven runway at the grass airstrip.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On December 2, 1997, at 1330 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-46-350P, N6295Z , operated by Hov-Aire, Inc., sustained substantial damage when it hit trees on the side of the runway during an aborted takeoff.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was departing an unnamed grass airstrip on a local maintenance test flight with Kalamazoo, Michigan, as the destination.
The pilot lost control of the aircraft after it hit a dip in the runway.
The private pilot and passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that he was departing a private airfield located about seven miles south of Kalamazoo, Michigan.
The airplane went over a large hump in the runway during the takeoff roll at about 800 feet from the approach end of the runway.
The pilot reported the airplane veered to the left and the "takeoff was aborted."
An Operations Safety Inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration interviewed the passenger who had sat in the right seat of the airplane during the accident.
The passenger, who was on board to monitor the instruments, reported that the intended flight was a maintenance test flight.
The passenger reported that the airplane entered a large dip in the runway about 1,200 feet from the approach end of the runway.
He reported the airplane became "airborne near stall speed."
The left wing struck the ground.
The airplane departed the left side of the runway at about a 45 degree angle and traveled approximately another 1,000 feet before striking a row of small trees before coming to rest.
The examination of the airplane revealed no abnormalities.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 56, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
