National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GRASS VALLEY, CA
Accident Number: LAX98LA051
Date & Time: 12/02/1997, 1500 PST
Registration: N2591K
Aircraft: Luscombe 194E
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis On landing rollout the pilot inadvertently activated the aircraft brakes and the aircraft nosed over.
The pilot stated that weather was not a factor, and that there were no mechanical difficulties with the aircraft.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inadvertent activation of the aircraft brakes during the landing rollout.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) BRAKES(NORMAL) - INADVERTENT ACTIVATION - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On December 2, 1997 at 1500 hours Pacific standard time, a Luscombe 194E, N2591K, veered off the runway during the landing roll and subsequently nosed over at the Auburn Airport, Grass Valley, California.
The aircraft was substantially damaged, and the commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions existed for the local flight and no flight plan was filed.
In an interview with an Federal Aviation Administration inspector from the Sacramento, California, Flight Standards District Office, the pilot stated that he inadvertently activated the aircraft brakes during the landing roll and the aircraft nosed over.
The pilot reported that there were no mechanical malfunctions with the aircraft and weather was not a factor.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial; Flight Engineer Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
