National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: UNION CITY, CA
Accident Number: LAX98LA049
Date & Time: 12/02/1997, 1435 PST
Registration: N1396U
Aircraft: Cessna T210N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The aircraft was being repositioned to home base following a partial repaint.
While on short final to land the engine lost power and the aircraft landed in a residential area.
Postaccident examination of the fuel and ignition systems found the fuel flow transducer to be restricted.
After several attempts it was possible to blow air through it, but with resistance.
Nothing foreign was found in the lines or blown from the transducer.
The component was sent to the manufacturer of the fuel system and met flow specifications.
The component was then sent to a testing laboratory for examination where it was opened and examined.
The interior, turbine, and bearing points appeared to be normal and functional.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Blockage of the fuel flow transducer, which resulted in fuel starvation and the loss of engine power.
Unsuitable terrain for an emergency landing was a contributing factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
FUEL SYSTEM - BLOCKED(TOTAL) 2.
FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
OBJECT - RESIDENCE 4.
UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA Factual Information On December 2, 1997, at 1435 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna T210N, N1396U, was substantially damaged during a forced landing at Union City, California.
The aircraft was cleared for a straight-in approach to runway 28R at Hayward Air Terminal.
At 4.5 miles from the runway, the pilot declared an emergency and landed in a residential area.
The pilot received minor injuries.
The aircraft departed Salinas, California, on a repositioning flight following a partial repaint of the aircraft.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
On December 4, 1998, a postaccident examination of the aircraft and engine was conducted at Hayward, California.
Present at the examination were four representatives from the Federal Aviation Administration Oakland Flight Standards District Office, Teledyne Continental Motors, and representatives from the operator of the aircraft.
According to maintenance information dated June 1997, a low fuel flow indication report was resolved by flushing fuel through the transducer.
Another component of the system was also cleaned and the procedure resolved the condition.
The fuel and ignition systems were examined.
Initial attempts to blow through the fuel flow transducer were unsuccessful due to a blockage.
Subsequently, after several attempts it was possible to blow through the transducer, although it was with a degree of resistance according to the Continental representative.
On March 25, 1998, the transducer was functional tested at Shadin Company Incorporated, Louis Park, Minnesota, the manufacturer of the system.
According to Shadin, the transducer met the system fuel flow specifications at the time of the test.
On May 7, 1998, the transducer was taken to Fowler Inc. for internal examination.
Attempts to visually examine the interior by borescope were not possible.
The transducer cavity closure/assembly is accomplished with an epoxy.
It is not designed to be opened after manufacture.
According to the manufacturer of this component of the system, FloScan, the only way to open it is to cut it open or pressurize it apart with nitrogen or hydraulics.
The transducer was taken to Tap-Ex Company for an electric metal disentagrator procedure.
The procedure allowed access to the transducer turbine cavity without damage to the turbine.
The turbine wheel, cavity, and bearing points appeared to be normal and functional.
The manufacturer of the transducer component of the system (FloScan) chose not to be involved in the testing/examination.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 27, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 3800 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 2 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 1306 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Engine Model/Series: TSIO-520-R Registered Owner: JAMES A.
LONG Rated Power: 285 hp Operator: JAMES A.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
