Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
LOCK HAVEN, PA
Accident Number:
IAD98LA074
Date & Time:
07/01/1998, 1105 EDT 
Registration:
N760AB
Aircraft:
American Blimp Corp. ABC-A-60
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
The pilot received a weather briefing in person from the Flight Service Station at the departure 
airport.  The predicted headwinds for the planned airship flight over mountainous terrain were 
15 knots gusting to 25 knots.  An Airmet issued for the proposed route of flight 45 minutes after 
takeoff called for occasional moderate turbulence over rough terrain due to strong low-level 
winds.  In cruise flight approximately 500-600 feet above ground level, the airship 
encountered '...a severe sustained downdraft...' that could not be overcome with full power and 
full up elevator.  The airship subsequently collided with trees.  An update to the same Airmet 
one hour after the accident called for occasional moderate and isolated severe turbulence over 
rough terrain. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's encounter with unforecasted downdrafts. 
Page 2 of 6IAD98LA074
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) WEATHER CONDITION - DOWNDRAFT
2. HAZARDOUS WEATHER ADVISORY - NOT AVAILABLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6IAD98LA074
Factual Information
 On July 1, 1998, at 1105 eastern daylight time, an American Blimp Corporation ABC-A-60, an 
airship, N760AB, was substantially damaged during collision with trees following an 
uncontrolled descent near Lock Haven, Pennsylvania.  The certificated commercial pilots were 
not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the positioning flight that 
originated at Williamsport, Pennsylvania (IPT), at 0900, and destined for Youngstown, Ohio 
(YNG).  A visual flight rules flight plan was filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot reported he obtained a weather briefing in person at the IPT 
Flight Service Station, at 0800.  The airship departed, at 0900, and the pilot reported "normal" 
operations in cruise flight until 1050.  He said:
"About 1050 am in level flight at about five to six hundred feet above the highest obstacles, 
aprox. 3,000 ft MSL (mean sea level), over a tree covered plateau, the ship experienced a 
severe sustained downdraft.  The engines were at full power and elevators were placed in a full 
up position.
"Shortly thereafter the ship made its initial impact with the treetops.  The gondola descended 
below the treetops and both engines were stopped.  The location was approx. 8 miles NW of 
Piper Memorial (LHV).  
"The ships maneuvering and pressure relief valves were opened to induce further descent.
"The ship bounced from treetop to treetop for about 10 minutes before settling in a tree with 
the gondola about 40 feet in the air.  The helium rip cord was pulled but apparently 
unsuccessfully.  The air-to-helium rip was successfully pulled."
After he contacted the IPT Flight Service Station by cellular telephone, the pilot stopped the 
engines, turned off all switches and circuit breakers, and jettisoned equipment.  Both pilots 
then egressed the airship by climbing down the tree.  The pilot further stated:
"In about 15 minutes the ship blew away, later to be found approximately 300 yards away."
In a telephone interview, the pilot stated the predicted winds at IPT were 15 knots gusting to 25 
knots, and 10 knots gusting to 20 knots at their destination.  Winds at IPT at takeoff were 9 
knots gusting to 16 knots.  The pilot said the headwind encountered during the flight resulted 
in the airship achieving a 15 knot ground speed as indicated by the ship's global positioning 
system receiver.  He said a "...consistent, strong, huge downdraft ..." could not be overcome by 
full elevator and full engine power application.
When questioned, the pilot stated the airship had no wind limitations imposed by the 
manufacturer for flight operation.  He added, "Practically speaking, around 35 knots.  It's 
situational, it's the type of wind that's important.  Change in direction of gusting conditions are 
a critical component.  It's not wind speed change as much as directional change that's 
important."
An Airman's Meteorological Advisory (AIRMET) released by the National Weather Service, at 
0945, called for occasional moderate turbulence below 10,000 feet due to strong northwesterly 
low level winds over rough terrain.  An update to the same AIRMET released, at 1215, called for 
occasional moderate and isolated severe turbulence below 10,000 feet due to strong 
northwesterly low level winds over rough terrain.
Page 4 of 6IAD98LA074
The pilot reported there were no mechanical deficiencies with the airship.  He added, "Control, 
engine response, everything was perfect.  There was no degradation at all."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
35, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Airship; Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/21/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
5022 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model), 4000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 168 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 45 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
American Blimp Corp.
Registration:
N760AB
Model/Series:
ABC-A-60 ABC-A-60
Aircraft Category:
Blimp
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
007
Landing Gear Type: 
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/23/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4394 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
30 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6631 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Limbach
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
L 2000 ECI
Registered Owner:
ICARUS AIRCRAFT INC
Rated Power:
80 hp
Operator:
ICARUS AIRCRAFT INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
HIGH DEGREE OPERATIONS 
CORP
Operator Designator Code:
Page 5 of 6IAD98LA074
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
IPT, 529 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
30 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1054 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 5500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 7000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
16 knots / 19 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
WILLIAMSPORT, PA (IPT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
YOUNGSTOWN, OH (YNG)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0900 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
BRIAN      C RAYNER
Adopted Date:
09/07/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
RAY   STEICH; HARRISBURG, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6IAD98LA074
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
