National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Algona, IA
Accident Number: CHI04LA187
Date & Time: 07/02/2004, 1715 CDT
Registration: N3248T
Aircraft: Beech A36
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The airplane was substantially damaged during a forced landing on a road.
The pilot reported that while in level flight the engine "blew up."
He executed a forced landing on a road and elected to delay lowering of the landing gear until the airplane had cleared a car that was traveling in the opposite direction.
Once clear of the car, the pilot lowered the landing gear, but it did not fully extend due to the low altitude.
Examination of the engine revealed a hole in the crankcase adjacent to the number 6 connecting rod journal.
Additionally, the number 6 connecting rod and piston were found fractured.
No determination could be made regarding the failure of the connecting rod.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the connecting rod which resulted in the loss of engine power during cruise flight and subsequent forced landing.
A contributing factor was the delayed lowering of the landing gear in order to clear the other vehicle encountered during the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CONNECTING ROD - FAILURE,TOTAL ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
(F) OBJECT - VEHICLE 3.
(F) GEAR EXTENSION - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - ROADWAY/HIGHWAY Factual Information On July 2, 2004, about 1715 central daylight time, a Beech model A36, N3248T, piloted by a commercial pilot, was substantially damaged as a result of a forced landing following a loss of engine power and subsequent in-flight fire.
The 14 CFR Part 91 business flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
No injuries were reported.
The flight originated from the Mason City Municipal Airport, Mason City, Iowa, at 1630, and was bound for the Joe Foss Field Airport, Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
The pilot reported that about 15 minutes into the flight, while level at 4,500 feet mean sea level, the airplane engine "blew up."
The pilot stated that he executed a forced landing on a road.
He stated that he kept the landing gear retracted to insure that he could clear a car that was traveling in the opposite direction.
The pilot stated that once clear of the car he lowered the landing gear, but due to the low altitude, the landing gear did not fully extend before contact with the road occurred.
Examination of the engine revealed a hole in the top of the crankcase near the number 5 and 6 cylinders.
The hole in the crankcase was aligned with the number 6 connecting rod journal.
All of the engine accessories remained intact and attached to the engine.
Fractured pieces of the number 6 connecting rod, piston and piston pin were found within the crankcase.
The fractured piston exhibited signatures consistent with overload failure.
The fracture surfaces of the connecting rod were smeared and no determination could be made concerning the fracture surfaces.
The number 5 piston was lodged within its cylinder.
The connecting rod remained attached to the piston.
The connecting rod cap was separated from the connecting rod.
The fracture surfaces were smeared and no determination could be made concerning the fracture surfaces.
Examination of the main bearings and the connecting rod bearings of the undamaged connecting rods revealed no evidence of oil starvation.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 274 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2334 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-550B6F Registered Owner: Broin Enterprise, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
