National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Winston Salem, NC
Accident Number: ATL04LA167
Date & Time: 07/01/2004, 1500 EDT
Registration: N71409
Aircraft: Cessna 172M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis According to both pilots, after landing, the airplane was cleared to taxi to the north ramp.
Both pilots stated that the CFI in the left seat took control of the airplane in order to position and park it.
The pilot in control of the airplane at the time of the accident, CFI- left, stated, "while pushing the left rudder, [his] foot slipped down and off the [left] pedal."
He stated that he then immediately "pushed full left rudder, but the right wing... hit one of the corner metal poles."
The pilot not in control of the airplane at the time of the accident, CFI-right, stated that as the pilot in control "was beginning to set-up the aircraft's turn, his foot immediately slipped off of the rudder.
This caused the aircraft's wing to hit a fence pole."
Both pilots stated that the airplane was immediately shut down and assistance was sought.
Post-accident examination of the airplane revealed that the right wing sustained leading edge spar damage and extensive skin buckling, and the right wing tip was crushed.
The engine, landing gear, fuselage, and left wing were intact and undamaged.
No mechanical problems with the airplane were reported by the pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from the fence post, while taxing which resulted in a collision.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
OBJECT - FENCE POST 2.
CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On July 1, 2004, at 1500 eastern daylight time, N71409, a Cessna 172M, registered to and operated by Triad Air, Inc., collided with a fence post while taxiing after landing at Smith Reynolds Airport, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
The instructional flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot-in- command, a certified flight instructor seated in the left seat (CFI-left), and the certified flight instructor seated in the right seat, (CFI-right), were not injured.
The airplane received substantial damage.
The local flight originated at Smith Reynolds Airport, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, on July 1, 2004, at 1330.
According to the operator, the flight had taken place prior to the accident for the purpose of an initial checkout for a newly hired flight instructor, CFI-right.
According to both pilots, after landing, the airplane was cleared to taxi to the north ramp.
Both pilots stated that the CFI-left took control of the airplane in order to position and park it.
The pilot in control of the airplane at the time of the accident, CFI- left, stated, "while pushing the left rudder, [his] foot slipped down and off the [left] pedal."
He stated that he then immediately "pushed full left rudder, but the right wing... hit one of the corner metal poles."
The pilot not in control of the airplane at the time of the accident, CFI-right, stated that as the pilot in control "was beginning to set-up the aircraft's turn, his foot immediately slipped off of the rudder.
This caused the aircraft's wing to hit a fence post."
Both pilots stated that the airplane was immediately shut down and assistance was sought.
Post-accident examination of the airplane revealed that the right wing sustained leading edge spar damage and extensive skin buckling, and the right wing tip was crushed.
The engine, landing gear, fuselage, and left wing were intact and undamaged.
Examination of the aircraft logbooks revealed that the right wing was replaced per Federal Aviation Regulations and procedures on July 23, 2004.
No mechanical problems with the airplane were reported by the pilots.
Notification of this accident from the operator was received by the NTSB on August 12, 2004.
Flight Instructor Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 26, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
