National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Chatsworth, NJ
Accident Number: IAD04LA027
Date & Time: 07/02/2004, 1330 EDT
Registration: N915X
Aircraft: Grumman G-164A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis Shortly after takeoff, and about 100 feet above the ground, the airplane's engine began to lose power.
The pilot began to dump the load of fertilizer the airplane was carrying and then performed a forced landing into a cranberry bog.
After touchdown, the airplane nosed over.
An inspection of the engine revealed that the impeller shaft of the blower section of the engine was bent, and its surface was discolored from heat and exhibited signs of rotational scoring.
A 1/16-inch oil passage that lubricated the impeller shaft bearings was found blocked.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A blocked internal oil passage, which resulted in inadequate lubrication of the blower impeller shaft, and the subsequent partial loss of engine power.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(C) LUBRICATING SYSTEM,OIL PORT/PASSAGE,INTERNAL - BLOCKED(PARTIAL) 2.
ENG ASSEMBLY,BLOWER/IMPELLER/INTEGRAL SUPERCHARGER - FAILURE ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - MUSKEG Factual Information On July 2, 2004, at 1330 eastern daylight time, a Grumman G-164A, N915X, operated by Downstown Airport, Inc. was substantially damaged during a forced landing, shortly after taking off from a gravel airstrip in Chatsworth, New Jersey.
The certificated commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the local aerial application flight, conducted under 14 CFR Part 137.
According to a written statement submitted by the pilot, the departure to the south was normal until about 100 feet, when the engine began to lose power.
The pilot made a "slight" right turn to align the airplane with the wind and a cranberry bog.
The pilot also began dumping the 800-pound load of fertilizer that was onboard the airplane.
After touchdown, the airplane nosed over in the bog.
The engine was disassembled and examined under the supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector at a maintenance and repair facility.
The oil pump was removed and appeared to be normal, and the oil screen appeared to be clean.
The blower (supercharger) section of the engine was also examined.
Several impeller blades were damaged or missing, and the remaining portions of the impeller exhibited signs of melting and breakage.
The impeller shaft was bent, and its surface was discolored from heat and exhibited signs of rotational scoring.
The impeller shaft bushings were worn and "oversize", and the blower shaft attach nut also exhibited heat discoloration.
Further examination of the engine revealed metal contamination in the engine cylinders.
According to the chief inspector at the facility where the engine was disassembled, the impeller shaft was supported by two bronze bushings that were lubricated by engine oil via a 1/8-inch hole in both of the bushings, and a 1/16-inch hole in one of the bushings.
The 1/16-inch hole was found blocked.
The inspector additionally stated that failure of the bronze bushing would cause the impeller shaft to "wobble," and permit contact between the blower and the rear case, which would then result in excessive damage to the impeller, impeller shaft, blower, and rear case.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 73, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
