National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Portland, ME
Accident Number: IAD04LA029
Date & Time: 07/02/2004, 1936 EDT
Registration: N421KS
Aircraft: Cessna 421B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Line personnel reported to the pilot that while the airplane had been parked on the ramp, heavy wind and rain "hydroplaned" the airplane across the ramp about 25 feet.
After takeoff, the pilot retracted the landing gear and noticed an unfamiliar "clunking" noise during the retraction cycle.
During the approach to the destination airport, he extended the landing gear and noted all three of the landing gear down and locked indicator lights were green.
Sometime during the rollout he heard the "clunk" noise again, and the right wing began to settle lower than normal.
The airplane then began to veer to the right and came to rest in the grass on the right side of runway.
Examination of the right main landing gear revealed that two components of the down-lock mechanism had broken.
The parts were submitted to the Safety Board Materials Laboratory.
Metallurgical examination of the mating fractures revealed features typical of overstress separation.
The fractures contained no evidence of fatigue.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Failure of the right main landing gear down-lock mechanism resulting in the collapse of the right main landing gear.
Findings Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,GEAR LOCKING MECHANISM - FAILURE Factual Information On July 2, 2004, about 1936 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 421B, N421KS, was substantially damaged while landing at Portland International Jetport (PWM), Portland, Maine.
The certificated private pilot and passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and the airplane was operating on an instrument flight rules flight plan.
The personal flight, which departed Groton-New London Airport (GON), Groton, Connecticut, at 1730, was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to a written statement submitted by the pilot, prior to his departure from Groton, the airplane was involved in "thunderstorm activity" while parked on the ramp.
Line personnel reported to him that heavy wind and rain "hydroplaned" the airplane across the ramp about 25 feet.
Prior to departing Groton Airport, the pilot performed a preflight examination of the airplane and found no abnormalities.
After takeoff, the pilot retracted the landing gear and noticed an unfamiliar "clunking" noise during the retraction cycle.
The climb, cruise, and decent portions of the flight were all uneventful.
During the approach to Portland Jetport, he extended the landing gear and noted all three of the landing gear down and locked indicator lights were green.
The airplane touched down on the main landing gear, and as the airplane decelerated, it touched down softly on the nose wheel.
Sometime thereafter, the pilot heard the "clunk" noise again, and the right wing began to "settle down lower than normal."
The airplane then began to veer to the right side of the runway and came to rest in the grass on the right side of runway 29.
Examination of the right main landing gear revealed that the upper right landing gear trunnion ear and the attaching drag brace end ear had broken.
The parts were submitted to the Safety Board Materials Laboratory.
Metallurgical examination of the mating fractures revealed features typical of overstress separation.
The fractures contained no evidence of fatigue.
The weather reported at Groton, on the day of the accident at 1649, included winds from 190 degrees at 7 knots gusting to 33 knots, and 3/4 statute miles visibility in heavy rain.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
