Shortly after departure, the airplane impacted near the base of a 300-foot butte.  According to 
a witness, the pilot and passenger departed the airport to the west and he then lost sight of the 
airplane behind rising terrain adjacent to the airport.  The witness reported the engine sounded 
normal during departure.  Another witness, located in his residence, heard the airplane and a 
few minutes later heard a "pop."  The witness observed a fire on a hillside.  Examination of the 
accident site revealed the airplane impacted the terrain and came to rest approximately 167 
feet from the initial impact.  The airplane was destroyed by fire.  The propeller blades displayed 
leading edge gouging, chordwise scratches, and were twisted in the direction of rotation.  Flight 
control continuity was established from the cockpit to the flight control surfaces.  The pilot had 
accumulated approximately 900 total flight hours.
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the terrain for undetermined reasons.
On March 1, 2005, approximately 0925 mountain standard time, a Piel Emeraude CP-305 
single-engine homebuilt airplane, N9091, piloted by a private pilot, was destroyed when it 
impacted terrain while maneuvering near Del Norte, Colorado. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The personal flight was being conducted under 
the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan. The private pilot, who was the 
owner of the airplane, and pilot-rated passenger sustained fatal injuries. The flight originated 
from Del Norte Municipal and County Airport (8V1), Del Norte, Colorado, approximately 
0920.
According to local authorities, the pilot and passenger were flying to South Park, Colorado, to 
look at a radio for the passenger.  A witness observed the accident airplane depart 8V1 on 
runway 26, and within a few minutes, the witness lost sight of the airplane behind rising 
terrain adjacent to the airport.  The witness stated the "engine sounded normal" during the 
takeoff.  Another witness, who was located in his residence, stated he heard an airplane, and a 
few minutes later, he heard a "pop."  The witness observed a fire on a hillside and responded to 
the accident site.  At 0925, the local authorities received a 911 call reporting a fire on the north 
side of a 300-foot butte, approximately 2 miles northwest of Del Norte.  Approximately 0945, 
the local authorities confirmed an aircraft wreckage at the location of the fire.
According to the pilot's most recent medical application, he had accumulated a total of 900 
total flight hours.  The pilot held a private pilot certificate and was issued a third class medical 
certificate on December 30, 2003, with a limitation for corrective lenses.  The airplane was 
registered to the pilot and a co-owner on January 16, 2003, and was based at 8V1.  
The accident site was located approximately 1 mile southwest of 8V1 near the base of a 300 foot 
tall hill.  According to local authorities, the airplane impacted the terrain and came to rest 
approximately 167 feet from the initial impact.  The airplane was destroyed by fire.  
Examination of the accident site by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector 
revealed the propeller blades displayed leading edge gouging, chordwise scratches, and were 
twisted in the direction of rotation.  Flight control continuity was established from the cockpit 
to the flight control surfaces.   
At 0852, the reported weather conditions at San Luis Valley Regional/Bergman Field (ALS), 
Alamosa, CO, located approximately 30 nautical miles southeast of the accident site, were wind 
from 310 degrees at 5 knots, visibility, 10 statute miles, sky broken at 6,500 feet, temperature 1 
degree Celcius, dew point minus 6 degrees Celcius, altimeter setting of 30.02 inches of 
mercury.  The calculated density altitude was 7,559 feet msl.
