The private pilot, with his adult son aboard, departed on a local area flight, with a return to the 
private fly-in community.  After the initial climb, the pilot attempted to retard the throttle to a 
cruise power setting, but was unable to control the airplane's engine rpm with the throttle, and 
the engine rpm remained at takeoff power.  He subsequently elected to return to the departure 
airport for an emergency landing.  The airplane touched down with the engine still producing 
takeoff power, and the pilot decided to abort the landing.  As the airplane began to climb, the 
engine rpm began to decrease and lose power, and the pilot selected an emergency landing area 
that contained 75-foot tall trees.  The airplane collided with the trees, and sustained extensive 
damage to the wings, fuselage, and empennage.  A postimpact fire ensued, with both the pilot 
and passenger trapped inside of the burning fuselage.  The pilot's son was able to free the pilot 
before the airplane was consumed by fire.  A postaccident engine examination revealed that the 
bolt that connects the throttle linkage to the fuel control arm was missing, and the throttle 
linkage was disconnected.  According to an FAA airworthiness inspector who reviewed the 
accident airplane's maintenance logbooks, there was no entry in the logbook indicating that 
any maintenance or repairs had been conducted on the throttle linkage to the fuel control arm.
The improper installation of the bolt that connects the throttle linkage to the fuel control arm 
by an unknown maintenance person, which resulted in a loss of the bolt, a loss of engine rpm 
control, and subsequent forced landing and collision with trees.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 2, 2005, about 1137 Eastern standard time, a Piper PA-32-300 airplane, N444NM, 
was destroyed by impact and postimpact fire after colliding with tree-covered terrain, about 8 
miles southeast of Dunnellon, Florida.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) local area personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The 
airplane was operated by the pilot.  The private pilot, and the sole passenger, sustained serious 
thermal injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed in the area, and no flight plan was 
filed.  According to family members, the flight originated about 1115, from the Twelve Oaks 
Airport, a private fly-in community, located about 9 miles southeast of Dunnellon.     
Due to injuries sustained in the accident, the pilot was unable to be interviewed during the on-
scene portion of the investigation.
According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) 
submitted by the pilot, he reported that he and his nineteen year-old son were planning a short 
local area flight, and then return to the Twelve Oaks Airport.  He said that as he attempted to 
retard the throttle to a cruise power setting after the initial climb, he discovered that he was 
unable to control the airplane's engine speed with the throttle, and the engine rpm remained at 
a high power setting.  He elected to return to the Twelve Oaks Airport to attempt an emergency 
landing.  He stated as he touched down on runway 04, a 2,655 foot long, by 100 foot wide turf-
covered surface, with the airplane's engine still set at takeoff power, the airplane was moving 
too fast to stop, and he decided to abort the landing.  As the airplane climbed on a northerly 
heading the engine began to slow down and lose power, and he selected an emergency landing 
area that contained 75-foot tall trees.  The airplane collided with the trees, and sustained 
extensive damage to the wings, fuselage, and empennage.  A postimpact fire ensued, with both 
the pilot and passenger trapped inside of the burning fuselage.  The passenger was ultimately 
able to free the pilot before the airplane was consumed by fire.  
CREW INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land rating.  His most 
recent third-class medical certificate was issued on June 29, 2003, and contained no 
limitations.
According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report submitted by the pilot, his total 
aeronautical experience consisted of about 400 flight hours, of which 300 were accrued in the 
accident airplane make and model.  In the preceding 90 and 30 days prior to the accident, the 
report lists a total of 15 and 10 flight hours, respectively.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane had accumulated a total time of approximately 2,882.6 hours.  The most recent 
annual inspection was accomplished at an aircraft total time of 2,871.1 hours, about 11.5 hours 
before the accident.   
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest official weather observation station is located at the Ocala Regional Airport, Ocala, 
Florida.  On March 2, 2005, at 1115, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) was 
reporting, in part:  Wind, 100 degrees (true) at 6 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and 
ceiling condition, clear; temperature, 52 degrees F; dew point, 18 degrees F; altimeter, 30.20 
inHg.
 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
On March 3, the NTSB IIC, a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector 
from the Orlando Flight Standards District Office, and representatives from Piper Aircraft and 
Textron Lycoming, examined the airplane wreckage at the accident site.  
All of the airplane's major components were located at the main wreckage area, in an area of 
tree-covered, flat terrain, about 1 mile beyond departure end of runway 04.  The average height 
of the trees in this area was 75 feet.   
A path of wreckage debris, from an area of broken trees to the wreckage point of rest, was on a 
magnetic heading of 060 degrees.  (All headings/bearings noted in this report are orientated 
towards magnetic north.) The path of wreckage debris measured about 180 feet from the initial 
impact point to the wreckage point of rest.     
Several trees were broken and toppled at the wreckage site.  Various small tree sections along 
the path of wreckage debris displayed sharp cuts orientated on about a 45-degree angle to the 
vertical axis of each section.      
The first pieces of airplane wreckage discovered along the debris path were the airplane's red, 
tail-mounted anti-collision light lens, Plexiglas windshield fragments, and torn shreds of 
airplane aluminum skin.  These items were not fire damaged.   
The main portion of the airplane wreckage was located lying upright, with the nose of the 
airplane orientated on a 080 degree heading.  Several trees and limbs were knocked down and 
burned within the main wreckage area.
With the exception of small portions of the airplane's wings and the empennage, a postcrash 
fire destroyed the entire airplane.
Due to impact and fire damage, the flight controls could not be moved by their respective 
control mechanisms.  The continuity of the flight control cables was established from the 
cabin/cockpit area to the point of impact related damage.  The instrument panel was consumed 
by fire, as was both wing-mounted fuel tanks. 
The engine sustained fire and impact damage.  The propeller blades had substantial leading 
and trailing edge gouging and chord-wise scratching. 
A detailed engine examination revealed that the bolt that connects the throttle linkage to the 
fuel control arm was missing, and the throttle linkage was disconnected.    
At the conclusion of the on-scene portion of the investigation there were no additional 
preaccident mechanical anomalies noted.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
During the on-scene portion of the investigation, residents of the Twelve Oaks Airport, a 
private fly-in community, approached the NTSB IIC, and the FAA airworthiness inspector.  The 
residents offered information concerning the accident airplane and its owner/pilot.   
A resident who lives near the accident pilot's home stated that about a week before the accident 
he noticed that the cowling had been removed from the accident airplane while the airplane 
was parked at the pilot's home.  He said that it appeared that either the pilot, or a maintenance 
technician had been working on the airplane during that time.  He said that he believed that 
either the pilot, or a maintenance technician, had been attempting to fix a stiff throttle 
condition.  
During a follow-up examination of the accident airplane's airframe and engine logbooks, the 
FAA airworthiness inspector reported finding no additional logbook entries after the airplane 
and engine annual inspection on November 1, 2004.  When asked by the FAA airworthiness 
inspector about the resident's report of seeing the cowling removed, the pilot/owner 
emphatically denied that either he, or his maintenance technician, had preformed any 
maintenance procedure prior to the accident.  The FAA airworthiness inspector reported 
finding no logbook entries concerning repairs made to the throttle linkage or fuel control arm 
during the most recent annual inspection, or subsequent inspections.  
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on June 8, 2005, a maintenance 
technician who had worked on the accident airplane about two years before the March 2, 2005 
accident reported that the airplane had been involved in a previous, unreported accident that 
occurred around May or June of 2003.  He said that the pilot/owner had landed fast on a wet 
runway, and slid off the end at the Twelve Oaks Airport.  He said the airplane sustained 
substantial damage to the left wing, propeller, and engine mounts.  The maintenance 
technician said that he had assumed that the pilot/owner had reported that accident.  The 
maintenance technician said that when he completed the required repairs, and the airplane 
was once again airworthy, he asked the pilot/owner for his airframe and engine logbooks so he 
could make the required logbook endorsements.  According to the maintenance technician, the 
pilot/owner replied by saying he did not want a record of the repairs in the logbook because it 
would devalue the price of the airplane.  The maintenance technician said that he reluctantly 
made the required logbook endorsements on adhesive-backed logbook pages, and instructed 
the pilot/owner to insert the logbook page in both the engine and airframe logbooks.  
According to the FAA airworthiness inspector who reviewed that accident airplane's 
maintenance logbooks, there was no such entry in the logbook indicating that any major 
repairs had been accomplished.  
When asked by the FAA airworthiness inspector, the pilot/owner emphatically denied the 
airplane had been involved in a previous, unreported accident.
The Safety Board released the wreckage, located at accident site, to the owner's family on 
March 3, 2005.  The Safety Board retained no parts or components.
