The pilot stated the flight was cruising at 3,500 feet mean sea level when the engine began to 
run rough. Moments later, engine oil sprayed on the windscreen and the cockpit filled with 
smoke. Several hundred yards short of runway 4, the engine lost power completely, and the 
propeller stopped. The pilot maneuvered the airplane to avoid trees and landed in a field. The 
pilot stated when the nose wheel touched down, it sank into the soft ground, and the airplane 
nosed over. Examination of the airplane revealed the empennage was nearly separated aft of 
the baggage compartment, the fuselage was buckled aft of the firewall, and damage was 
observed on the engine crankcase. The post-accident examination of the engine revealed the 
timing reference plug was missing from the crankcase. The timing reference plug threads in the 
crankcase were not stripped. The crankshaft did not reveal any signs of movement or rotation, 
and the pistons, rings, and pins in all six cylinders revealed discoloration and mechanical 
damage. 
Improper installation of the timing reference plug by other maintenance personnel, which 
resulted in oil starvation, and the loss of engine power.
On March 3, 2005, about 1615 central standard time, a Cessna T-41B, N14449, registered to 
and operated by the State of Tennessee Division of Forestry, nosed over during emergency 
landing in Sparta, Tennessee. The public use flight was operated under the provisions of Title 
14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The private 
pilot received serious injuries, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight 
departed Nashville International Airport, Nashville, Tennessee, at 1544.
The pilot stated the flight was cruising at 3,500 feet  when the engine began to run rough. 
Moments later, engine oil sprayed on the windscreen and the cockpit filled with smoke. The 
pilot estimated he was five or six miles from the Upper Cumberland Regional Airport, Sparta, 
Tennessee, and he reported the emergency on the airport common traffic advisory frequency. 
The pilot continued flight towards the airport. The pilot ventilated the cabin by opening the 
passenger-side window, and attempted to maintain engine power but could see engine oil 
spurting out the oil service door in the cowling. Several hundred yards short of runway 4, the 
engine quit completely, and the propeller stopped. The pilot maneuvered the airplane to avoid 
trees and landed in a field. The pilot stated the field was soft with recent rains, and when the 
nose wheel touched down, it sank into the soft ground, and the airplane nosed over. 
Examination of the airplane revealed the empennage was nearly separated aft of the baggage 
compartment, the fuselage was buckled aft of the firewall, and damage was observed on the 
engine crankcase.
Post-accident examination of the engine revealed the timing reference plug was missing from 
the crankcase. The timing reference plug threads in the crankcase were not stripped. The 
aircraft oil pressure gauge reference (45-degree fitting) located below and between the 
numbers two and four cylinder was loose at the union fitting in the crankcase. The crankshaft 
did not reveal any signs of movement or rotation, and the pistons, rings, and pins in all six 
cylinders revealed discoloration and mechanical damage. The crankshaft bearings revealed 
scoring, discoloration, and mechanical damage concentrated at the number two connecting rod 
journal. The crankcase was breached above the centerline of the number two-cylinder bay. The 
plug gasket seating area position on the crankcase revealed staining adjacent the crankcase 
breach. There was no safety wire in the area of the timing reference plug. 
Review of maintenance records revealed that the last 100 hour inspection was completed on 
December 16, 2004. During the 100-hour inspection both magnetos were installed and timed 
to the engine.
