Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Marion, OH
Accident Number:
IAD05LA051
Date & Time:
04/02/2005, 1630 EST 
Registration:
N3292S
Aircraft:
Cessna 182N
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Prior to departure, the pilot received a  weather briefing, which included information about a 
low-pressure area that contained moisture, advisories for icing,  and information about the 
freezing level that existed along his planned route of flight. While en route he was advised by 
air traffic control of pilot reports of icing, and other aircraft on the assigned radio frequency 
were reporting ice accretion. He requested lower altitudes and eventually elected to divert to an 
alternate airport where he performed an instrument approach. During the approach, he 
extended the flaps, and the airplane began descending at a rate that he could not arrest. The 
airplane impacted the ground short of the runway, in a wings level attitude and nosed over.  
The pilot stated that while in flight, he had observed  ice adhering to the airframe and the 
windshield.  When an airport employee  arrived at the accident site, he estimated that the 
airplane's leading edges were covered with 1 to 1.5 inches of ice. The emergency procedures 
section of the owners manual revealed that, although flying into known icing conditions is 
prohibited, the pilot during an unexpected icing encounter, should plan a landing at the 
nearest airport, be prepared for a significantly higher stall speed, and to leave the wing flaps 
retracted.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inadequate in-flight planning/decision which resulted in an encounter with icing 
conditions and the accretion of ice on the airframe.  Also causal was the pilot's improper setting 
of the flaps in icing conditions in accordance with operating procedures which resulted in a 
stall/mush.
Page 2 of 6IAD05LA051
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. PREFLIGHT BRIEFING SERVICE - OBTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) WEATHER EVALUATION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) FLIGHT INTO KNOWN ADVERSE WEATHER - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - ICING CONDITIONS
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH
Findings
5. (C) FLAPS - IMPROPER
6. (C) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE
8. STALL/MUSH
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
9. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6IAD05LA051
Factual Information
On April 2, 2005, at 1630 eastern standard time, a Cessna 182N, N3292S, was substantially 
damaged when it impacted terrain during an instrument approach to the Marion Municipal 
Airport (MNN), Marion, Ohio, following an encounter with in-flight icing.  The certificated 
private pilot and three passengers were not injured.  Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the flight which departed the 
Morgantown Municipal Airport (MGW), Morgantown, West Virginia, about 1430, destined for 
the Toledo Suburban Airport (DUH), Lambertville, Michigan.  The personal flight was 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
At approximately 1130 eastern standard time the pilot received a telephonic weather briefing 
from the Elkins Automated Flight Service Station. He was advised of a low-pressure area that 
was over the state of West Virginia, that was moving to the east, with moisture that stretched 
across the state of Ohio. He was also informed "advisories are out there for icing, occasional 
moderate rime or mixed icing in clouds."  Additionally, he was told that the freezing level at 
Pittsburgh Pennsylvania was at 6,000 feet, and that "Cleveland is a little bit lower, because I've 
got minus 4 at 6,000 over Cleveland."
A review of air traffic control tapes revealed that between the hours of 1500 and 1543, after 
radio communications were first established, the approach controller at the Akron-Canton 
Terminal Radar Approach Control facility advised the pilot of reports of light clear icing at 
4,000 feet. The pilot responded, "we had a little bit earlier, but it seems to have melted off." 
The approach controller queried another aircraft on the frequency as to whether they were 
accreting any ice. They replied that they were accreting very light rime ice while at 3,500 feet, 
and that the temperature was -4 degrees Celsius. 
Later in the flight, the pilot was told to climb to 5,000 feet to avoid other air traffic. He 
subsequently advised the approach controller, "we're picking up a little ice here, we were ok at 
4,000." The air traffic controller then coordinated a descent for the pilot to 4,100 feet, and 
after a second request, to 3,100 feet. 
About 40 nautical miles south of the Mansfield Lahm Regional Airport (MFD), Mansfield, 
Ohio, the pilot elected to divert to MFD.  He was told by the approach controller that 
approximately 3 to 5 inches of snow had accumulated on the runway.  The pilot then asked the 
approach controller for another airport to divert to and was directed to MNN for the GPS 
Runway 24 approach.
According to the pilot, while on the approach for runway 24, he extended the flaps at 
approximately 100 feet above ground level, and the airplane began descending at a rate that he 
could not arrest. The airplane impacted the ground about 250 feet short of the runway in a 
wings level attitude. During the impact, the nose wheel dug into the ground, and the airplane 
nosed over, coming to rest inverted, about 100 feet from the approach end of the runway.
During a telephone interview, the pilot stated that during the flight, he observed conglomerate 
ice adhering to the airframe, the windshield was covered at least 50 percent with ice, and the 
autopilot kept trimming "nose up."
The director of aviation for MNN stated during a telephone interview, that at the time of the 
accident, very wet, large snowflakes were falling at the airport. When he arrived at the accident 
site, about 5 to 6 minutes after it had occurred, he estimated that the airplane's leading edges 
Page 4 of 6IAD05LA051
were covered with 1 to 1.5 inches of ice.
A review of the emergency procedures section of the owners manual revealed that, "although 
flying into known icing conditions is prohibited," the pilot during an unexpected icing 
encounter, should "plan a landing at the nearest airport," "be prepared for significantly higher 
stall speed," and to "leave wing flaps retracted."
A weather observation taken at MNN, about 7 minutes after the accident, recorded the winds 
as 340 degrees at 21 knots, gusting to 29 knots, 4 statute miles visibility in unknown 
precipitation and mist, overcast clouds at 700 feet, temperature 36 degrees Fahrenheit, dew 
point 34 degrees Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting of 29.61 inches of mercury.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/01/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2004
Flight Time:
611 hours (Total, all aircraft), 315 hours (Total, this make and model), 595 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N3292S
Model/Series:
182N 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18260635
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
13 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4980 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-470/TS
Registered Owner:
Sky Lane Aero Club Inc.
Rated Power:
240 hp
Operator:
Sky Lane Aero Club Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6IAD05LA051
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MNN, 993 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1637 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
21 knots / 29 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.61 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
In the Vicinity - Blowing - Unknown Precipitation; In the Vicinity - Mist
Departure Point: 
Morgantown, WV (MGW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Lambertville, MI (DUH)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1430 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Marion Municipal Airport (MNN)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
993 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
25
IFR Approach:
Global Positioning System
Runway Length/Width:
5000 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor, 2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.616111, -83.063333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd  G Gunther
Adopted Date:
09/13/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Stephen C Bowman; FAA FSDO-07; Columbus, OH
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6IAD05LA051
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
