Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Ridgefield, CT
Accident Number:
IAD05LA050
Date & Time:
04/02/2005, 1210 EST 
Registration:
N134DE
Aircraft:
Piper PA-31P-350
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Prior to departing on the accident flight, a mechanic, who was to perform work on the airplane 
advised the owner/pilot that the weather was below landing minimums and he should not 
attempt the trip. During a localizer approach at the airport, the airplane impacted trees that 
were located west of the approach end of the runway.  After executing a missed approach  the 
pilot advised ATC that he had bird strikes on both wings and that it looked like the de-icing 
boots were damaged.  A local resident who witnessed the event stated that "the scraping sound 
of branches against metal was audible, and I saw the upper branches of the pine trees waving 
after contact with the plane."  The trees  were located at a terrain elevation of 599 feet above 
sea level.  The minimum descent altitude for the approach was published as 1,100 feet. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper IFR procedure by flying below the minimum descent altitude, which 
resulted in the airplane striking trees.
Page 2 of 6IAD05LA050
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - FAF/OUTER MARKER TO THRESHOLD (IFR)
Findings
1. OBJECT - TREE(S)
2. (C) IFR PROCEDURE - NOT COMPLIED WITH - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) MINIMUM DESCENT ALTITUDE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6IAD05LA050
Factual Information
On April 2, 2005, about 1210 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-31P-350, N134DE, was 
substantially damaged when it struck trees in Ridgefield, Connecticut, while on an instrument 
approach to Danbury Municipal Airport (DXR), Danbury, Connecticut.  The certificated 
commercial pilot/owner was not injured.  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and 
an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed for the flight that departed East Hampton 
Airport (HTO), East Hampton, New York.  The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR 
Part 91.
According to a mechanic, the purpose of the flight was to reposition the airplane to Danbury, 
Connecticut to replace a propeller de-icing boot. Prior to departing East Hampton, the 
mechanic advised the pilot that the weather was below landing minimums, and he should not 
attempt the trip.
Radar plot data and air traffic control (ATC) transcripts obtained from the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) revealed that the pilot departed East Hampton, New York, on an IFR 
flight plan, destined for Danbury, Connecticut. After departure, the pilot initially climbed to 
4,000 feet msl and proceeded direct to Bridgeport, Connecticut. A while later, the pilot was 
given radar vectors to the Localizer Runway 8 approach at Danbury. He crossed the final 
approach fix at approximately 2,200 feet msl and initiated his descent on the localizer where 
the last radar return during the descent was recorded at 1,200 feet msl. The altitude readout 
was then lost by ATC and later reacquired during the missed approach. He then climbed up to 
an altitude of 3,000 feet msl and advised ATC that he had bird strikes on both wings and that it 
looked like the de-icing boots were damaged.
The pilot then asked ATC about weather conditions at the Francis S. Gabreski Airport (FOK), 
Westhampton Beach, New York; however, the reported weather was below landing minimums. 
ATC then offered the pilot a choice of two other airports that might be suitable for an 
instrument approach and landing but he advised them that he would then have to "arrange 
alternate transportation."  He then proceeded to Long Island Mac Arthur Airport (ISP), Islip, 
New York and flew the instrument landing system (ILS) approach for runway 24. He was 
unable to land, executed another missed approach, and proceeded to Republic Airport (FRG) 
Farmingdale, New York where he was able to perform the ILS Runway 14 approach, and land. 
A statement from a local resident revealed that an airplane had struck trees that were located 
west of the approach end of runway 08 at the Danbury Municipal Airport.  The witness stated 
that "the scraping sound of branches against metal was audible, and I saw the upper branches 
of the pine trees waving after contact with the plane." 
Topographical data for the local area showed that the trees mentioned in the witness's 
statement were located at a terrain elevation of 599 feet above sea level.  The minimum descent 
altitude for the Localizer Runway 8 approach was published as 1,100 feet, and the Danbury 
Municipal Airport was located at a field elevation of 458 feet. 
According to a witness statement, on April 4, 2005, the airplane was flown without a special 
flight permit from Farmingdale, New York, to Danbury, Connecticut. An airframe and 
powerplant mechanic advised the pilot that he was unable to repair the airplane in a 
reasonable amount of time, as the wing skins would require replacement. He suggested that 
the repair work could be accomplished at two other locations, one of which was in Hagerstown, 
Page 4 of 6IAD05LA050
Maryland.
On April 9,2005 the airplane was flown to Hagerstown, Maryland. 
According to an FAA inspector, on April 21, 2005, while inspecting other airplanes located at 
the Hagerstown Regional Airport (HGR), Hagerstown, Maryland, his attention was drawn to 
an airplane that appeared to be substantially damaged. Closer inspection by the inspector 
revealed the presence of wood imbedded in some of the screw heads, joint overlaps, and 
inspection plates. He was later informed by a mechanic that the airplane had been flown into 
the airport without a special flight permit.
On May 18, 2005, the airplane was inspected by the Safety Board in Hagerstown, Maryland. 
The inspection revealed that the airplane had sustained impact damage to both wings, the 
ailerons, horizontal stabilizers and elevators. The left and right side de-ice boots exhibited 
scrape marks and tears, the left wing gap fairing was cracked, the left engine exhaust shield 
exhibited crush marks and the left cowling was wrinkled. The navigation light for the right 
wing was broken, and numerous antennas were damaged.
The recorded weather at the Danbury Municipal Airport, at 1224, included: winds from 080 
degrees at 9 knots; visibility 2 1/2 statute miles in light rain and mist; ceiling overcast at 200 
feet; temperature 46 degrees Fahrenheit; dew point 46 degrees Fahrenheit; altimeter setting 
29.64 inches of mercury.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/01/2004
Flight Time:
1633 hours (Total, all aircraft), 695 hours (Total, this make and model), 1595 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 16 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6IAD05LA050
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N134DE
Model/Series:
PA-31P-350 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
31P-8414005
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/01/2005, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
35 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2650 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540-V2AD
Registered Owner:
Steller Air Charter LLC
Rated Power:
350 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DXR, 458 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1224 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
82°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
2.5 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 200 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.64 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Rain; Mist
Departure Point: 
East Hampton, NY (HTO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Danbury, CT (DXR)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1100 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Danbury Municipal Airport (DXR)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
458 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
8
IFR Approach:
Localizer Only
Runway Length/Width:
4422 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 6 of 6IAD05LA050
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.362222, -73.526111
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd G Gunther
Adopted Date:
10/27/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Susan Fraher; FAA FSDO-03; Windsor Locks, CT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
