Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Miami Gardens, FL
Accident Number:
ERA11FA274
Date & Time:
05/02/2011, 0809 EDT 
Registration:
N18R
Aircraft:
BEECH E18S
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
After taking off from runway 9L at his home airport and making an easterly departure, the 
pilot, who was also the president, director of operations, and chief pilot for the on-demand 
passenger and cargo operation, advised the air traffic controller that he was turning downwind. 
According to witnesses, the airplane did not sound like it was developing full power. The 
airplane climbed to about 100 feet, banked to the left, began losing altitude, and impacted a 
tree, a fence, and two vehicles before coming to rest in a residential area. A postcrash fire 
ensued, which consumed the majority of the cabin area and left wing. Examination of the 
accident site revealed that the airplane had struck the tree with its left inboard wing about 20 
feet above ground level. Multiple tree branches exhibiting propeller cuts were found near the 
base of the tree. Propeller strike marks on the ground also corresponded to the location of the 
No. 1 (left side) propeller. There were minimal propeller marks from the No. 2 (right side) 
propeller. Examination of the propellers revealed that the No. 1 propeller blades exhibited 
chordwise scratching and S-bending, consistent with operation at impact, but the No. 2 
propeller blades did not exhibit any chordwise scratching or bending, which indicates that the 
No. 2 engine was not producing power at the time of impact.
There was no evidence that the pilot attempted to perform the manufacturer™s published single 
engine procedure, which would have allowed him to maintain altitude. Contrary to the 
procedure, the left and right throttle control levers were in the full-throttle position, the 
mixture control levers were in the full-rich position, neither propeller was feathered, and the 
landing gear was down. 
Postaccident examination of the No. 1 engine revealed no evidence of any preimpact 
malfunction or failure. However, the No. 2 engine's condition would have resulted in erratic 
and unreliable operation; the engine would not have been able to produce full rated 
horsepower as the compression on four of the nine cylinders was below specification and both 
magnetos were not functioning correctly. Moisture and corrosion were discovered inside the 
magneto cases; the left magneto sparked internally in a random pattern when tested and its 
point gap was in excess of the required tolerance. The right magneto's camshaft follower also 
exhibited excessive wear and its points would not open, rendering it incapable of providing 
Page 2 of 10ERA11FA274
electrical energy to its spark plugs. Additionally, the main fuel pump could not be rotated by 
hand; it exhibited play in the gear bearings, and corrosion was present internally. 
 
When the airplane was not flying, it was kept outdoors. Large amounts of rain had fallen 
during the week before the accident, which could have led to the moisture and corrosion in the 
magnetos. Although the pilot had been having problems with the No. 2 engine for months, he 
continued to fly the airplane, despite his responsibility, particularly as president, director of 
operations, and chief pilot of the company, to ensure that the airplane was airworthy. During 
this period, the pilot would take off with the engine shuddering and would circle the departure 
airport to gain altitude before heading to the destination. On the night before the accident, the 
director of maintenance (DOM) replaced the No. 1 cylinder on the No. 2 engine, which had 
developed a crack in the fin area and had oil seeping out of it. After the DOM performed the 
replacement, he did not do a compression check or check the magnetos; such checks would 
have likely revealed that four of the remaining cylinders were not producing specified 
compression, that the magnetos were not functioning correctly, and that further maintenance 
was necessary. Review of the airplane's maintenance records did not reveal an entry for 
installation of the cylinder. The last entry in the maintenance records for the airplane was an 
annual and a 100-hour inspection, which had occurred about 11 months before the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s improper response to a loss of power in the No. 2 engine and his failure to ensure 
that the airplane was airworthy. Contributing to the accident was the inadequate engine 
maintenance by the operator's maintenance personnel.
Findings
Aircraft
Aircraft power plant - Incorrect service/maintenance (Factor)
Aircraft power plant - Failure
Personnel issues
Maintenance - Maintenance personnel (Factor)
Use of policy/procedure - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 10ERA11FA274
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 2, 2011, about 0809 eastern daylight time, a Beech E18S, N18R, was substantially 
damaged when it impacted terrain in Miami Gardens, Florida. The airline transport pilot was 
fatally injured. The airplane was registered to Aircap Management Company Inc., and was 
operated under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had been filed for the non-scheduled 
international cargo flight which departed from Opa-Locka Executive Airport (OPF), Opa-
Locka, Florida, destined for Marsh Harbour International Airport (MYAM), Marsh Harbour, 
Bahamas.
According to recorded communications from the OPF air traffic control tower, after takeoff for 
an "East departure" from runway 9L at OPF, the pilot advised that he was "turning downwind" 
According to witness statements, just after takeoff, the airplane did not sound like it was 
developing full power. The airplane then climbed to approximately 100 feet, banked to the left, 
and "slowly" began losing altitude. It then impacted a tree, a fence, and two vehicles before 
coming to rest in a residential area. A post crash fire then ensued. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the pilot held an airline transport 
pilot certificate with a rating for airplane multi-engine land. His most recent FAA second-class 
medical certificate was issued on April 25, 2011.  He reported 6,400 total hours of flight 
experience on that date.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident aircraft was a twin-engine, low-wing, conventional-gear airplane of all metal 
semi-monocoque construction. It was powered by two 450 horsepower Pratt & Whitney R-985-
AN-14B, 9-cylinder, radial engines.
The airplane had previously been involved in an accident on November 6, 2007 when it 
collided with another airplane during taxi at OPF and had been repaired and returned to 
service.
According to FAA and airplane maintenance records, the accident airplane was manufactured 
in 1957. The airplane™s most recent annual inspection was completed on June 30, 2010. At the 
time of the inspection, the airplane had accumulated 13,198.5 total hours of operation.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The reported weather at OPF at 0753, included: winds 110 degrees at 12 knots, 10 miles 
visibility, a few clouds at 2,800 feet, temperature 26 degrees C, dew point 20 degrees C, and an 
altimeter setting of 30.08 inches of mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
According to the Airport Facility Directory, OPF was a public use airport. It had three runways, 
oriented in a 12/30 and 09/27 (left and right), configuration. Runway 9L was grooved asphalt, 
in good condition. It was 8,002 feet long by 150 feet wide. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Page 4 of 10ERA11FA274
  
The accident site was located approximately 1,753 feet northeast of the departure end of 
runway 9L. Examination of the accident site revealed that the airplane had initially struck the 
tree with its left inboard wing at an approximate height of 20 feet above ground level and 
multiple tree branches which exhibited propeller cuts were found near the base of the tree. 
Ground scarring on the street which corresponded to the airplane's flight path also existed on a 
055 degree magnetic heading leading from the tree to the impact point with the fence and the 
two vehicles. Further examination of the ground scarring revealed the presence of tire marks 
on both sides of the ground scarring and propeller strike marks on the left side of the ground 
scarring which corresponded to the location of the No. 1 propeller. Minimal propeller marks 
were evident on the right side of the ground scarring. 
Examination of the main wreckage revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction of 
the airplane or flight controls. The airplane after impacting the fence and two vehicles had 
come to rest with the left wing root and forward side of the nose section against one of the 
vehicles that it had impacted. 
The No.1 engine and its cowling were separated from their mounting location and were found 
lying near the left side of the fuselage against the other vehicle. The No.2 engine and its cowling 
were found to have separated from their mounting location and were discovered against the 
south wall of a residence. The cowl flaps were open on both of the engine's cowlings.
The majority of the cabin area, and the left wing were consumed by a post crash fire. The right 
wing was separated from its mounting location and exhibited areas of crush and compression 
damage and a large area of deformation similar in size to one of the concrete block fence 
support columns. The empennage also exhibited impact damage.
Examination of the landing gear system revealed that the landing gear was in the down 
position. The main landing gear drag legs were in the over center position, and the slide for the 
tailwheel was at its travel limit. 
Flight control continuity was confirmed from the aileron on the right wing, the aileron on the 
surviving outboard portion of the left wing, and the elevators, and rudders on the empennage 
to the breaks in the system and then to the cockpit. 
Examination of the cockpit revealed that both the left and right throttle control levers were in 
the full-throttle position. The mixture control levers were in the full-rich position, the propeller 
pitch control levers were full forward, and both fuel selector valves were in the main wing tank 
positions. 
Examination of the fuel system revealed that despite the post impact fire, approximately 9 
gallons of fluid consistent with 100LL aviation gasoline was still present in the right main tank. 
When the fluid was applied to a coupon containing water finding paste, the paste did not 
change color indicating that no water was present. 
There was no evidence of any preimpact failure or malfunction of the propellers. Examination 
of the propellers revealed that the No.1 propeller's blades exhibited evidence of chordwise 
scratching and S-bending but, the No.2 propeller's blades did not. Neither propeller was 
feathered. 
The spinners and spinner bulkheads exhibited impact damage but did not exhibit any evidence 
of preimpact cracking. The propeller blades were still attached to their hubs and the pitch 
Page 5 of 10ERA11FA274
change mechanisms were intact and showed no evidence of any preimpact damage. Further 
examination revealed no evidence of a blade angle split, rotational, lateral, or longitudinal play 
of the blades, or worn links. The blade tapes which were also present on the blades and the 
blade clamps were aligned, and did not reveal evidence of the blades having moved in the blade 
clamps. Examination of the hub assembly also did not reveal any evidence of any preimpact 
grease leaks, oil leaks, or cracking.
Examination of the No.1 engine revealed no evidence of any preimpact malfunction or failure. 
Its compression was within specifications on the majority of its cylinders, and the others 
exhibited impact damage. The main fuel pump rotated freely, and the left magneto produced 
spark. The right magneto was impact damaged but, internal examination revealed no evidence 
of preimpact malfunctions. 
Examination of the No.2 engine revealed however, that the compression on four of the nine 
cylinders was below specification and there were metallic particles suspended in the oil. The 
main fuel pump could not be rotated by hand, it exhibited play in the gear bearings, and 
corrosion was present internally. Both magnetos contained moisture and corrosion internally. 
The left magneto when tested would spark internally in a random pattern and its point gap was 
in excess of the required tolerance. The right magneto's camshaft follower exhibited excessive 
wear, and its points would not open. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Miami-Dade County Medical Examiner 
Department. 
Toxicological testing of the pilot was conducted by the FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The specimens were negative for basic, acidic, and 
neutral drugs. Carbon Monoxide and Cyanide were detected in blood consistent with the pilot's 
exposure to a post impact fire. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
According to the president of the shipping company whose cargo was onboard the airplane at 
the time of the accident, the airplane had been "down" most of the previous month. At first 
there was a problem with the tail of the airplane, and then approximately a week before the 
accident a cylinder went "bad". The pilot had called her and advised that even though he had a 
flight scheduled for another customer, as soon as the plane was fixed, her cargo would be first 
as she had been waiting for awhile. 
According to witnesses, the airplane was kept outdoors when not flying and the local area had 
been experiencing large amounts of rain during the week before the accident. 
The pilot had been having problems with the right engine for months and the pilot would 
takeoff with the engine "shuddering" and would circle his departure airport to gain altitude 
before heading to his destination. Then on the night before the accident witnesses observed 
maintenance being performed on the right engine while it was being illuminated by an 
automobile with its headlights on.
 
According to the mechanic, the maintenance performed was to replace the No.1 cylinder on the 
No.2 engine which had developed a crack in the fin area and had oil seeping out of it. After the 
Page 6 of 10ERA11FA274
mechanic performed the replacement he did not do a compression check or check the 
magnetos and stated that he had entered the replacement in the discrepancy log that was kept 
in a clipboard in the airplane.
When asked about how maintenance was being tracked for the airplane the mechanic stated 
that he had gotten a bulletin board and all of the inspections were tracked on the board. When 
asked what the total time on the airplane was when the cylinder was replaced the mechanic 
could not recall. 
During review of the airplane's maintenance records, a loose production limitation record 
(FAA form 8130-3), dated April 27, 2011 was discovered inside the aircraft logbook for the 
replacement cylinder however, no logbook entry was discovered for installation of the cylinder.
Further review revealed that the last entry in the maintenance records for the airplane was an 
annual and 100 hour inspection which had occurred on June 30, 2010, approximately 11 
months prior to the accident.
Examination of a checklist associated with the 100 hour inspection revealed that during each 
100 hour inspection the mechanic was required to check the magnetos for condition and 
attachment, and to inspect the magneto breaker compartments for cleanliness, the breaker 
points for pitting, cam followers for operation and lubrication, and to check for specified 
grounding, wear, and security. 
No further entries regarding any inspections, repairs, alterations, part replacements, oil 
changes, or preventive maintenance that may have been performed after the 100 hour 
inspection were discovered in any of the maintenance records. 
Weight and Balance Information
A review of the cargo manifest, airplane logbooks, fueling information, and flight plan revealed 
that the airplane departed OPF with 4 hours of fuel onboard and 1,650 pounds of cargo which 
consisted of computer supplies, marine supplies, auto parts, audio speakers, coffee, gift items, 
and clothing.
Review of the flight handbook revealed that given the empty weight of the airplane, and the 
fuel and cargo onboard the airplane, the airplane's operating weight for the accident flight was 
approximately 1,000 pounds less than the published maximum gross weight of 10,100 pounds.
 
Single-Engine Operation
Emergency procedures for single-engine operation along with graphs showing the effects of 
weight and outside air temperature on single engine climb were included in the manufacturer's 
flight handbook for the airplane. According to the manufacturer, at maximum gross weight 
with the airplane properly configured with only one engine operating the airplane could climb 
255 feet per minute at sea level and 165 feet per minute at 5000 feet. Under the same weight 
and power conditions the absolute ceiling for the airplane was approximately 8,900 feet.
The optimum single-engine rate of climb speed at sea level was 116 mph indicated air speed 
(IAS). This would have been visible to the pilot as the "blue line" on the airspeed indicator. 
According to the manufacturer, maintaining this speed is of "extreme importance" if best 
aircraft performance is to be attained during emergency conditions. The calculation of this 
speed was based on a compromise between best angle-of-climb speed and best rate-of-climb 
Page 7 of 10ERA11FA274
speed and would produce the best angle-of-climb possible without appreciably reducing the 
rate-of-climb.
When one engine was shutdown, directional control, altitude, and safe airspeed, could be 
maintained by using maximum power from the operating engine, and corrective action with 
the flight controls. The first effect from unbalanced power from an inoperative engine would be 
the airplane's tendency to yaw towards the inoperative or "dead" engine. This characteristic is 
aggravated when power from the operating engine is increased, but can be corrected by 
application of rudder. Rudder forces could then be trimmed out with the trim tab. 
The amount of rudder trim necessary to give straight flight depends on airspeed; if the airplane 
is first trimmed and the airspeed is then decreased, the rudder trim becomes less effective and 
allows the airplane to turn into the dead engine. If the power is reduced, or if the control 
column is moved forward to increase airspeed, the trim would become more effective and the 
airplane would turn into the good engine. The airplane's minimum single-engine control speed 
which was the lowest airspeed at which a safe margin of control could be maintained when one 
engine was dead and the other engine was operating at maximum rated power was 94 miles an 
hour IAS.
In order to properly configure the airplane, the basic single engine procedure required the 
following preliminary steps:
1. "Operative engine-Add power to maintain altitude and airspeed".
2. "Inoperative engine:  Mixture control- IDLE CUT-OFF".
3. "Inoperative engine: Propeller-FEATHER".
4. "Landing gear-UP".
Engine Failure During Takeoff or Climb
According to the manufacturer, before each takeoff the pilot should consult the accelerate-stop 
graph to determine their decision speed and deceleration distance for the maximum load 
condition and:
1. If an engine failure occurred during takeoff and there was sufficient runway remaining for 
deceleration to "CUT POWER IMMEDIATELY AND STOP STRAIGHT AHEAD".
2. If there was insufficient runway remaining and the airplane had not gained best single-
engine angle of climb speed to close the throttles, shut off the battery and generator switches, 
shutoff the fuel selectors, and continue straight ahead, turning to avoid obstacles if necessary.
3. If there was insufficient runway remaining and the airplane had reached best angle of climb 
speed for single-engine and was airborne to "IMMEDIATELY CLEANUP THE AIRPLANE 
(RETRACT THE LANDING GEAR, FEATHER THE WINDMILLING PROPELLER) AND 
FOLLOW NORMAL SINGLE ŒENGINE PROCEDURE
Additionally, the flight handbook also contained a 'NOTE" that stated, "With the airplane clean 
you can climb. With gear down, propeller windmilling and cowl flaps open, you will not be able 
to maintain altitude."
ORGANIZATIONAL AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION
According to the FAA, if an operator provides air transportation of persons or property for 
Page 8 of 10ERA11FA274
compensation or hire, the operator must hold an air carrier certificate and appropriate 
operations specifications issued under Title 14 Part 119 of the CFRs.  A requirement for an air 
carrier certificate holder conducting operations under Part 135 is to maintain control and 
authority over the initiation, continuity, conduct, and termination of its Part 135 flights. Among 
other things, the air carrier must have knowledge of the flights beforehand, have legal 
possession of the aircraft and have all required records to show how it determined legal aircraft 
and legal crew before the flight. The Title 14 CFRs makes it incumbent on the Part 135 charter 
operator to maintain that control, referred to as "operational control".  A carrier properly 
exercising operational control must be able to show, prior to flight, that the crew is qualified 
(e.g., is trained, has a current medical certificate and meets duty, flight and rest provisions) 
and the aircraft is airworthy.
According to the operator's FAA approved operations specifications, the pilot was also the 
owner of Aircap Management Inc., which did business as Island Air Service. He was also the 
president, director of operations, and chief pilot for the on-demand, 14 CFR Part 135 passenger 
and cargo operation, and had the authority to exercise operational control. 
The mechanic was also listed in the FAA approved operations specifications as the director of 
maintenance and was responsible for administering the operator's maintenance program.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial)
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/25/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/04/2010
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 6400 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 9 of 10ERA11FA274
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N18R
Model/Series:
E18S 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
BA-312
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tailwheel
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/30/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9700 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
13221 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
R-985-14B
Registered Owner:
AIRCAP MANAGEMENT CO INC
Rated Power:
450 hp
Operator:
AIRCAP MANAGEMENT CO INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Island Air Service
Operator Designator Code:
19XA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OPF, 8 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0753 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
225°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 2800 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 20°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Opa Locka, FL (OPF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Marsh Harbour (MYAM)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0809 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Opa-Locka Executive Airport (OPF)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
8 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
09L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
8002 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 10 of 10ERA11FA274
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
25.925000, -80.260833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd G Gunther
Adopted Date:
06/28/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Felix B Molina; FAA/FSDO; Miramar, FL
Publish Date:
08/12/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=79001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
