National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Amarillo, TX
Accident Number: CEN10LA117
Date & Time: 02/04/2010, 0215 CST
Registration: N644EM
Aircraft: MITSUBISHI MU-2B-60
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control on ground
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis While on approach to the snow and ice-covered runway, the pilot was correcting for a right crosswind.
The airplane was flying approximately 20 knots faster than the recommended landing airspeed.
The airplane's right main landing gear touched down first followed by the left main landing gear and the nose gear.
The airplane made an abrupt left turn and the pilot attempted to correct by depressing the right rudder pedal.
The pilot lost control of the airplane and the airplane departed the left side of the runway.
The right main landing gear was torn from the airplane and the airplane came to rest in the upright position.
Airfield operations reported that the runway's braking condition was estimated at "nil."
An examination of the airplane and its systems revealed no anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's loss of directional control while landing on an ice/snow covered runway.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The on-demand air taxi flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 on an instrument flight rules flight plan.
The pilot and three passengers were not injured.
The cross-country flight originated from the Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport (KDFW), Fort Worth, Texas at 0111 and was landing at its intended destination at the time of the accident.
According to a statement provided by the airline transport pilot, while on approach to the airport, the pilot was informed by airport operations that the runway was covered with snow and ice.
The pilot acknowledged and continued the instrument approach to the landing runway.
While on approached the pilot was correcting for a right crosswind.
The pilot kept a higher approach speed and landed 20 knots faster than the manufacturer's recommended landing airspeed.
The airplane's right main landing gear touched down first followed by the left main landing gear and the nose gear.
The airplane made an abrupt left turn and the pilot attempted to correct by depressing the right rudder pedal.
The pilot lost control of the airplane and the airplane departed the left side of the runway on a heading that was approximately 30 degrees left of runway heading.
The right main landing gear detached from the airplane and the airplane came to rest in the upright position.
An inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) responded to the accident scene and found no pre-impact anomalies with the airframe or engines.
Denting, bending, and crushing damage was sustained to fuselage and the forward spar of the right wing.
In an interview with the FAA inspector, a representative from airfield operations reported the runway's braking condition was estimated at "nil."
This accident is part of the Safety Board's Human Fatigue Investigation Methodology Study.
Forms completed by the pilot indicate that he awoke at approximately 0700 on February 3, 2010.
The pilot had been awake for 19 hours and 15 minutes prior to the accident, but had only been on-duty for 4 hours and 15 minutes.
Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Tricycle Seats: 10 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 11/11/2009, 100 Hour Certified Max Gross Wt.
