Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Boynton Beach, FL
Accident Number:
ERA15FA141
Date & Time:
03/02/2015, 1252 EST 
Registration:
N787Z
Aircraft:
COLYAER SL FREEDOM
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airline transport pilot departed in his light sport aircraft with a friend, who held a student 
pilot certificate, on a cross-country flight to another airport for lunch. GPS data showed the 
airplane maneuvered near the accident site for about 30 minutes, performing multiple climbs, 
descents, and turns. Several witnesses reported hearing the engine "sputter," which was 
immediately followed by an advance in engine power. Although the airplane's final movements 
were not captured by witness reports or radar/GPS data, examination of the accident site 
showed that the airplane was in a steep descent when it impacted a swamp. The impact 
geometry was consistent with an in-flight loss of control and subsequent uncontrolled descent 
to ground impact. A postcrash fire ensued, which consumed most of the airplane.
Postaccident examination of the airplane and the engine did not reveal any mechanical 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. Although the environmental 
conditions were favorable for light icing at glide or cruise power, witnesses reported that the 
engine regained power after "sputtering"; such a gain in power is not consistent with a 
carburetor ice condition. The cause of the "sputtering" reported by the witnesses could not be 
determined because the extensive fire damage precluded testing of the engine-driven fuel 
pump, carburetors, and ignition system components.
The pilot reported a vibration in the control stick to the airplane manufacturer in the days 
leading up to the accident. The manufacturer responded to the pilot on the morning of the 
accident and stated that the vibration could be the result of an inadequately balanced engine or 
propeller. However, the propeller's effect on the airplane's performance could not be 
determined because two of the blades were not recovered from the accident site and the acetal 
pitch change slide block within the propeller hub was consumed by postcrash fire.
Although sedating medications were found in toxicological specimens from both occupants, 
and the pilot's autopsy found evidence of severe coronary artery disease, the investigation 
could not determine if these physiological conditions contributed to the accident.
Page 2 of 10ERA15FA141
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
An in-flight loss of control for reasons that could not be determined based on the available 
evidence.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 10ERA15FA141
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Post-impact
Fire/smoke (post-impact)
On March 2, 2015, about 1252 eastern standard time, a Colyaer Freedom S100, N787Z, collided 
with terrain after a loss of control near Boynton Beach, Florida. The airline transport-rated 
pilot and passenger were fatally injured, and the airplane was destroyed by impact forces and 
postcrash fire. The airplane was registered to the pilot and was being operated as a 14 
Code of 
Federal Regulations 
Part 91 local personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, 
and no flight plan was filed. The flight departed from Palm Beach County Park Airport (LNA), 
West Palm Beach, Florida at 1217.
The pilot's wife reported that the pilot and passenger had planned to fly to Okeechobee, 
Florida, for lunch and then return home. The airplane's flight path was captured by data 
recovered from an onboard Garmin 496 global positioning satellite (GPS) unit. A review of the 
data showed that, after its departure, the airplane maintained a westerly course to a wildlife 
refuge about 9 nautical miles (nm) west of LNA. The airplane then maneuvered over the 
wildlife refuge completing numerous descents, climbs, and turns. The last GPS point recorded 
was at 1251:18 and showed the airplane at a GPS altitude of 883 ft with a ground speed of 57 
knots.
According to witnesses who were fishing about 1/2 mile from the accident site, they observed 
the airplane flying over the wildlife refuge for about 20 to 30 minutes and then heard the 
engine make a sound that they described as a "sputter." One witness said the sound resembled 
a sound his boat motor makes when it runs out of fuel and the cylinders are misfiring. The 
engine then "revved up" almost instantaneously, which was followed by a loud boom about 30 
seconds later. The witnesses did not observe the airplane's descent or impact but did notice 
smoke coming from the wreckage after it came to rest.
Page 4 of 10ERA15FA141
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial; 
Flight Engineer
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/04/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
19400 hours (Total, all aircraft), 132 hours (Total, this make and model)
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
66, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Sport Pilot None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
35.9 hours (Total, all aircraft), 0 hours (Total, this make and model)
The pilot, age 64, held an airline transport certificate with ratings for airplane multi-engine 
land and single-engine sea. He reported a total flight experience of 19,400 hours and 300 flight 
hours in the previous 6 months on his latest first-class medical certificate application, which 
was dated February 3, 2015. A copy of the pilot's personal logbook was provided by his family, 
but it did not contain any entries beyond December 2013. According to the logbook entries, the 
pilot had accumulated a total of 128 flight hours from March 2008 to December 2013 in the 
accident airplane make and model. The pilot's wife estimated that the pilot had accrued an 
additional 5 flight hours between January 2014 and the day of the accident.
A follow-up interview with the pilot's wife was used to construct a 72-hour history of the pilot's 
activities. In the days leading up to the accident, the pilot completed some construction 
projects around the house and attended a church service. He received about 9 hours of 
uninterrupted sleep the night before the accident. The pilot's wife observed no abnormalities in 
the pilot's behavior or sleep patterns on the day of the accident nor did she detect any unusual 
behavior from the pilot in the 3 days that preceded the accident. She further remarked that her 
husband would not have allowed the passenger to fly the airplane.
The passenger, age 66, held a student pilot certificate with an endorsement to conduct solo 
flights in a Czech Sport Aircraft Sportcruiser. He did not possess a medical certificate. A copy of 
Page 5 of 10ERA15FA141
the passenger's logbook, which included entries from 2013 to February 23, 2015, was provided 
by his family. According to the logbook, the passenger had accumulated about 36 hours of total 
flight experience at the time of the accident.
According to a 48-hour history provided by the passenger's wife, he stayed near the house 
during the 2 days that preceded the accident. The passenger and the pilot had planned the 
recreational flight a few weeks prior, and her husband had been talking about it in anticipation 
for several days. She remarked that her husband did not have any health issues and exercised 
regularly at a local gym; however, he was taking cholesterol medication. He normally went to 
sleep between 2200 and midnight and woke up around 0700. The passenger's wife did not 
observe any abnormalities in his behavior or sleep pattern in the days leading up to the 
accident.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
COLYAER SL
Registration:
N787Z
Model/Series:
FREEDOM S100
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2008
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
130-001-027
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable -
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/20/2015, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1433 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
147 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
C91  installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
912ULS
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
According to records collected from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the pilot's 
logbook, the pilot purchased the airplane in 2008 from the previous owner, who provided the 
accident pilot with 6 hours of instructional flight time in the airplane. At the time of purchase, 
the airplane had accrued a total of about 23 flight hours. About 6 months after he registered 
the airplane, the pilot visited the airplane manufacturer in Pontevedra, Spain, to receive 
supplemental flight training with the airplane's designer/builder.
According to FAA records, the amphibious airplane was manufactured in 2008 and registered 
to the pilot on May 30, 2008. The airplane was powered by a Rotax 912 ULS, a normally-
aspirated, direct drive, 4 stroke liquid and air-cooled, 100 horsepower reciprocating engine. 
The aircraft logbooks were not recovered. A maintenance history was constructed from hand-
Page 6 of 10ERA15FA141
written copies of the logbook entries that were provided by the pilot's mechanic. The airplane's 
most recent condition inspection was completed on February 20, 2015, when the airplane had 
about 146 total flight hours.
According to the pilot's wife, she and the pilot decided to sell the airplane because they were 
not flying as much as they had initially planned. The pilot demonstrated the airplane to two 
prospective buyers about 1 week before the accident. During each flight, he departed from 
LNA, performed a touch and go in the water near his house, and then returned to LNA. At the 
conclusion of one of the demonstration flights, a cylinder head temperature probe was 
replaced. According to the mechanic who replaced the probe, he completed a ground run in the 
airplane after installing the new probe and did not observe any anomalous temperature 
indications.
About 1 week before the accident, the pilot wrote to the manufacturer about a small vibration 
in the control stick that a potential buyer had noticed. The manufacturer responded to the pilot 
on the morning of the accident and stated that the vibration could be the result of an 
inadequately balanced engine or propeller. A representative of the mechanic stated that his 
client installed only "one propeller" in his history with the accident airplane. Maintenance 
records supplied by the pilot's mechanic indicated that he replaced a Warp Drive propeller with 
an Airmaster AP332R variable pitch propeller hub with three Warp Drive propeller blades in 
October 2012. Further, the mechanic stated that he did not observe any anomalies with the 
propeller following its installation. He did not recall if the propeller had been balanced.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BCT, 13 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2200 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 14 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
90°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.23 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 20°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
WEST PALM BEACH, FL 
(LNA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Okeechobee, FL (OBE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1217 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Page 7 of 10ERA15FA141
The 1253 recorded weather observation at Boca Raton Airport, Boca Raton, Florida, included 
wind from 090° at 7 knots gusting 14 knots, 10 statute miles visibility, clouds scattered at 
2,200 ft and 2,700 ft, and broken at 3,700 ft, temperature 26° C, dew point 20° C; barometric 
altimeter 30.23 inches of mercury.
According to an FAA carburetor icing probability chart, the recorded weather conditions were 
conducive to light icing at glide or cruise power.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
26.520278, -80.222222
The airplane came to rest upright in swamp water on a southeasterly heading about 40 ft from 
a dirt road and 1 nm from the airplane's final GPS target. All major components of the airplane 
were accounted for at the accident site. Most of the fuselage and empennage were consumed by 
fire. The right wing displayed fire damage, the wingtip was separated, and the inboard wood 
spar was broken at the fuselage. The elevator separated from the tail section and was located 
several feet behind the main wreckage. All three composite propeller blades had fractured and 
separated from the propeller hub.
Airframe
Postaccident examination of the airframe was completed at a secure facility by a Federal 
Aviation Administration inspector (FAA), the NTSB Investigator-in-Charge, and a 
representative from the engine manufacturer. The aileron flexball cable was traced from the 
cockpit flight controls to the right aileron through the center bellcrank. The left aileron was 
destroyed by fire; however, although thermally damaged, the left aileron flexball cable 
extended from the center bellcrank to an allen bolt that is normally coupled to the left aileron. 
The wing flap control system was not recovered.
Continuity of the elevator flexball control cable was confirmed from the elevator to the cockpit 
flight controls. The right and left occupants' rudder pedals moved synchronously, which 
actuated the center bellcrank assembly. About 6 inches of push rod, which extended from the 
rudder into the vertical stabilizer, was present; however, the rudder control tubes that 
connected to the push rod at the vertical stabilizer were not recovered.
The wing fuel tanks were destroyed by fire, but the fuselage tank remained intact and 
contained trace amounts of blue colored fuel that resembled 100 low lead aviation grade 
gasoline. The gascolator filter was free of debris, and the gascolator bowl was void of fuel.
Page 8 of 10ERA15FA141
The throttle and choke controls were confirmed from the throttle/choke quadrant to the 
carburetors.
All three composite propeller blades were separated and about 6 inches of each blade remained 
connected to the propeller hub. Each of the remaining blade sections displayed composite 
fibers that were thermally damaged. The propeller blade ferrules were covered in soot, and the 
propeller spinner exhibited blistering, consistent with fire damage. A section of propeller blade 
that measured about 15 inches in length was co-located with the main wreckage and did not 
exhibit any fire damage. The other two propeller blades were not recovered. A visual inspection 
of the propeller extension shaft found that it was about 10 inches in length, which was 4.72 
inches beyond the engine manufacturer's maximum limitation.
The propeller hub and blade remnants were sent to the NTSB material's laboratory in 
Washington, D.C., for further examination. The control wires and metallic components of the 
pitch change mechanism within the hub were intact; however, the pitch change slide, which 
was composed of acetal, was melted and not attached to the drive screw.
Engine
The engine was intact and remained attached to the engine mounts. An attempt to rotate the 
crankshaft at the propeller flange was unsuccessful as a result of the thermal damage to the 
engine crankcase. A nut on the ignition housing was fused to the crankshaft, which precluded 
disassembly of the crankcase. A visual examination of the connecting rods and crankshaft 
through the cylinder portholes did not reveal any anomalies.
The electronic modules and external triggers to the engine's dual capacitor discharge ignition 
system were consumed by postcrash fire and could not be examined. The functionality of the 
ignition coils and cables could not be confirmed due to extensive damage. Both the stator and 
flywheel were damaged by fire, which precluded functional testing.
The engine driven fuel pump was destroyed by fire and could not tested. Both constant 
depression diaphragm carburetors were displaced from the intake manifolds and destroyed by 
fire, which precluded an inspection of the floats, fuel bowls, and diaphragms.
Both the top and bottom spark plugs were removed from each cylinder for inspection; each 
plug appeared grey in color, consistent with normal operating signatures. All 8 spark plug 
electrode gaps were within the gap range prescribed by the manufacturer. Rust deposits were 
observed along the rim of several of the spark plug cases.
The cylinder heads exhibited evidence of exposure to postcrash fire; however, each piston 
displayed signatures consistent with normal combustion, and all of the cylinder valve faces and 
seats were in place. Each cylinder bore exhibited cross-hatching with no indications of scoring 
or oil starvation. An inspection of the valves, valve springs, rocker arms, and push rods did not 
reveal any anomalies.
An inspection of the oil pump did not reveal any anomalies; however, the unit was thermally 
Page 9 of 10ERA15FA141
damaged and could not be functionally tested. The oil tank was partially damaged by fire, but 
remained intact and displayed some oil residue within the sump case. The oil cooler, oil filter, 
and oil lines were consumed by postcrash fire and could not be examined.
The engine reduction gearbox displayed some soot residue on the case; however, the internal 
gearset did not display any anomalies. Remnants of oil were observed within the gearbox.
Medical And Pathological Information
Autopsies were performed on both occupants by District 15 - State of Florida, Office of the 
District Medical Examiner, West Palm Beach, Florida. The autopsy reports listed the cause of 
death for the pilot and the passenger as blunt impact injuries of head, neck, torso, and thermal 
injuries. The pilot's autopsy found significant diffuse, calcific, severe coronary artery disease 
with focal narrowing by 75-80% in both the left anterior descending and right coronary arteries 
and a scar along the septum.
Forensic toxicology testing was performed on specimens of the pilot and passenger by the FAA 
Bioaeronautical Science Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Testing on 
specimens of the pilot detected the presence of cetirizine and losartan in the blood and urine 
and salicylate in the urine. Toxicology testing performed on specimens of the passenger 
detected cetirizine, chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine, hydroxyzine, losartan, naproxen, 
quinine, and salicylate in the urine. Cetirizine, chlorpheniramine (0.022 ug/ml), 
diphenhydramine (0.0031 ug/ml), and losartan were also identified in the passenger's cavity 
blood.
Cetirizine is an antihistamine available over the counter, commonly marketed with the name 
Zyrtec. It carries a warning, "When using this product, drowsiness may occur; avoid alcoholic 
drinks; alcohol, sedatives, and tranquilizers may increase drowsiness; be careful when driving 
a motor vehicle or operating machinery." Chlorpheniramine, diphenhydramine, and 
hydroxyzine are all sedating antihistamines, and each carries a warning about operating 
machinery due to drowsiness or "marked drowsiness." Chlorpheniramine is commonly sold 
under the names Chlortrimeton and Chlor-tab; therapeutic blood levels are between 0.0100 
and 0.0400 ug/ml. Diphenhydramine is available in a large number of products marketed as 
treatments for cold symptoms and allergies. Additionally, diphenhydramine is used as the 
active ingredient in a number of over the counter sleep aids. Therapeutic blood levels are 
between 0.0250 and 0.1120 ug/ml. Finally, hydroxyzine is a prescription sedating 
antihistamine commonly sold under the names Atarax and Vistaril.
Due to their warnings of drowsiness, all four of the antihistamines found in the passenger's 
blood meet the FAA's criteria for waiting 5 maximum dosing intervals before flight.
Page 10 of 10
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Stephen R Stein
Adopted Date:
03/29/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
John R Stephenson; FAA/FSDO; Miramar, FL
Jordan Paskevich; Rotax Engines
Silvia Tilves; Colyaer Aircraft; Pontevedra,
Publish Date:
03/29/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90801
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
