Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Venice, FL
Accident Number:
ERA15LA145
Date & Time:
03/03/2015, 1100 EST 
Registration:
N498TC
Aircraft:
CESSNA 152
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The flight instructor reported that he and the student pilot departed on a local training flight. 
After completing maneuvers at 2,000 ft, the flight instructor initiated a simulated engine 
failure and proceeded to demonstrate the forced landing procedure to the student. He selected 
a field as the forced landing location and applied carburetor heat. After turning onto final 
approach for the field at an altitude of about 500 ft, the flight instructor discontinued the 
simulation by turning off the carburetor heat and applying engine power to initiate a climb. 
The flight instructor stated that the engine then "sputtered and produced no power," and he 
subsequently conducted a forced landing to the field. 
During postaccident examination of the airplane, no fuel was observed in either of the two 
wing fuel tanks; however, the fuel quantity at the time of the accident could not be determined 
because a fuel line was damaged during impact, and fuel might have leaked out postaccident. 
An auxiliary fuel supply was plumbed into the fuel system, and the engine started immediately, 
accelerated smoothly, and ran continuously with no anomalies observed.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
testing of the engine revealed no anomalies.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA15LA145
Factual Information
On March 3, 2015, about 1100 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N498TC, was substantially 
damaged during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power near Venice, Florida. 
The flight instructor (CFI) was not injured, and the student pilot sustained minor injuries. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local 
instructional flight, which departed Venice Municipal Airport (VNC), Venice. The flight was 
conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
The CFI stated that he and the student departed VNC for a local training flight with 18 gallons 
of fuel onboard. After completing maneuvers at 2,000 feet, the CFI initiated a simulated engine 
failure and proceeded to demonstrate the forced landing procedure to the student. He selected 
a field as a forced landing location, and carburetor heat was applied. After turning onto final 
approach for the selected field at an altitude of about 500 feet, the CFI discontinued the 
simulation by turning off the carburetor heat and applying engine power to initiate a climb. 
The engine "sputtered and produced no power," and after ensuring the proper positions of the 
fuel selector valve, mixture control, and engine primer, the CFI conducted a forced landing to 
the field. Upon touchdown, the left wing contacted the ground and the airplane "cartwheeled." 
The airplane came to rest upright, and the CFI and student subsequently egressed. The CFI 
stated that the accident airplane had performed without anomalies during another 
instructional flight just prior to the accident flight, during which he also conducted a simulated 
engine failure. 
The airplane was manufactured in 1979 and was equipped with one Lycoming O-235 series, 
110-hp reciprocating engine, which had accumulated 3,484 hours since overhaul. The 
airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on February 13, 2015, and as of the 
accident flight, had accumulated about 29 hours since that date. 
The CFI held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single and multiengine 
land, and instrument airplane; as well as a flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane 
single and multiengine land and instrument airplane. His most recent Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) first-class medical certificate was issued in September 2013. He reported 
6,244 total hours of flight experience, of which 352 hours were in the accident airplane make 
and model.  
Postaccident examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed substantial damage to 
both wings and the forward fuselage. There was no fuel observed in either of the airplane's two 
wing fuel tanks; however, fuel quantity at the time of the accident could not be determined as a 
fuel line was damaged during impact. The airplane was subsequently removed from the site, 
the starter was replaced, and an auxiliary fuel supply was plumbed into the airplane's fuel 
system. The engine started immediately, accelerated smoothly, and ran continuously with no 
anomalies observed. The carburetor heat control could not be manipulated due to impact 
damage.
In a written statement, the flight instructor indicated that he had flown the accident airplane 
on a training flight prior to the accident flight on the day of the accident. Fueling records 
provided by the operator indicated that the airplane was last serviced at 1122 EST the day prior 
to the accident with 10.36 gallons of 100LL aviation fuel. The operator did not, however, 
provide flight records for the airplane; therefore, total flight time since the airplane's most 
recent fueling could not be determined.
Page 3 of 5ERA15LA145
The 1115 weather observation at VNC, located about 5 miles west of the accident site, included 
wind from 140 degrees at 12 knots with gusts to 17 knots, 10 statute miles visibility, clear skies, 
temperature 26 degrees C, dew point 18 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.21 inches of 
mercury. Review of a carburetor icing probability chart indicated the potential for serious icing 
at glide power given the atmospheric conditions present about the time of the accident.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Simulated/training event
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
48
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/09/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/10/2015
Flight Time:
6244 hours (Total, all aircraft), 352 hours (Total, this make and model), 5720 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 115 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/26/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
10 hours (Total, all aircraft), 7 hours (Total, this make and model), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ERA15LA145
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N498TC
Model/Series:
152 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15283390
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/13/2015, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1676 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91  installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-235 SERIES
Registered Owner:
MIDIN CORP
Rated Power:
118 hp
Operator:
Florida Flight Training Center
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KVNC, 19 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1115 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
279째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 17 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
140째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.21 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26째C / 18째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Venice, FL (VNC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Venice, FL (VNC)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1030 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
27.059722, -82.347778 (est)
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Allison N Diaz
Adopted Date:
12/14/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Angel A Figueroa-Rodriguez; FAA/FSDO; Tampa, FL
Publish Date:
12/14/2015
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90825
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
