Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Monticello, UT
Accident Number:
DEN03LA020
Date & Time:
12/02/2002, 1125 MST 
Registration:
N20840
Aircraft:
Aerospatiale AS-350BA
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
Analysis 
According to the pilot, he had moved approximately 80 bags of seismic sensor cable earlier that 
morning with no problems. At approximately 1120, the pilot stopped operations to change 
lines. He proceeded to pick up five bags and was en route to the drop off point. During the 
approach to the north, the pilot "noticed that the Nr (rotor rpm) was high at roughly 400 rpm 
as [he] turned to the west." As the pilot slowed down, he added collective to reduce the rotor 
speed. The rotor rpm began to slow, at which point the pilot lowered the collective and applied 
forward cyclic to maintain forward airspeed. The rotor speed continued to decrease and the 
"low rotor speed warning horn" sounded. The pilot lowered the collective and flared, at which 
point the bags contacted the ground. The pilot then "noticed that the Nr was low" at 
approximately 320 rpm. The pilot "zeroed the airspeed, pumped the collective once[,] trying to 
slow the rate of decent and pulled up on the collective," just before impacting the ground. The 
helicopter settled onto the load beneath it, and subsequently rolled over on its right side 
causing substantial damage. An examination of the helicopter revealed no anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's failure to maintain rotor rpm.  A related factor was the presence of an object in the 
path during the touchdown.
Page 2 of 6DEN03LA020
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) ROTOR RPM - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. AUTOROTATION - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: ROLL OVER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. (F) OBJECT - OTHER
Page 3 of 6DEN03LA020
Factual Information
On December 2, 2002, at approximately 1125 mountain standard time, an Aerospatiale AS-
350BA, N20840, operated by Crew Concepts Inc., was substantially damaged following an 
autorotation and subsequent landing rollover 1 mile east of Monticello, Utah. The commercial 
pilot, the sole occupant on board, received minor injuries. The external load operation was 
being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 133. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the local geophysical flight that 
originated approximately 5 minutes prior to the accident. 
According to the pilot, he had moved approximately 80 bags earlier that morning with no 
problems. The bags contained seismic sensor cables. At approximately 1120, the pilot stopped 
operations to change lines. He proceeded to pick up five bags and was en route to the drop off 
point. During the approach to the north, the pilot "noticed that the Nr [rotor rpm] was high at 
roughly 400 rpm as [he] turned to the west." As the forward speed slowed down, the pilot 
added collective to reduce the rotor speed. The rotor rpm began to slow but continued to 
decrease, at which point the pilot lowered the collective and applied forward cyclic to maintain 
forward airspeed. The rotor speed continued to decrease and the "low rotor speed warning 
horn" sounded. The pilot lowered the collective and flared, at which point the bags contacted 
the ground. The pilot then "noticed that the Nr was low" at approximately 320 rpm. Impact 
with the ground was unavoidable and the pilot "zeroed the airspeed, pumped the collective 
once[,] trying to slow the rate of decent and pulled up on the collective," just before impacting 
the ground.
The helicopter settled onto the load on the ground. Subsequently, the helicopter rolled over, 
coming to rest on its right side. The tail boom was severed, the engine and transmission were 
separated, and the main rotor blades and hub assembly were destroyed. 
On March 6, 2003, the fuel control unit was examined at Turbomeca, Grand Prairie, Texas.  No 
anomalies were reported. An examination of the helicopter's systems revealed no anomalies.
The calculated density altitude at the accident site was 7,443 feet.  The helicopter's maximum 
substantiated pressure altitude is 16,000 feet.
Page 4 of 6DEN03LA020
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
41, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/14/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/22/2002
Flight Time:
6790 hours (Total, all aircraft), 815 hours (Total, this make and model), 6590 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 59 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 52 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 6 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Aerospatiale
Registration:
N20840
Model/Series:
AS-350BA 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1070
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4988 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Turbomeca
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
Aerial 1B
Registered Owner:
Copter Lease LLC Trustee
Rated Power:
681 hp
Operator:
CREW CONCEPTS INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
FZOL
Page 5 of 6DEN03LA020
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BDG, 5865 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
24 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1045 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
210°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.19 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / -2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Monticello, UT (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1120 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
37.937222, -109.327778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
James  F Struhsaker
Adopted Date:
03/02/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Lynn Higgins; FAA FSDO; Salt Lake City, UT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DEN03LA020
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
