Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Panaca, NV
Accident Number:
LAX03TA043
Date & Time:
12/01/2002, 1310 PST 
Registration:
N48020
Aircraft:
Bell 47G-3B-1
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Public Aircraft
Analysis 
The helicopter experienced a loss of engine power and landed hard during an autorotation, 
severing the tail boom.  The number 6 cylinder's intake valve separated, with the valve's head 
wedged in the intake valve seat bore.  Removal of the rocker box cover on that cylinder revealed 
that the spring retainer was broken into numerous pieces.  The piston head showed over 15 
impressions consistent in dimension to that of the valve head.  After examining the number 6 
cylinder, a metallurgist determined that the valve failed in between the intake valve head and 
the valve stem.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
separation of the no. 6 cylinder intake valve head from the valve stem, which resulted in a loss 
of engine power.  The mechanism responsible for the valve failure is unknown.
Page 2 of 6LAX03TA043
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,VALVE,INTAKE - SEPARATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. AUTOROTATION - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
3. MISC ROTORCRAFT,MAIN ROTOR/TAIL BOOM CONTACT
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6LAX03TA043
Factual Information
On December 1, 2002, about 1310 Pacific standard time, a Bell 47G-3B-1, N48020, experienced 
a loss of engine power and landed hard during an autorotation near Panaca, Nevada.  The 
Bureau of Land Management was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 
91.  The commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured; the helicopter sustained 
substantial damage.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company flight plan had 
been filed.  The local public use positioning flight originated from Caliente, Nevada, about 
1200.
The pilot was positioning the helicopter to perform a horse herding operation for the Bureau of 
Land Management at the time of the accident.  Two witnesses reported seeing two grey smoke 
emissions from the engine prior to a loss of engine power and hard landing, severing the tail 
boom.
In a written statement, the mechanic who regularly preformed the maintenance on the 
helicopter, reported that earlier in the year the helicopter underwent a 1,000-hour engine 
inspection, which included an engine overhaul; it was returned to service on April 30, 2002.  
The cylinder assemblies used for the overhaul were purchased from Engine Components, Inc., 
in San Antonio, Texas.  The maintenance tag attached on the cylinders attested that "the repair 
made to the unit listed on reverse side was made and inspected in accordance with current 
regulations of the FAA [Federal Aviation Administration] and the part is Airworthy and 
approved for return to service."
The mechanic further stated that he conducted an engine examination after the accident under 
the supervision of the FAA.  Upon removal of the induction tubes and the induction manifold, 
the mechanic discovered internal discoloration similar to that for the exhaust tubes.  He 
removed the number 6 cylinder and noted that the intake valve was broken, with the valve's 
head wedged in the intake valve seat bore.  Removal of the rocker box cover on that cylinder 
revealed that the spring retainer was broken into numerous pieces. The piston head showed 
over 15 impressions consistent in dimensions to that of the valve head.
The mechanic added that at the time of the accident, the cylinder had accumulated 10 hours 
since overhaul and the engine had accumulated 110.3 hours since the last overhaul.  The 
cylinder was sent to Engine Components, Inc., for further examination under the auspice of the 
FAA.  The mechanic's complete written account is appended to this report in the public docket.
Engine Components, Inc., completed a technical report in summation of their findings.  In 
pertinent part, the director of quality and metallurgy stated that the retainer failed due to 
overload.  He opined that during engine operation the valve fractured first, resulting in the 
valve stem impacting the retainer and keys leading to their facture and deformation.  He noted 
that the broken valve was a new part supplied by Lycoming during the cylinder overhaul.  The 
complete report is appended to the report in the public docket.
Page 4 of 6LAX03TA043
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/19/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
29351 hours (Total, all aircraft), 16120 hours (Total, this make and model), 26934 hours (Pilot 
In Command, all aircraft), 51 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 17 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N48020
Model/Series:
47G-3B-1 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2812
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/31/2002, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
100 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7471 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TVO-435-B1A
Registered Owner:
Clifford J. Heaverne
Rated Power:
270 hp
Operator:
Bureau of Land Managment
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX03TA043
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CDC, 5622 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
63 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
95°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 4300 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.12 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Caliente, NV 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Panaca, NV 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1200 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.790278, -114.425000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
GEORGE E PETTERSON
Adopted Date:
12/28/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Frank Vavra; Federal Aviation Administration; Las Vegas, NV
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX03TA043
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
