Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
College Place, WA
Accident Number:
SEA04LA062
Date & Time:
04/01/2004, 1138 PST 
Registration:
N284DM
Aircraft:
Davenport (Van's) RV-8F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot of the homebuilt RV-8F departed runway 23 executing a climbing right turn, followed 
by a second RV-8F about 300 feet behind.  As the second aircraft climbed through 300-400 
feet above ground the pilot observed the first aircraft roll wings level and commence a descent 
while simultaneously turning back toward the departure airport and then impacting the 
ground in a wings level flat pitch attitude.  The aircraft slid about 25-30 feet across the ground 
along a 200 degree magnetic track and its "G" meter registered +10 G's.  Post crash 
examination of the aircraft's Franklin engine, the throttle system and engine fuel pump and 
boost pump revealed no evidence of mechanical or fuel related malfunction.  Fuel was found in 
both fuel tanks and throughout the fuel lines up to the engine.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power for undetermined reason(s) and the pilot's failure to maintain adequate 
flying airspeed during the forced landing.  A contributing factor was the pilot's decision to 
attempt a turn at low altitude.
Page 2 of 7SEA04LA062
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
----------
Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
2. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7SEA04LA062
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2004, approximately 1138 Pacific standard time, a Davenport (Van's) RV-8F 
homebuilt experimental aircraft, N284DM, registered to and being flown/operated by a 
commercial pilot sustained substantial damage during an in-flight collision with terrain 
following a loss of power on initial climb at College Place, Washington.  The pilot was fatally 
injured and there was no post-crash fire.  Visual meteorological conditions existed and no 
flight plan had been filed.  The flight, which was personal, originated from Martin Field, 
College Place, Washington, approximately 1135 and was destined for Walla Walla, Washington.
A pilot of a second RV-8F, N254LF, had just departed Martin Field immediately after 
N284DM.  He reported that N284DM made a climbing right turn after departing runway 23 
and he executed the same right turn upon his departure following in loose formation (refer to 
Chart I).  He estimated the separation between his aircraft and the preceding N284DM to be 
about 300 feet and he "...observed N284DM roll from its r[igh]t bank climb attitude.  Then to a 
shallow left bank.  At the same time N284 slowed rapidly and began a descent...."  He further 
reported that while in a climb, his aircraft overtook and passed N284DM and that he 
maintained visual contact with the aircraft observing it impact the ground in a wings level, flat 
pitch attitude.  He reported observing the impact in his 4-5 o'clock position while climbing 
through 300-400 feet above ground (refer to Attachment W-I).
The pilot of N254LF also reported that both he and N284DM were in radio communication but 
he never heard any radio transmissions from the pilot indicating a problem.
 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot possessed a commercial pilot's certificate with airplane single/multi-engine land and 
instrument, as well as airplane single-engine sea ratings.  He also possessed a flight instructor's 
certificate with an airplane single-engine rating and an experimental aircraft repairman's 
certificate.  His total flight time was reported as 3,500 hours at the time of his most recent 
airman medical application (November 7, 2001).  This application was noted as pending and 
the pilot's most current medical certificate at the time of the accident was for a Class II 
certificate with a restriction for vision, which was dated July 27, 1994.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N284DM was a Van's Aircraft model RV-8F homebuilt manufactured by the pilot/owner.  The 
aircraft was initially certificated for flight as an experimental aircraft by an inspector assigned 
to the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Spokane Flight Standards District Office 
(FSDO) on June 10, 2003, and the total airframe time was estimated to be approximately 100 
hours at the time of the accident.  The aircraft was equipped with a Franklin 6A-350-C1 
reciprocating engine rated at 220 horsepower and a three blade composite propeller.  Refer to 
Attachment A-I.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Page 4 of 7SEA04LA062
On site examination was conducted by an inspector from the FAA Spokane FSDO on the 
afternoon of the accident.  He reported that the aircraft was observed upright on the ground at 
an approximate latitude/longitude of 46 degrees 02.88 minutes North and 118 degrees 25.22 
minutes West.  The aircraft was on the south side of East Whitman Drive and within the 
northern boundary of Martin Field.  The first evidence of ground impact was a small crater on 
the south side of the road with a distribution of debris along an approximate 200 degree 
magnetic bearing line for a distance of about 25-30 feet (refer to graphic image G-1).  The 
center of the aircraft was located at this terminus and the longitudinal axis of the aircraft 
paralleled the road with the nose pointed toward 230 degrees magnetic (refer to graphic image 
G-2).
The aircraft remained essentially in one piece with the exception of the two main landing gear 
that were broken off and evidence of compressive deformation along the vertical axis (refer to 
graphic image G-3).  The "G" meter positive G recording needle was noted pegged at its 
maximum reading of +10 g's (refer to graphic image G-4).  The fuel selector was observed 
positioned to the right wing tank (refer to graphic image G-5).  The propeller blades displayed 
damage with the blade in the 8 o'clock position displaying aft bending and the 12 and 4 o'clock 
blades displaying mid span fractures in an aft direction (when viewed from the cockpit).
The FAA inspector, assisted by a local mechanic, confirmed fuel in both fuel tanks and 
compression in all cylinders of the engine, as well as the development of sparks at all spark 
plugs.  He also verified control continuity to all three control surfaces.   The Ellison throttle 
body was examined and the mixture and throttle positions were noted in the full rich/open 
positions respectively.  The throttle body was removed for further examination.  The fuel line to 
the fuel pump was disconnected, the fuel selector was switched to the left tank and the boost 
pump was activated on battery power with a resultant flow of fuel out the end of the line.  Fuel 
was found within the fuel line between the fuel pump and the throttle body.  The fuel pump 
was removed and the drive was manually activated with verification of pump operation (refer 
to Attachment M-I).
 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The throttle body was subsequently installed on another engine and tested satisfactorily.  It 
was then disassembled and no evidence of significant malfunction was noted that could be 
related to a power loss.  The fuel pump also tested satisfactorily and its disassembly revealed 
no mechanical malfunctions (refer to Attachments TBI-I and FP-I).
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The pilot initially survived the ground impact but later succumbed due to accident related 
injuries.  The St. Mary Medical Center (WA) Lab conducted tests on a sample of the pilot's 
blood obtained at 1227 on the date of the accident.  The tests revealed less than 5 MG/DL 
alcohol and a drug screen resulted in all negative findings.  A post mortem examination was 
not conducted.
Page 5 of 7SEA04LA062
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Expired
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/27/1994
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3500 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Davenport (Van's)
Registration:
N284DM
Model/Series:
RV-8F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
80955
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/10/2003, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
100 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
100 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Franklin
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
6A-350-C1
Registered Owner:
Davenport, David M.
Rated Power:
220 hp
Operator:
Davenport, David M.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7SEA04LA062
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ALW, 1205 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
43°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.25 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
College Place, WA (S95)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Walla Walla, WA (ALW)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1135 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Martin Field (S95)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
750 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
23
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3840 ft / 60 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
46.046667, -118.418333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Steven A McCreary
Adopted Date:
09/29/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Charles L Roberts; FAA FSDO; Spokane, WA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7SEA04LA062
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
