The sport pilot/mechanic reported that the accident flight was the first flight in the 
experimental, amateur-built airplane after he installed an overhauled engine. About 30 
minutes after takeoff, the engine experienced a sudden and total loss of power and would not 
restart. The pilot then conducted a forced landing to a grass field, and the airplane nosed over. 
The pilot and another mechanic subsequently performed a condition inspection of the airplane 
and found that fuel had leaked from the gascolator between the glass cup and metal frame. 
They also found that the gascolator bale clamp was not safety-wired, which allowed the clamp 
to loosen and subsequently relax the seal between the glass cup and the metal frame and the 
fuel to leak.
The pilot/mechanic's failure to safety-wire the gascolator bale clamp, which resulted in a fuel 
leak and subsequent total loss of engine power.
On April 2, 2016, about 1530 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Ginny B, 
N349E, was substantially damaged during a forced landing in South Harrison Township, New 
Jersey. The pilot sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan had been filed for the local flight from Alloway Airfield (NJ02), Alloway, New 
Jersey. The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal 
Regulations 
Part 91.
According to the pilot, who also held an airframe and powerplant (A&P) certificate, the flight 
was the first since he overhauled and installed a Continental O-200 engine. The pilot took off 
about 1500, and headed north from the airport. About 30 minutes later, the engine 
experienced a sudden and complete loss of power, and the pilot could not get it restarted. The 
pilot then completed a forced landing to a grassy field, where the airplane nosed over. The 
airplane's wing spar, vertical stabilizer, and right wing struts were substantially damaged.
The pilot and another A&P rated mechanic subsequently performed a conditional inspection 
on the airplane, where they found that fuel had leaked from the gascolater between the glass 
cup and the metal frame. They also noted that the bale clamp was not safety-wired, which 
allowed it to loosen and relax the seal between the gascolator glass cup and its metal frame.
