About 15 minutes after departing on the cross-country flight, the experimental, amateur-built 
airplane experienced a loss of engine power, and the private pilot considered landing on a 550-
ft-long airstrip for remote-controlled aircraft. After observing numerous people on and near 
the runway, he subsequently decided to land on an interstate highway. Upon touching down 
with the landing gear retracted, the airplane slid into a car parked on the paved shoulder of the 
highway, fatally injuring one of the car's occupants. Video footage captured by a cell phone 
inside the airplane showed normal engine indications before the accident. A video taken 
shortly thereafter did not capture the instrument panel or engine indications; however, the 
engine could be heard surging. 
The airplane was equipped with fuel tanks in the left and right wings, as well as a fuselage tank. 
The right and left wing tanks each had a capacity of 52 gallons, and the capacity of the fuselage 
tank was 33 gallons. The fuel system was configured so that the left wing tank connected to the 
fuselage tank, and the engine would draw from the fuselage tank. The fuselage tank did not 
have a dedicated fuel quantity gauge; the pilot stated that he knew it was full when the wing 
tank gauge began to indicate above zero. The pilot stated that before departing on the accident 
flight, the left fuel tank quantity gauge indicated 1 gallon, which corresponded to 34 gallons 
available. 
Postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. A test run of the engine 
at low, intermediate, and high power settings was successful.
The fuselage tank was breached during the accident, and an undetermined quantity of fuel 
leaked out. The gascolator did not contain any fuel, and the line from the gascolator to the 
engine-driven fuel pump, as well as the fuel inlet line to the fuel manifold, contained no fuel. 
The lack of fuel in these areas, coupled with the engine surging heard on video, may be an 
indication of fuel starvation; however, since the investigation was unable to determine the total 
Page 2 of 10WPR16FA091
quantity of fuel on board the airplane, the reason for the loss of power and engine surging 
could not be determined. 
A loss of engine power during cruise for reasons that could not be determined because 
examination of the airplane did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation.
