The commercial pilot reported that, on his initial approach for landing in the experimental, 
amateur-built, turboprop-equipped airplane, a gust of wind caused the airplane to "balloon" 
and that he elected to execute a go-around. On the second approach, the airplane touched 
down "just left" of the runway centerline. However, when the pilot placed the propeller into 
beta, the nose landing gear collapsed. He was unable to maintain directional control, and the 
airplane subsequently departed the right side of the runway. He "felt a loud bang" after the 
airplane exited the runway pavement. 
Video footage depicted that the airplane initially touched down on the right main landing gear, 
followed by the left main landing gear. The right main wheel appeared to leave the pavement 
momentarily before settling back down. Shortly afterward, the nose landing gear collapsed. 
The airplane subsequently veered to the right and departed the runway pavement. The airplane 
continued to travel through the grass area adjacent to the runway and rotated abruptly to the 
right immediately before coming to rest.
A postaccident examination of the airplane landing gear system did not identify any anomalies 
consistent with a preimpact failure or malfunction. The nose landing gear strut, wheel 
assembly, support structure, and extension/retraction linkage appeared to be intact. In the 
absence of any confirmed failures related to the nose landing gear installation, the cause for the 
nose landing gear collapse could not be determined.
Collapse of the nose landing gear during landing for reasons that could not be determined, 
because postaccident examination did not detect any anomalies consistent with a preimpact 
failure or malfunction.
On April 1, 2016, about 1720 central daylight time, an experimental, amateur-built Gill Lancair 
IV-P Propjet airplane, N992BC, was substantially damaged during landing on runway 33 
(7,203 feet by 100 feet, asphalt) when the nose landing gear collapsed resulting in a runway 
excursion at the Addison Airport (ADS), Addison, Texas. The pilot was not injured. The 
airplane was registered to N992BC Properties LLC and operated by the pilot under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the flight, which was operated on an instrument flight rules flight plan. 
The flight originated from the Georgetown Municipal Airport (GTU), Georgetown, Texas, about 
0930.
The pilot reported that on his initial approach to runway 33, a gusty wind condition caused the 
airplane to "balloon" on short final and he elected to execute a go-around. On the second 
approach, the airplane touched down "just left" of the runway centerline, about 1,000 feet from 
the approach threshold. However, when the pilot placed the propeller into beta, the nose 
landing gear collapsed. He was unable to maintain directional control and the airplane 
subsequently departed the right side of the runway. He "felt a loud bang" after the airplane had 
exited the runway pavement. He noted that the left landing gear strut had failed above the 
wheel and the strut dug into the ground before the airplane came to rest.
Video footage from cameras positioned at the approach end of the runway was provided by 
airport management. The airplane initially touched down on the right main landing gear, 
followed by the left main landing gear. The right main wheel appeared to leave the pavement 
momentarily before settling back down. Shortly afterward, the nose landing gear collapsed. 
The airplane subsequently veered to the right and departed the runway pavement. The airplane 
continued to travel through the grass area adjacent to the runway and rotated abruptly to the 
right immediately before coming to rest.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors identified runway propeller strike and tire 
skid marks attributable to the accident airplane. A line of propeller strike marks began at the 
runway number markings, about 10 feet left of the centerline, and appeared to initially parallel 
the runway centerline. Small fiberglass fragments were located near the strike marks. Shortly 
afterward, the strike marks began tracking toward the right side of the runway. The strike 
marks were joined by a set of three tire skid marks. The center mark was defined by two 
uniform marks consistent with being formed by the edges of the tire. This mark was collocated 
with the propeller strike marks and was continuous until it reached the right side of the runway 
pavement. The left and right tire skid marks were also continuous to the edge of the runway 
pavement; however, they were lighter/more faint and narrower than the center skid mark. The 
skid marks continued as ruts in the adjacent grass area and led to the accident site.
A postaccident examination of the airplane landing gear system by FAA inspectors did not 
identify any anomalies consistent with a preimpact failure or malfunction. The nose landing 
gear was collapsed/retracted. The left main landing gear strut had separated near the wheel 
assembly; the fracture surface appeared consistent with an overstress failure. The right main 
landing gear remained extended and appeared intact. The nose landing gear doors, lower 
engine cowling, and both wings were damaged. The nose landing gear strut, wheel assembly, 
support structure, extension/retraction linkage and hydraulic actuator appeared to be intact. 
The actuator did not exhibit any evidence of leakage.
Normal extension and retraction of the nose landing gear is provided by a hydraulic actuator. 
Landing gear extension begins when the pilot moves the cockpit landing gear handle to the 
down position, which directs hydraulic fluid to the extension side of the actuators. A pressure 
switch is incorporated into the system in order to maintain hydraulic system pressure. Once 
the nose landing gear is fully extended, the over-center linkage is intended to react the 
operating loads and to keep the nose landing gear in the down position until retraction is 
commanded by the pilot. Within its capability, the hydraulic actuator will resist movement of 
the over-center linkage provided the hydraulic system is operating normally. The emergency 
extension gas strut will also provide this function, within the limits of its capability.
