Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
San Luis Obispo, CA
Accident Number:
WPR11FA120
Date & Time:
02/03/2011, 0945 PST 
Registration:
N47503
Aircraft:
AERONCA O-58C
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane was in cruise flight at 3,500 feet mean sea level when the engine lost power. The 
pilot restarted the engine, and it ran for about 20 seconds before again losing power. He 
applied carburetor heat, but the cycle of losing power and restarting for a few seconds occurred 
several times. The pilot attempted to land in a field, but collided with trees at the edge of the 
field. There was no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction found during a postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine. The meteorological conditions at the time of the 
accident were conductive to serious carburetor icing at cruise power. Although the pilot applied 
carburetor heat after the initial power loss, the engine likely did not run long enough to melt 
the ice and restore power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s delay in using carburetor heat, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to an 
encounter with carburetor icing conditions.
Findings
Aircraft
Intake anti-ice, deice - Not used/operated (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Delayed action - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Contributed to outcome (Cause)
Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome
Page 2 of 5WPR11FA120
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 3, 2011, about 0945 Pacific standard time, an Aeronca 0-58C, N47503, collided 
with trees near San Luis Obispo, California. The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The private pilot sustained 
minor injuries, and one passenger sustained fatal injuries; the airplane sustained substantial 
damage to the fuselage and wings. The cross-country personal flight departed Paso Robles, 
California, about 0920, with a planned destination of Oceano, California. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector interviewed the pilot, and provided the 
following information. The pilot stated that the airplane was in cruise flight at 3,500 feet mean 
sea level (msl). The engine started to cough and lose power. He attempted to restart the engine, 
and it ran for about 20 seconds. He then applied carburetor heat, but the cycle of losing power 
and restarting for a few seconds occurred several times. The pilot attempted to land in a field, 
but collided with trees at the edge of the field.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot reported that he held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine 
land. He was issued a third-class medical certificate on July 19, 2010, with the limitation that 
he must wear corrective lenses.
The pilot reported that he had a total flight time of 315 hours. He logged 4.1 hours in the last 90 
days, and 0.5 in the last 30 days. He stated that he had 20 hours in this make and model, and 
completed a biennial flight review on September 3, 2010.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was an Aeronca O-58C (L-3B), serial number 43-8212. The owner reported that 
the airplane had a total airframe time of 910 hours. It had an annual inspection on April 30, 
2010.
The engine was a Continental Motors A-65-8, serial number 5292968.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The closest official weather observation station was San Luis Obispo, California (KSBP), which 
was 4 nautical miles (nm) southeast of the accident site. The elevation of the weather 
observation station was 212 feet msl.
An aviation routine weather report (METAR) for KSBP was issued at 0956 PST. It stated: wind 
calm; visibility 10 miles; sky clear; temperature 9/48 degrees Celsius/Fahrenheit; dew point 
4/39 degrees Celsius/Fahrenheit; altimeter 30.48 inches of mercury; relative humidity 71 
percent.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Examination of the airframe and engine was conducted on February 8, 2011, at the facilities of 
Aircraft Recovery Services, Pearblossom, California. No evidence of preimpact mechanical 
malfunction was noted during the examination of the airframe and engine. Detailed 
examination notes are in the public docket.
Page 3 of 5WPR11FA120
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA Aircraft Certification Service published Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin 
(SAIB) CE-09-35 on June 30, 2009, to inform pilots of the potential hazards associated with 
carburetor icing.
The SAIB noted that carburetor icing doesn™t just occur in freezing conditions; it can occur at 
temperatures well above freezing temperatures when there is visible moisture or high 
humidity. It states that icing can occur in the carburetor at temperatures above freezing. 
Because vaporization of fuel, combined with the expansion of air as it flows through the 
carburetor (the venturi effect) causes sudden cooling, a significant amount of ice can build up 
within a fraction of a second. The SAIB contains a graph that illustrates the probability of 
carburetor icing for various temperature and relative humidity conditions.
The conditions for this accident fell within the range of serious icing at cruise power.
The FAA™s Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge states that application of carburetor heat will 
cause a further reduction in power, and possibly engine roughness as melted ice goes through 
the engine. It states that these symptoms can last from 30 seconds to several minutes, 
depending on the severity of the icing.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private; Sport Pilot
Age:
66, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/19/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/03/2010
Flight Time:
313 hours (Total, all aircraft), 20 hours (Total, this make and model), 205 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5WPR11FA120
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AERONCA
Registration:
N47503
Model/Series:
O-58C 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
43-8212
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/30/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1260 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 
Airframe Total Time:
910 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
Jeffrey B Wells
Rated Power:
Operator:
Jeffrey B Wells
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSBP, 212 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0956 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
150°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.48 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Paso Robles, CA 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Oceano, CA 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0920 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
35.312778, -120.675000 (est)
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard D Plagens
Adopted Date:
05/03/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Wilbert Robinson; FAA FSDO; San Jose, CA
Andrew Swick; Teledyne Continental Motors; Sacramento, CA
Publish Date:
05/03/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=78275
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
