National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Livermore, CA
Accident Number: WPR15FA174
Date & Time: 06/01/2015, 2058 PDT
Registration: N1348C
Aircraft: PIPER PA 22-135
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airline transport pilot departed on a local night flight.
Shortly after takeoff, he reported a control difficulty to air traffic control tower personnel; he stated that he was going to make a circle, and troubleshoot the issue.
There were no further transmissions from the pilot.
A witness about 1/2 mile away from the airport said that the airplane caught his attention when he heard the engine cut out.
He looked up, but couldn't see the airplane as it was dusk.
He finally saw two outboard lights, one on each wing, and realized that the airplane was in a nose dive.
According to the witness, it was not spinning, and the engine sounded like it was at full throttle.
Radar data indicated that the airplane departed about on runway heading, and about 2 minutes into the flight it began a 180° turn.
The airplane lost about 1,100 ft of altitude in 18 seconds during the turn.
The radar track continued in a straight line until ground impact.
Postaccident examination revealed no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation of the airframe or engine or would have caused a control difficulty.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of control for reasons that could not be determined, because examination of the airframe and engine revealed no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
The airline transport pilot sustained fatal injuries, and the airplane was destroyed.
The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
The local personal flight departed Livermore at 2052.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
Shortly after takeoff, the pilot reported a control difficulty to air traffic control tower personnel; he stated that he was going to make a circle, and troubleshoot the issue.
There were no further transmissions from the pilot.
A witness about 1/2 mile away from the airport said that the airplane caught his attention when he heard the engine "cut out."
He looked up, but couldn't see the airplane as it was dusk.
He then heard the engine "revving to a higher rpm like a crop duster swooping down."
He heard the engine sputter twice, and then increase rpm again.
He finally saw two outboard lights, one on each wing, and realized that the airplane was in a nose dive.
According to the witness, it was not spinning, and the engine sounded like it was at full throttle.
A plot of recorded radar data indicated that the airplane climbed about on the runway heading to a maximum mode C reported altitude of 3,100 ft mean sea level.
About 2 minutes into the flight, the airplane made a 180° left turn, and lost 1,100 ft of altitude in 18 seconds.
The radar track continued in a straight line until it ended; the total duration of the flight was 2 minutes 48 seconds.
The pages from the previous 2 years totaled over 49 hours with none listed in the accident make and model.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information Aircraft Make: PIPER Registration: N1348C Model/Series: PA 22-135 Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: 1953 Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Normal Serial Number: 22-1141 Landing Gear Type: Tailwheel Seats: Date/Type of Last Inspection: 06/01/2014, Annual Certified Max Gross Wt.
The first identified point of ground contact was a series of ground scars consistent with the left and right main landing gear, gear legs, engine, cowling, left and right wing lift struts, and wings.
A propeller blade had separated about 6 inches from the hub along an angular plane.
The rest of the propeller was in the principal impact crater; it was not charred.
The main wreckage was burned, and was in the middle of a charred area.
All of the airplane's fabric covering was consumed by fire.
The debris path was about 108 ft long, and oriented on a 318° magnetic heading.
All major structural components of the airplane were located at the accident site.
Further examination of an aileron cable distortion by the NTSB Office of Research and Engineering Materials Laboratory determined that the cable distortion was a result of overload conditions.
The postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
Medical And Pathological Information The Alameda County Coroner completed an autopsy on the pilot, and determined that the cause of death was blunt force trauma.
The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory performed toxicological testing of specimens of the pilot, which were negative for volatiles and tested drugs.
The laboratory did not perform tests for carbon monoxide or cyanide.
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Howard D Plagens Adopted Date: 07/20/2017 Additional Participating Persons: David Jensen; Oakland; Oakland, CA Charles Little; Piper Aircraft Inc; Vero Beach, FL Mark Platt; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA Publish Date: 07/20/2017 Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91284
