National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Grove Hill, AL
Accident Number: ERA15LA232
Date & Time: 06/01/2015, 1730 CDT
Registration: N29JR
Aircraft: BEECH A23 24
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that, during the long cross-country flight, he stopped at an intermediate airport and added 30 gallons of fuel to the airplane.
About 15 minutes after departure from that airport and while the airplane was cruising at 3,500 ft, the engine lost all power.
The pilot attempted to restart the engine using the emergency procedures but was unsuccessful.
He then chose a field for an emergency landing.
During the landing on rough terrain, the nose landing gear collapsed.
Examination of the wreckage revealed that each wing fuel tank was about half full, and fuel drained from the fuel sump did not contain any visible contamination.
Subsequent engine examination revealed no preimpact mechanical malfunctions, and the engine was test run successfully.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because engine examination and testing did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
The airline transport pilot and passenger were not injured.
The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the planned flight to Jack Edward Airport (JKA), Gulf Shores, Alabama.
The flight originated from Demopolis Regional Airport (DYA), Demopolis, Alabama, about 1715.
The pilot stated that during a cross-country flight, he stopped at DYA and added 30 gallons of fuel.
About 15 minutes after departure, while cruising at 3,500 feet, the engine lost all power.
The pilot utilized emergency procedures to restart the engine, but was unsuccessful.
He then selected a field for an emergency landing due to utility wires surrounding the adjacent roads.
The pilot also noted that there was an airport he had recently flown over, but it was behind him and he could not locate it.
As such, he felt that the field was the best option for the forced landing.
The touchdown was normal, but the field included rough terrain, which resulted in the nosegear collapsing before the airplane came to rest upright.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that an engine mount and underside fuselage sustained damage.
The inspector noted that each wing fuel tank was approximately half-full.
He drained fuel from the fuel sump and it did not contain any visible contamination.
Due to the disposition of the wreckage, the inspector was not able to examine the engine.
Subsequently, when a recovery company lifted the airplane from the field, the recovery crew was able to rotate the propeller and confirm continuity to the rear accessory section of the engine, with the sound of the magneto impulse coupling activating.
They also attained thumb compression on each cylinder.
The engine was later test-run at the recovery facility under the supervision of an NTSB investigator.
Fuel was plumbed to the fuel pump, the battery was replaced, and the exhaust pipe was manually opened to correct impact damage.
The engine then started and ran continuously at settings between idle and 1,700 rpm, where a successful magneto check was performed.
Due to vibration as a result of impact damage, a high power setting was not attempted.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91290
