National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Darby, MT
Accident Number: WPR15LA036
Date & Time: 11/07/2014, 0900 MST
Registration: N84462
Aircraft: CHAMPION 7AC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The commercial pilot reported that he was attempting to land the light sport airplane on a private grass airstrip surrounded by mountainous terrain.
While maneuvering for landing, the airplane suddenly entered into a steep, right-wing-low bank.
The wings then leveled momentarily before the airplane impacted the ground.
The passenger in the rear seat of the airplane stated that he felt a downdraft or windshear just prior to impact.
A post-accident examination of the airplane found no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
The pilot reported the wind as light and variable with 5-10 knot gusts; however, he stated that during previous flights in the area, he experienced unexpected severe gusts and terrain- induced turbulence, followed by complete calm.
The airplane was not equipped with a stall warning system or flaps.
Since the airplane was maneuvering for landing approach at low airspeed, a sudden gust of wind or shift in wind speed or direction could have resulted in a rapid loss of airspeed, followed by an aerodynamic stall as the airplane reached its critical angle-of-attack.
Due to the airplane's low altitude, the pilot likely did not have sufficient time to recover from the stalled condition prior to impacting terrain.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain airspeed while maneuvering in gusting wind conditions, which resulted in the airplane exceeding its critical angle of attack and experiencing an aerodynamic stall.
The commercial pilot and single passenger were seriously injured, and the airplane was substantially damaged.
The airplane was registered to the pilot and operated under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight, and no flight plan had been filed.
According to the pilot he was attempting to land on a private grass airstrip in a farm field surrounded by mountainous terrain when the accident occurred.
Witnesses observed the airplane descending at an estimated 90 degree right-wing-low bank angle; the wings then leveled before impacting the ground.
The pilot stated that due to injuries he could not recall all the events leading up to the accident; however he recalled observing a TV interview of a witness after the accident, in which the witness stated that it was windy at the time of the accident.
The nearest weather reporting station was 40 nautical miles north of the accident site and reported wind from 230 degrees at 4 knots.
The pilot reported light and variable winds with 5-10 knot gusts at the time of the accident; however he stated that he has experienced unexpected severe gusts and terrain induced turbulence pass through the area momentarily followed by complete calm.
The pilot rated passenger in the rear seat recalled that he felt what he believed to be wind shear or a down draft before impact.
Post-accident examination of the airplane did not reveal any failures or malfunctions with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
Further examination revealed that an undetermined amount of aviation fuel was recovered from the fuel system.
It was also noted that the airplane was not equipped with flaps or a stall warning system.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90370
