National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Jacksonville, OR
Accident Number: WPR15LA032
Date & Time: 11/02/2014, 1456 PST
Registration: N1593M
Aircraft: CESSNA T210M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that, during cruise flight, the engine began running roughly with smoke developing inside the cabin, followed by oil covering the windshield.
The pilot stated that the engine continued to run and that his attempts to increase the power setting resulted in severe shaking and more smoke.
The pilot initiated a forced landing in a nearby field.
During the landing roll, the nosewheel landing gear dug into mud, and the airplane subsequently nosed over.
Postaccident examination of the engine revealed that the Nos.
5 and 6 connecting rods were liberated from the crankshaft.
The No.
6 connecting rod was thermally discolored and fractured, which was likely caused by oil starvation to the No.
6 connecting rod journal and bearing.
The No.
5 connecting rod was also fractured; however, the connecting rod and bearing did not exhibit thermal discoloration or distress; the fracture likely resulted due to damage sustained when the No.
6 connecting rod fractured.
The Nos.
1 and 2 connecting rods also exhibited thermal discoloration and distress, which likely resulted from the engine™s continued operation after the liberation of the No.
6 connecting rod.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power during cruise flight due to the failure of the No.
6 connecting rod, which resulted from oil starvation.
The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the personal flight.
The cross-country flight originated from Grants Pass, Oregon, with an intended destination of Long Beach, California.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in- charge (IIC), the pilot reported that during cruise flight at an altitude of about 12,900 feet mean sea level, the engine began to run rough with smoke developing inside the cabin, followed by oil covering the windshield.
The pilot stated that he observed the oil pressure gauge indicating 0, however, the engine continued to run, and that any attempt to increase the power setting resulted in severe shaking and smoke.
The pilot initiated a forced landing in a nearby field.
During the landing roll, the nosewheel landing gear dug into the mud, and the airplane subsequently nosed over.
Examination of the airplane by local law enforcement revealed that the right wing at the flap aileron junction was bent downward about 45 degrees.
Oil was observed on the windshield and surrounding the fuselage area.
The wreckage was recovered to a secure location for further examination.
The engine was removed from the airframe and sent to the facilities of Continental Motors, Inc., Mobile, Alabama, for further examination.
The engine was examined on March 3, 2015, by representatives from Continental Motors under the supervision of the NTSB IIC.
The examination revealed a large hole on the top left side of the crankcase over the number 6 cylinder, and a smaller hole on the top right side of the crankcase over the number 5 cylinder.
Visual inspection through each hole revealed that the number 5 and number 6 connecting rods were liberated from the connecting rod journals.
The engine was subsequently disassembled and inspected.
The crankcase halves remained secured to each other.
The main bearing saddles for the number 1 through number 3 bearings did not display any anomalies.
The number 4 and number 5 bearing saddles displayed displaced material with the number 5 being the worst.
In addition, the oil feed hole for the number 5 bearing was obstructed by displaced saddle material.
The oil galleys on the cylinder 2, 4, and 6 side of the crankcase were free of debris, with the exception the hole at the number 5 main bearing.
The number 1 and 2 main bearings displayed normal wear and a few score marks consistent with hard-particle-passage.
There was no sign of lock tab movement or lock slot elongation.
The number 3 main bearing displayed wear and scoring that removed the babbit layer and displayed the copper underlay.
There was no sign of lock tab movement or lock slot elongation.
The number 4 main bearing was discolored black, heavily worn, and displaced in the saddle such that the bearing split line did not match up with the case half split line.
There was no evidence of lateral lock slot elongation.
The oil feed to the backside of the number 4 bearing was unobstructed.
The number 5 main bearing was discolored black, heavily worn, and displaced in the saddle such that the bearing split line did not match up with the case half split line.
There was no evidence of lateral lock slot elongation.
The oil feed to the backside of the number 5 bearing was obstructed by displaced saddle material.
The crankshaft remained intact but displayed thermal distress at the number 1, number 2, and the number 6 connecting rod journals.
The number 6 connecting rod journal was also mechanically damaged and the oil feed hole was no longer visible due to the displaced material.
Additionally, the crankshaft's number 4 and number 5 main bearing journals displayed black thermal discoloration, along with material displacement at the number 5 bearing journal.
All of the crankshaft oil tubes were clear of debris with the exception of the number 6 connecting rod journal, which was mechanically damaged.
The number 1 connecting rod remained secured to the crankshaft and the piston pin; however, it displayed thermal discoloration and evidence of heat distress associated with a lack of lubrication.
The oil feed to the number 1 bearing was clear of debris.
The connecting rod bearing displayed evidence of thermal discoloration and heat distress associated with a lack of lubrication.
The number 2 connecting rod remained secured to the crankshaft and the piston pin; however, it displayed thermal discoloration and evidence of heat distress associated with a lack of lubrication.
The oil feed to the number 2 bearing was clear of debris.
The oil feed to the number 2 bearing was clear of debris.
The bearing displayed evidence of thermal discoloration and heat distress associated with a lack of lubrication.
The number 3 connecting rod remained secured to the crankshaft and piston pin.
There were no signs of operational distress with the connecting rod.
The oil feed to the number 3 bearing was clear of debris.
The connecting rod bearing displayed some wear, but did not show the signs of thermal distress or lack of lubrication as the others.
The number 4 connecting rod remained secured to the crankshaft and piston pin.
There were no signs of operational distress with the connecting rod.
The oil feed to the number 4 bearing was clear of debris.
The connecting rod bearing displayed some wear, but did not show the signs of thermal distress or lack of lubrication as the others.
The number 5 connecting rod was fractured into four pieces, none of which displayed thermal discoloration; however, mechanical damage was evident on all of the components.
The piston end of the connecting rod remained attached to the piston pin.
The oil feed to the number 5 bearing was clear of debris.
The number 5 connecting rod bearing was liberated along with the fractured connecting rod; however, the two bearing halves were located (one in the sump and one found outside the engine).
The bearing was mechanically damaged but there was little-to- no thermal distress noted on the bearing.
The number 6 connecting rod was fractured into five pieces, and all displayed thermal discoloration and mechanical damage.
The piston end of the connecting rod remained attached to the piston pin.
The oil feed to the number 6 bearing was mechanically damaged at the number 6 connecting rod journal; however, it was unobstructed at the number 4 main journal end.
Remnants of the connecting rod bearing were found in the oil sump.
The remnants were thermally discolored and distorted.
The internal configuration of two engine crankshaft oil tube assemblies for the number 5 and 6 connecting rods was documented using radiographic images that were collected on May 4 and 5, 2015, in Chicago, Illinois.
A total of 360 computed tomography (CT) slice images were examined, processed, and analyzed by the NTSB to evaluate the component.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90347
