Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
TUCSON, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX97LA031
Date & Time:
11/01/1996, 1743 MST 
Registration:
N95HS
Aircraft:
Rainey RANS S-12
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The 2 seat, ultralight type, homebuilt aircraft was observed climbing out after takeoff toward 
the area of the accident site. Ground witnesses stated that they heard the high pitched hum of 
the engine, which went completely silent and was followed by a bang or thud; however, they 
did not see the aircraft crash. An FAA inspector examined the aircraft and reported that it 
impacted the ground in a near vertical nose down descent and that the empennage was 
torsionally twisted. No broken or disturbed vegetation, or other ground scars were observed 
beyond the immediate area of the wreckage. No preimpact mechanical problem was noted with 
the airframe or flight control system. The engine was examined by a power plant mechanic, 
who was familiar with the Rotax engine. He reported that both spark plugs had no spark due to 
a broken wire in the ignition coil. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
a broken wire in the ignition coil, which resulted in a loss of engine power; and failure of the 
pilot to maintain adequate airspeed, which resulted in a stall/spin and uncontrolled collision 
with the terrain. 
Page 2 of 6LAX97LA031
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CLIMB - TO CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) IGNITION SYSTEM,IGNITION COIL - FAILURE,TOTAL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 6LAX97LA031
Factual Information
 On November 1, 1996, about 1743 hours mountain standard time, a homebuilt experimental 
Rainey Rans S-12, N95HS, collided with the ground following an in-flight loss of control near 
Tucson, Arizona.  The aircraft was owned and operated by the pilot and was on a local area 
personal flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was 
filed.  The aircraft was destroyed in the ground collision sequence.  The certificated private 
pilot and the one private pilot passenger onboard sustained fatal injuries.  The flight originated 
from Tyler Field, a private ultralight airpark in Marana, Arizona, at 1720.
There were no witnesses to the accident.  The aircraft was observed climbing out after takeoff 
toward the area of the accident site.  Another ultralight pilot flying in the area observed the 
crashed aircraft on the desert floor and reported the event to 911.  One witness stated that the 
ultralight flew over him and another person and, "as we were talking you hear the high pitched 
hum of its motor going behind us.  Then it went completely silent and then we heard a bang or 
thud.  I thought that it had just went over the hill and backfired or something."
Another witness who arrived on scene stated that the ". . . engine had stopped in flight.  The 
condition of the propeller blades were as such as the blades broke over the motor.  If the engine 
had been running on impact, the blades would have been sheared off."
In one statement made to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector, 
the individual stated that ". . . this pilot liked to fly high and he was in a hurry to get airborne 
before the sun set."  The FAA inspector further stated in his report that "another pilot did tell 
me that this particular aircraft has a higher stall speed [than] most other ultra lights.  Also two 
stoke Rotax engines can cold seize in a long climb."  
Both the pilot and the pilot-rated passenger had access to the flight controls.  According to 
responding law enforcement personnel, the pilot/owner was found in the pilot's seat and the 
passenger occupied the normal passenger station.  No definitive pathological evidence was 
found to make a determination of which pilot was at the controls of the aircraft at the time of 
impact.
An FAA airworthiness inspector from the Scottsdale, Arizona, Flight Standards District Office 
responded to the accident site and examined the aircraft.  The inspector reported that the 
aircraft impacted the ground in a near vertical nose down descent, and that the empennage was 
torsionally twisted.  No broken or disturbed vegetation, or other ground scars were observed 
beyond the immediate area of the wreckage.  The aircraft was examined with no abnormal 
conditions noted with the airframe control system or the engine.
Following recovery of the aircraft the engine was examined by a power plant mechanic familiar 
with the Rotax engine.  He reported that both spark plugs had no spark due to a broken wire in 
the ignition coil.
Page 4 of 6LAX97LA031
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/30/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
280 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Rainey
Registration:
N95HS
Model/Series:
RANS S-12 RANS S-12
Aircraft Category:
Ultralight
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
1090026
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
960 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
582
Registered Owner:
HUGH S. RAINEY
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
HUGH S. RAINEY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX97LA031
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TUS, 2641 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
30 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1650 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
115°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (0AZ1)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1720 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JEFF         RICH
Adopted Date:
08/21/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
BRUCE   BESSETTE; SCOTTSDALE, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX97LA031
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
