Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
LAKE HAVASU, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX97LA033
Date & Time:
11/01/1996, 2000 MST 
Registration:
N2825V
Aircraft:
Cessna 150M
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The aircraft was fully serviced with 22.5 gallons of fuel before flight, and the pilot calculated 
that slightly less than 17 gallons would be needed. Approaching the destination, the pilot began 
a power-on, en route, cruise descent at 200 feet per minute. Shortly thereafter, the engine rpm 
'dropped slightly for 4-5 seconds,' and then the enigne lost power. The pilot said he was unable 
to restart the engine, and he prepared for a night forced landing in the desert. Subsequently, 
the aircraft hit a hillside in a nose high landing attitude, and the nose gear broke off. As the 
pilot was securing the aircraft, he observed fire in the engine compartment. Subsequently, a 
postcrash fire consumed the aircraft. During examination of the engine by an FAA 
airworthiness inspector, no preimpact discrepancy was identified. According to a current 
weather observation, the sky was clear, the temperature was 67 degrees, and the dew point was 
41 degrees. Review of a carburetor icing probability chart showed moderate icing at cruise 
power and serious icing at glide power. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
carburetor ice, and failure of the pilot to use carburetor heat, which resulted in loss of engine 
power.  Factors relating to the accident were: carburetor icing conditions, darkness, and the 
lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing. 
Page 2 of 6LAX97LA033
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - NORMAL
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - ICE
3. (C) CARBURETOR HEAT - NOT USED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
4. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
5. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
6. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY
Page 3 of 6LAX97LA033
Factual Information
 On November 1, 1996, at 2000 hours mountain standard time, a Cessna 150M, N2825V, 
collided with hilly desert terrain during a night forced landing attempt near Lake Havasu, 
Arizona.  The forced landing was precipitated by a loss of engine power as the aircraft was in an 
en route descent for landing at the Lake Havasu airport.  The aircraft was owned and operated 
by the certificated commercial pilot and was on a personal cross-country flight.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.  The aircraft was 
destroyed in the collision sequence and postcrash fire.  The pilot was not injured.  The flight 
originated at Camarillo, California, on the day of the accident at 1525 Pacific standard time as a 
non-stop flight to Lake Havasu.
The pilot stated in his written report that "I filled the oil tank to capacity (6 qts.) and taxied to 
the self service fuel island where I topped the fuel tanks" prior to departure from Camarillo.  "I 
know the tanks would hold no more[,] because I overflowed both tanks and had to do a slight 
clean-up on the top of the wings."  
The pilot stated that he used the flight manual performance charts to calculate a predicted fuel 
burn of 4.3 gallons per hour for the planned 3 hours 30 minutes en route leg of the flight to 
Lake Havasu.  The en route leg was to be flown at 2400 rpm at 5,500 feet msl.  The total 
estimated fuel burn of slightly less than 17 gallons also included 1.6 gallons of fuel needed for 
takeoff and climb operations.  The pilot indicated that his fuel calculations factored in a 
forecasted 15 to 20 knot quartering headwind along his route of flight.  Based upon an 
estimated total fuel burn of 17 gallons out of 22.5 gallons of fuel available, the pilot reported 
that "I had a reserve of 5 1/2 [gallons,] or almost an hour and a half of flight time."
The pilot reported that after departure from Camarillo, "I used the up drafts . . . to climb 600 - 
700 feet a minute . . . the rest of the climb and the flight were uneventful, I adjusted the 
mixture control for best rpm per the operating handbook."  The pilot reported that later in the 
trip, "I evaluated my flight and determined everything was going exactly as planned."  As the 
aircraft flew over the Needles, California, airport, the pilot noticed that the fuel gage on the left 
fuel tank "had the needle on the empty mark and the gage on the right read over 1/4 full."  At 
that point, the pilot reviewed the flight plan "and determined that I should have my planned 
reserve left, and the fuel island was closed at Needles airport so I continued to the Havasu 
airport."  
As the aircraft neared the Lake Havasu airport, the pilot began a power on en route cruise 
descent at 200 feet per minute.  Shortly thereafter, the engine rpm "dropped slightly for 4-5 
seconds and then stopped.  The engine was rotating but was not pulling.  I went to best glide 
speed of 70 mph and pulled the [carburetor] heat out.  I then performed the emergency 
checklist."  The pilot said he was unable to restart the engine and set up for a night forced 
landing in the desert.  He stated that he could not see terrain features until the aircraft was 
very near the surface.  In the aircraft landing light illumination area, he observed that the 
aircraft was heading for a hill and used the aircraft speed energy to balloon over the hill.  
Another hill was behind the first one and the aircraft hit the hillside in a nose high landing 
attitude and the nose gear broke off.  As the pilot was securing the aircraft he observed fire in 
the engine compartment and left the aircraft.  The postcrash fire consumed the aircraft.
The pilot reported that he just purchased the aircraft, which had been largely inactive for 2 
years while sitting on an airport ramp near the ocean.  Six months and 34 flight hours had 
Page 4 of 6LAX97LA033
elapsed since the last annual inspection.  Additionally, the pilot reported that for years, he has 
owned a Cessna 172 with a Lycoming engine, which traditionally has not required the use of 
carburetor heat.
The engine was examined after recovery by an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
airworthiness inspector from the Scottsdale, Arizona, Flight Standards District Office with 
technical assistance provided by a representative from Teledyne Continental Motors.  No 
preimpact discrepancies were identified during the examination.  Reports from both 
individuals are attached.
According to a National Weather Service observation taken at approximately the same time as 
the accident occurred, the sky was clear, the temperature was 67degrees Fahrenheit, and the 
dew point 41 degrees Fahrenheit.  Review of a carburetor icing probability chart revealed that 
the temperature/dew point was in a range of the graph annotated "moderate icing cruise power 
--- serious icing glide power."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/05/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2670 hours (Total, all aircraft), 60 hours (Total, this make and model), 2583 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 130 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 46 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX97LA033
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N2825V
Model/Series:
150M 150M
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
15076292
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/17/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
30 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3667 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
JEROME C. BURGE
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
JEROME C. BURGE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KIF, 781 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1850 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
315°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 28 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
CAMARILLO, CA (CMA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
, AZ (HII)
Type of Clearance:
VFR on top
Departure Time:
1525 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
LAKE HAVASU CITY (HII)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6LAX97LA033
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JEFF         RICH
Adopted Date:
08/21/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
BRUCE   BESSETTE; SCOTTSDALE, AZ
MICHAEL J GRIMES; LANCASTER, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
