Page 1 of 11
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
HALAWA, HI
Accident Number:
LAX97FA032
Date & Time:
11/01/1996, 1907 HST 
Registration:
N1701K
Aircraft:
Piper PA-34-200
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
5 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The noninstrument-rated commercial pilot departed in VFR conditions at twilight. En route, 
the pilot encountered marginal VFR conditions. Radar data showed that the aircraft made a 
gradual left turn toward rising terrain, as it entered an area of poor weather. Subsequently, it 
flew into rising wooded terrain at an elevation of about 1,600 feet, near the top of a 
mountainous ridge. Witnesses in a sparsely inhabited rural area located about 3 miles from the 
accident site reported that the light condition was 'pitch black,' when the aircraft flew low over 
their location, and that instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed. 'Torrential' 
rains, which had just ended at their location, continued in the area where the aircraft impacted 
terrain. No preaccident mechanical malfunction of the aircraft was found. Another pilot, who 
had flown the aircraft recently, stated that the heading indicator would precess 30 degrees in 
10 minutes. The pilot's flight instructor said that he (the pilot) was working toward an 
instrument rating, but was not yet qualified to fly by reference to instruments. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's inadvertent VFR flight into instrument meteorological conditions (IMC), and his 
failure to maintain sufficient clearance and/or altitude from mountainous terrain.  Factors 
related to the accident were: darkness, adverse weather conditions, and mountainous terrain. 
Page 2 of 11LAX97FA032
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
2. WEATHER CONDITION - OBSCURATION
3. WEATHER CONDITION - RAIN
4. (C) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (F) LACK OF TOTAL INSTRUMENT TIME - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
6. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY
7. (C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 11LAX97FA032
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 1, 1996, at 1907 hours Hawaiian standard time, a Piper PA-34-200, N1701K, 
collided with mountainous terrain while in cruise flight 2 miles west of Halawa, Hawaii, on the 
island of Molokai.  The aircraft departed Molokai Airport, Kaunakakai, on the island of 
Molokai, about 1845 en route to Kahului Airport, on the island of Maui.  The aircraft was 
destroyed and the non instrument rated commercial pilot and four passengers were fatally 
injured.  Witnesses near the accident site reported that instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed.
The flight originated earlier in the day at Kahului for the purpose of transporting five members 
of the Maui County Democratic Party to a political rally on Molokai, and arrived in Molokai 
about 1600.  The pilot was the Co-Chairman of the Maui County Democratic Party.  
According to newspaper accounts, the group was upbeat about prospects for the election 
coming in 4 days.  According to the other co-chairperson, however, about 1830 the pilot 
expressed concern about the weather and expressed his desire to leave on the return flight.  She 
described him as seemingly apprehensive.  Another person at the rally drove the five people 
back to the airport, dropped them off at about 1845, and left as they were walking to the plane.  
That person said that the sun had set but that there was still light in the sky, and that the 
ground was wet but it was not raining.  The tower closed at 1830 and there are no known 
observers to the departure.
Recorded CDR radar data from Honolulu Combined En route Radar and Approach (CERAP) 
shows a VFR aircraft departing Molokai at 1849 and proceeding east-bound along the south 
shore of Molokai into the Pailolo Channel, which separates Molokai from Maui.  Over the 
channel, the target made a wide left turn back (westbound) toward the east end of Molokai 
until radar contact is lost near the accident site at 1905.  There is a 2 minute and 22 second 
interruption in radar data starting at 1859:12 when the aircraft is about 5 miles west of 
Honokahua, on Maui.  The track resumes at 1901:34 when the aircraft is 4 miles northwest of 
Nakalele Point, tracking northeast, and is turning westbound toward Molokai.  While 
eastbound along the south shore of Molokai and in the Pailolo Channel, the aircraft's mode C 
altitude data indicates approximately 1,700 feet with a brief climb to 2,100 feet.  When radar 
tracking is resumed 4 miles northwest of Nakalele Point after the interruption in radar data, 
the aircraft's mode C altitude is 1,600 feet.  As the aircraft turns left and tracks westbound the 
altitude reaches a minimum of 900 feet as the aircraft crosses the eastern shoreline of Molokai 
after which it again climbed, reaching 1,700 feet approximately at the accident site. 
Review of the recorded air-ground communications tapes at the Honolulu CERAP disclosed 
that the pilot contacted Maui Approach Control at 1902:15 and reported "inbound for landing," 
over Nakalele Point, "with the information."  The controller issued a discrete transponder code 
of 1737.  At 1904:28, the controller instructed the pilot to report Nakalele Point.  The pilot 
asked the controller to repeat the instruction, which the controller did, without 
acknowledgment from the pilot.  
The tapes revealed that at 1905:02 the pilot acknowledged a heading issued to another aircraft.  
The controller issued a heading of 270 degrees to Aloha 161 at 1904:53, and Aloha 161 read 
back the heading at 1904:59.  At 1905:02, the pilot of the accident aircraft read back the 270-
Page 4 of 11LAX97FA032
degree heading assignment.  At 1905:03, the controller clarified that the 270-degree heading 
was for Aloha 161, and again instructed the pilot of  the accident aircraft to report Nakalele 
Point.  
At 1905:10, the pilot radioed that he could not see Nakalele Point.  The controller replied, "say 
again, your radio is broken and unreadable.  You can't see Nakalele Point?"  At 1905:20, the 
pilot again transmitted that he was unable to see Nakalele Point.  Radar data indicates that at 
this time the aircraft was westbound, approximately 1 mile from the accident site, and that 
Nakalele Point was at the pilot's 6 o'clock position about 12 miles behind him.  At 1905:22, the 
controller instructed the pilot to report 10 miles northwest of the airport.
At 1905:39, the controller radioed the aircraft was in radar contact 3 miles west of Cape 
Halawa, going westbound.  The controller asked, "you going to Honolulu?"  There was no 
further radio communication from the aircraft.   
There were seven witnesses on the eastern end of Molokai who saw the lights of the aircraft 
and/or heard the aircraft as it proceeded westbound and passed over their locations.
According to the Maui Police Department Report of the accident, two Molokai residents were 
fishing on the east coastline of the island and heard the airplane fly overhead at a low altitude 
from east to west on the evening of the accident.  They reported that it was dark at the time, 
raining heavily, and that there was thunder.
Another person, a former airline mechanic, observed the aircraft from the veranda of his 
weekend home, which is near sea level on the north side of Honouliwai Bay (east end of 
Molokai).  His friend called him outside to see a low flying aircraft.  By the time he got out on  
the veranda, the airplane had flown over his house from east to west at a 400 to 500 feet 
altitude, and was climbing on a westerly heading into rising terrain.  The engines sounded 
normal to him.  It had rained earlier, but at the time it was drizzling under an overcast cloud 
layer.  He stated that up the mountain in the area into which the aircraft climbed, it was very 
dark and still raining heavily.  He could see from his house across the channel to Maui and 
could see the beacon of Kahului Airport.
Two witnesses who were inside their residence at the Puu O Hoku Ranch reported that the 
aircraft passed over their position at a low altitude.  One of them was talking on the telephone 
and reported that the engine noise interrupted her ability to hear the conversation.  Both 
reported that the engines sounded smooth and powerful, and that the aircraft must have been 
going slow because it didn't pass quickly.  They reported that conditions outside were very dark 
with very low clouds and that a "torrential" rain had just ended.
Two other witnesses observed the aircraft while outside their residence, which is about 1/4 
mile west of the previous witnesses at a slightly higher elevation.  One of these witnesses was 
the ranch manager who reported that intense rain had stopped about 5 minutes prior, and that 
his rain gauge showed that 1.8 inches of rain had fallen at that location in the previous 45 
minutes.  These witnesses also reported that it was very dark and that the ceiling was less than 
1,000 feet and the visibility about 1/8 mile in fog and drizzle.  They observed the aircraft turn 
to pass near the ranch which has the only lights in the area.  The ranch manager said that he 
was attracted to the aircraft by the loud, "throaty" engine sound, and that he observed the 
aircraft's position and strobe lights as it passed over his position.  The location where they 
observed the aircraft from is at latitude 21 degrees 08.56 minutes north, and longitude 156 
degrees 44.34 minutes west (GPS).  The ranch manager estimated the aircraft's altitude to be 
Page 5 of 11LAX97FA032
"about 2 pine trees" (approximately 200 feet agl).
The pilot of another aircraft, who was chartered to transport other people to the same political 
function on Molokai, heard the pilot on the radio in the minutes before the accident.  This pilot 
had already brought one group of people from Molokai to Kahului and was en route back to 
Molokai to pick up a second group.  After departure from Kahului about 1855, he was over 
Nakalele Point when Maui Approach Control called VFR traffic at 2 o'clock, 3 miles.  Seconds 
later, N1701K contacted Maui Approach from that position, 3 miles west of Nakalele Point.  
The pilot of the second aircraft said that he could hear both 01K and Maui Approach clearly, 
and that the pilot of 01K sounded "stressed and flustered."
The second pilot changed frequencies and preceded to Molokai via the south shore, going over 
at 1,000 feet and returning at 1,500 feet, VFR.  He said that at the time of the accident there 
were clouds over the east end of Molokai, but that it was clear in the channel between Maui and 
Molokai.  There was no rain and it was "pitch black."  He opined that it would have been easy 
for a non instrument rated pilot to get disoriented.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate issued March 1, 1996, with restrictions prohibiting 
the carrying of passengers in airplanes for-hire at night and on cross-country flights of more 
than 50 nautical miles.  He had owned the accident aircraft until shortly before the accident 
and had an agreement with the new owner that he could continue to use the aircraft "for the 
express purpose of staying current."  The agreement, signed October 11, 1996, stated in part 
that "9.  I will not fly the aircraft at night unless accompanied by a certified flight instructor...."  
Furthermore, the agreement states "15. I agree to return the Aircraft to the Owner at Kahului 
Airport, Maui, Hawaii on or before sunset . . ." and in bold print immediately below the pilot's 
signature "The aircraft must be returned to the owner at Kahului Airport no later than 6 PM."
The pilot's logbook recorded total flying time of 670.4 hours, of which 13.8 hours were at night, 
5.0 hours were actual instrument hours, 19.4 hours were simulated instrument hours (hood) 
and 5.5 hours were in a simulator.  Single engine land aircraft flight hours totaled 183.2 hours 
and multiengine land hours totaled 487.1 hours.
The logbook recorded that, in the previous 90 days, the pilot had flown 13.2 hours, all in the 
accident aircraft, of which 1.3 hours was at night and included two night landings.  
The logbook also recorded that, in the previous 6 months, the pilot had flown 36.9 hours, all 
except 2.0 hours of which were in the accident aircraft.  Seven hours were at night, including 9 
night landings.  The pilot had logged 2.4 hours of actual instrument time (dual), 4.8 hours of 
simulated instrument time, and five instrument approaches.
The pilot's flight instructor, who was a former business partner and who recommended him for 
his commercial pilot certificate, reported that his most recent instructional flight with the pilot 
was in June, 1996.  He said that the pilot was working towards an instrument rating, but did 
not have a formal course syllabus or a schedule of instruction and took instrument instruction 
irregularly.  He said that the pilot had a "good attitude toward safety," but that he was not 
qualified to fly by reference to instruments.  He said that the pilot maintained the accident 
aircraft very well since he was a licensed mechanic and he (the flight instructor) could not 
recall it ever having any serious mechanical discrepancies.  He thought that the pilot may have 
turned west abeam Nakalele Point because he lost visual reference and wanted to be assured of 
remaining clear of terrain near Nakalele.
Page 6 of 11LAX97FA032
Another flight instructor, who had flown with the pilot as recently as June, 1996, reported that 
the pilot was marginal at night, not strong on instruments and instrument navigation, and that 
the pilot didn't like it when he simulated an engine failure.  Regarding the accident he said, "I 
can see him getting behind the plane."
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
During the period from September 29, 1996, to the date of the accident, the aircraft was flown 
by three pilots, one of whom was the pilot involved in the accident.  The current owner of the 
aircraft, who last flew it on October 27, 1996, reported that there were no discrepancies 
(squawks) on the aircraft.  The third pilot was a flight instructor who gave instruction in the 
aircraft on October 21, 1996.  That flight instructor told the Safety Board that the directional 
gyro was precessing and that the number one communications radio (receiver) was weak.  He 
recalled that the DG was precessing about 30 degrees in 10 minutes.  His recollection was that 
while on a easterly heading (090) the card would precess to 100, 110, 120, etc.  He had also 
flown the aircraft at night and recalled that the instrument panel lighting was operating 
properly.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
A meteorological study was prepared by a Safety Board staff meteorologist and is appended to 
this report.  The study notes that the Surface Analysis for 2000 indicated an inverted trough of 
low pressure extending from west of the Hawaiian Islands north-northeast to a low located 
about 30 degrees north 160 degrees west.  A cold front extended from the low southward 
between Kauai and Oahu.  The Synoptic Discussion and Guidance Product, prepared at 1115, 
stated, in part, "some heavy showers were reported over the past few hours over Lanai and 
Molokai with some moving close to Oahu and west Maui also."  The same product, prepared at 
1715, stated, in part, "there are still a few heavy showers on Molokai this late afternoon but they 
should taper off after dark."
COMMUNICATIONS
The Air Traffic Control Group Chairman's Factual Report of Investigation is attached.  
Interviews were conducted with the controller at Honolulu Combined En route Radar and 
Approach (CERAP) and her supervisors regarding the communications transcript and their 
recollections.  The certification of personnel and equipment was verified and the timeliness of 
the ALNOT issuance was investigated.  According to a memorandum from the Honolulu 
Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS) dated November 12, 1996, there had been no request 
for a pilot weather briefing from a pilot identified with the accident aircraft.  
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The aircraft impacted on an east facing mountain slope at approximately 1,600 feet msl at 
latitude 21 degrees 09.21 minutes north, and longitude 156 degrees 46.41 minutes west (GPS).  
The mountain side slopes downward to the east about 10 degrees and is in an area of dense 
vegetation consisting of small diameter trees to 20 feet tall and abundant tropical vegetation.  
The wreckage created a clearing in the vegetation oriented 285 degrees (magnetic).  The 
clearing was approximately 35 feet wide and 180 feet long.  The entire aircraft was present in 
the proximity of the cleared area and there was no fire.
At the eastern end of the clearing, the tops of the trees were cut off evenly on a slope 
approximately 5 degrees down to the west and 5 degrees down to the south.  A ground 
Page 7 of 11LAX97FA032
disturbance was observed 40 feet along the wreckage path where the vegetation was completely 
cleared, the muddy soil exposed, and the remaining long grasses laid down uniformly in a 
westerly direction.  The area of exposed ground impact was initially about 35 feet wide and 
narrowed to about 15 feet wide further along the wreckage path.  
Thirty-five feet along the wreckage path and 15 feet left of the centerline was the left wing 
outboard section with the aileron attached.  At 80 feet along the wreckage path and 13 feet to 
the right of center was the right wing outboard leading edge assembly (fuel tanks); the right 
wing tip fairing was found 10 feet further along the path.  Throughout this area there was an 
abundance of small pieces of aluminum which were primarily from the outboard wing panels.
At 100 feet along the wreckage path and 6 feet right of center was the outboard end of the right 
horizontal stabilizer and the right hand aileron.
Between 100 and 140 feet the terrain sloped down approximately 20 degrees into a ravine 
oriented northeast-southwest.  At 120 feet, and on centerline, was the right wing and engine 
nacelle with the flap attached.  At 130 feet, and 5 feet right of center, was the right-hand engine 
and propeller.  
At 140 feet, and on centerline, was the entire fuselage with the left wing; the left engine and 
propeller were adjacent.
Beyond 140 feet from the initial disturbance the terrain sloped upward approximately 30 
degrees and the only aircraft component found beyond this point was the hydraulic power 
pack, which was on centerline at 180 feet. 
The aircraft was relocated to a level site on the Puu O Hoku Ranch, 2 miles east of the accident 
site, on November 3, 1996. 
The aircraft cabin was configured with six forward facing seats and the fuselage was destroyed 
from the nose aft to the wing spar carry through structure in front of the second row of seats; 
however, the nose wheel assembly was located with the remainder of the fuselage components.  
The instrument panel was broken loose but remained attached to the fuselage.  The fuselage 
and empennage were intact from the second row of seats aft.  The right side of the horizontal 
stabilator was twisted down and aft, and approximately 2 feet of the outboard end was 
separated.  The outboard seat belt buckle (tongue end) on the left rear seat was broken where 
the belt attaches to the buckle.
Most of the instrument panel light bulbs were destroyed; however, five bulbs were intact in the 
wreckage.  The overhead panel flood light bulb was intact, with even coil spacing and no 
distortion to the filament.  One post light bulb located between the turn and slip indicator and 
the directional gyro was undamaged and exhibited filament distortion with even spacing of  the 
coils.  On the left engine cluster, the inboard light board was blackened, the filament was 
broken, and the coils were evenly spaced.  Both light bulbs on the right engine instrument 
cluster exhibited distorted filaments with stretched coils. 
The left wing, with the left engine and propeller attached, was severed from the fuselage at the 
root but remained attached by control cables.  Outboard of the engine nacelle the wing was 
broken into several pieces, typically of 3 to 5 foot dimension.  The aileron cables were broken 
outboard of the nacelle and displayed frayed ends.
The right wing was completely separated from the fuselage at the root and the aileron cables 
displayed frayed ends.  The engine assembly was separated from the nacelle.  The leading edge 
Page 8 of 11LAX97FA032
forward of the wing spar and outboard of the nacelle was separated from the remainder of the 
wing.  The aileron was found in between the wing leading edge pieces and the remainder of the 
wing, which was found near the fuselage in the wreckage distribution path.  This section 
included the landing gear and flap.
The left engine and prop were attached to the nacelle.  The air filter element was intact and 
contained some vegetation residue.  A continuity check and thumb compression check was 
performed and the accessory gears rotated.  The exhaust pipes were bent between the collector 
and the exhaust opening.  The vacuum pump shear coupling, vanes and rotor were intact.
The right engine was separated from the nacelle and the propeller was broken from the engine 
crankshaft flange.  The air filter element was intact and contained some vegetation residue.  A 
continuity check and thumb compression check was performed and the accessory gears 
rotated.  The exhaust pipes were bent between the collector and the exhaust opening.  The 
vacuum pump shear coupling, vanes, and rotor were intact. 
One blade of the left propeller contained a long smooth bend aft about 8 inches from the hub.  
The other blade exhibited torsional twisting and chordwise scratches from the tip in about 18 
inches.  
One blade of the right propeller contained a smooth bend aft over its length with a tight bend 
near the tip.  The other blade was smoothly bent aft approximately 160 degrees with the center 
of the bend near the midspan location.
Both propellers were sent to Hartzell Propeller Company and were disassembled and inspected 
on February 7, 1997, in the presence of the Safety Board.  A trapped piston in the left propeller 
dome was in a position corresponding to a 23- to 25-degree blade pitch angle.  A crease in the 
pitch change rod of the right position also corresponded to a 24- to 25-degree blade pitch 
angle.  Their report is attached and notes no evidence of pre-accident malfunction.
Both engines were sent to Textron Lycoming and were disassembled and inspected on 
February 10 and 11, 1997, in the presence of the Safety Board.  No abnormalities were noted.  
Their report is also attached.
The directional gyro and attitude gyro (artificial horizon) were disassembled and inspected on 
December 23, 1996.  Both instruments had tags affixed indicating that they had been 
overhauled on November 1, 1995, and the overhaul seals (blue putty) were undisturbed.  Both 
instruments had impact damage to the case and face of the instruments, and the directional 
gyro had damage to the case frame which mounts the gyro assembly and contains the air 
manifold.  The air inlet screens of both instruments were clear of debris and no debris was 
observed in either instrument's air passages.  Neither gyro showed evidence of rotational 
scraping to either the gyro rotor or case.  Both rotors rotated freely on their respective shaft 
when spun manually.
The fuel injection servos and the fuel distribution valves were examined and checked on a flow 
bench at Precision Airmotive Corporation on March 12, 1997, in the presence of the Safety 
Board.  The operating linkage on the servo from the right-hand engine had been forced over 
center during the accident, damaging the idle stop pin and keeping the throttle from opening 
fully.  This was rectified by partially disassembling the linkage and reinstalling it properly.  
Some of the test points on this servo were outside limits due to damage to the throttle and 
mixture stop pins and their nylon spacers.  The other (left engine) servo tested within 
specifications except for the low idle setting.  The Precision Airmotive report is attached.  No 
Page 9 of 11LAX97FA032
abnormalities were noted that would have precluded normal operation of the engine fuel 
injection systems prior to the accident.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by Clinical Laboratories of Hawaii, Inc., and a 
toxicological analysis was performed by the FAA's Civil Aeromedical Institute.  No drugs or 
ethanol were detected, and tests for carbon monoxide and cyanide were not performed due to 
lack of suitable specimen.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to officials from the state and local Democratic Parties, the pilot had flown a 
considerable number of flights for the party, maybe 20, since becoming county party co-
chairman in May, 1996.  He was not paid by the Party for any of the flights, it was "strictly a 
political contribution".
The wreckage was released to A.P.B. Services, Inc., adjusters for AIG Aviation Insurance 
Services, on March 17, 1997.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/12/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
670 hours (Total, all aircraft), 100 hours (Total, this make and model), 550 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 10 of 11LAX97FA032
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N1701K
Model/Series:
PA-34-200 PA-34-200
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
34-7250196
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/24/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
39 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1811 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
L/IO-360-C1E6
Registered Owner:
ROBERT P. MCCARTHY
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
ROBERT P. MCCARTHY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
0.12 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
KAUNAKAKAI, HI (MKK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
KAHULUI, HI (OGG)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1845 HST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
4 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
5 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 11 of 11
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
RICHARD    B PARKER
Adopted Date:
01/30/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
RICHARD   NELSON; HONOLULU, HI
MARK W PLATT; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
CHARLES R LITTLE; VERO BEACH, FL
CHARLES R MOTE; SAN DIEGO, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
