Page 1 of 3ERA17FA222
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Chatsworth, GA
Accident Number:
ERA17FA222
Date & Time:
07/01/2017, 1644 EDT 
Registration:
N44HJ
Aircraft:
PIPER PA23
Injuries:
4 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On July 1, 2017, about 1644 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-23-250 airplane, N44HJ, was 
destroyed during an inflight breakup near Chatsworth, Georgia. The pilot and three passengers 
were fatally injured. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed. The flight originated at Moton Field Municipal Airport (06A), Tuskegee, Alabama and 
was destined for McMinn County Airport (MMI), Athens, Tennessee. The personal flight was 
conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91.
According to family members, the pilot and his family were returning home after a weeklong 
trip. Witnesses at the departure airport recalled servicing the airplane earlier that morning. 
The line service technician at 06A stated that the airplane arrived about 1000 and requested 
fuel. After the airplane was fueled with about 45 gallons of aviation gasoline, the pilot and the 
passengers boarded the airplane. The pilot then unsuccessfully attempted to start the engines 
and after about 5-7 minutes the service technician asked if he needed assistance. The pilot 
responded, "no we're good–she (the airplane) does this when the engines get too hot." The 
pilot tried to start the engines a few more times before asking the service technician if he had a 
battery charger. The technician told the pilot that he did not have a battery charger and offered 
the use of the airport vehicle to charge the battery. The pilot connected battery cables from the 
vehicle's battery to the airplane's battery and again tried start the engines, with no success. One 
of the field tenants offered the pilot use of a battery charger. The airplane was towed into a 
hangar and the charger was connected. The gauge on the charger displayed that the battery 
would take 2 hours to charge. The pilot and his family decided to get something to eat while 
they waited for the battery to charge. When the pilot and his family returned, they boarded the 
airplane and both engines were started; he taxied to the runway and departed about 1500.
According to information obtained from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the pilot 
was not receiving radar services, nor was he in communication with air traffic control (ATC) 
while en route or at any time during the accident flight. Radar data revealed a target consistent 
with the accident airplane heading northeast when it encountered a boundary of advancing 
thunderstorms from the northwest. Further review of the radar data showed that as the 
airplane penetrated the thunderstorm radar contact was lost.
Page 2 of 3ERA17FA222
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
According to witnesses, they watched as a thunderstorm approached, it was not raining at the 
time but they could hear the thunder in the distance. As they continued to watch the 
thunderstorm they heard a loud "boom" followed by observing pieces of the airplane and 
personal belongings falling out of the clouds. Shortly thereafter, one of the witnesses stated 
that they watched as the airplane came "tumbling and spinning" out of the sky. They continued 
to watch the airplane until it was out of view and then called the local authorities.
The wreckage was scattered over a large area that included very dense vegetation. The debris 
field was about 1 mile in length, oriented toward 030° true. The first components located along 
the debris field were fragments of the fuselage. Additional components located along the debris 
path included fragments of the right and left wing assembly. The left engine remained attached 
to a section of the left wing assembly and the right engine was separated from the wing and was 
at the end of the debris path. The fuselage came to rest near the wings. The fuselage, cockpit, 
cabin section, empennage and engines were destroyed.
The wreckage was recovered from the site and retained for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N44HJ
Model/Series:
PA23 250
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CHA, 682 ft msl
Observation Time:
2053 UTC
Distance from Accident Site:
30 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 22°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4000 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
5 knots / , 160°
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 10000 ft agl
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Tuskegee, AL (06A)
Destination: 
Athens, TN (MMI)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
34.711389, -84.728056
Page 3 of 3ERA17FA222
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eric Alleyne
Additional Participating Persons:
Danny Cox; FAA/FSDO; Atlanta, GA
Mike Childers; Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Damian Galbraith; Piper Aircraft; Vero Beach, FL
Les Doud; Hartzell Propeller; Montgomery, AL
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
