According to the pilot there was no intention to land. He stated that he had no recollection 
after turning final, but did recall "radical maneuvering to avoid hitting" the tank. According to 
the statement submitted by the pilot-rated passenger, the airplane touched down and the pilot 
"had trouble with directional control." The passenger stated that the pilot added power, 
became airborne, and struck the tank, resulting in substantial damage. An examination of the 
airplane's systems revealed no anomalies. The routine aviation weather report reported, wind 
340 degrees at 21 knots, gusting to 27 knots; with peak wind recorded at 29 minutes past the 
hour at 230 degrees at 29 knots. According to the FAA, the pilot did not hold a tailwheel 
endorsement.
the pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during an attempted landing. Contributing 
factors include the pilot's improper in-flight planning and decision making, the pilot's lack of 
experience in tailwheel airplanes, the pilot's lack of a tailwheel endorsement, and the gusty 
winds.
On April 1, 2006, at 1625 mountain standard time, a McLaughlin Rans S-7, N924LB, piloted by 
an airline transport pilot, was substantially damaged when it impacted an oil tank while 
landing at Platte Valley Airpark (18V), Hudson, Colorado. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident. The personal flight was being conducted under the 
provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 without a flight plan. The pilot 
sustained minor injuries and the pilot-rated passenger sustained serious injuries. The local 
flight departed approximately 1600.
According to the emergency response personnel, the pilot stated they were attempting to land 
on runway 33 (4,100 feet x 40 feet, asphalt) when the airplane impacted the oil tank on the left 
side of the runway. Both the pilot and private pilot-rated passenger submitted a Pilot/Operator 
Aircraft Accident Report Form (NTSB Form 6120.1/2). According to the pilot's statement, the 
purpose of the flight was to introduce the pilot to the make and model of the airplane. There 
was no intention to land. He stated that he had no recollection after turning final for runway 
33, but did recall "radical maneuvering to avoid hitting" the tank. According to the statement 
submitted by the pilot-rated passenger, the airplane touched down and the pilot "had trouble 
with directional control." The passenger stated that the pilot added power, became airborne, 
and struck the tank.
The right wing separated from the airplane, and the right horizontal stabilizer was bent up and 
wrinkled. An examination of the airplane's systems, conducted by an Airworthiness Inspector 
with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), revealed no anomalies.
The closest official weather observation station was Denver International Airport (DEN), 
Denver, Colorado, located 14 nautical miles south of the accident site. The routine aviation 
weather report (METAR) for DEN , issued at 1653, reported, wind 340 degrees at 21 knots, 
gusting to 27 knots; visibility 10 statute miles, light rain; sky condition, broken 6,000 feet agl, 
broken, 8,000 feet agl, broken, 12,000 feet agl; temperature 13 degrees Celsius (C); dewpoint, 
01 degrees C; altimeter, 29.97 inches; remarks, peak wind recorded at 29 minutes past the hour 
at 230 degrees at 29 knots.
According to the FAA, the pilot did not hold a tailwheel endorsement. According to CFR Part 
61.31(h) 2 (i) "Additional training required for operating tailwheel airplanes. (1) Except as 
provided in paragraph (i)(2) of this section, no person may act as pilot in command of a 
tailwheel airplane unless that person has received and logged flight training from an 
authorized instructor in a tailwheel airplane and received an endorsement in the person's 
logbook from an authorized instructor who found the person proficient in the operation of a 
tailwheel airplane." In addition, according to CFR Part 61.57 (a) "...no person may act as a pilot 
in command of an aircraft carrying passengers or of an aircraft certificated for more than one 
pilot flight crewmember unless that person has made at least three takeoffs and three landings 
within the preceding 90 days, and ... (ii) The required takeoffs and landings were performed in 
an aircraft of the same category, class, and type (if a type rating is required), and, if the aircraft 
to be flown is an airplane with a tailwheel, the takeoffs and landings must have been made to a 
full stop in an airplane with a tailwheel."
