The certificated private pilot reported that while in cruise flight over an area of snow-covered 
terrain, he noted a rough running engine and a slight reduction in engine rpm.  The application 
of carburetor heat and engine emergency procedures did not remedy the engine roughness, 
which was followed by a rapid loss of engine power, and subsequent loss of altitude.  The pilot 
said that he was unable to restore adequate engine power to maintain level flight, and he 
selected a snow-covered plateau as a forced landing site, which required a  downwind approach 
due to terrain features.  Just before touch down on the soft, snow-covered terrain, he said the 
left wing stalled and struck the ground, causing the airplane to cartwheel to the left.  The 
airplane sustained structural damage to the left wing and fuselage.  In the pilot's written report 
to the NTSB, he stated that weather conditions at the time of the accident were, in part: 
Visibility, 2 miles; clouds and sky condition, 2,000 feet broken; wind, 090 degrees at 20 knots, 
gusting to 35 knots; temperature, 20 degrees F, with light snow showers and blowing snow.  In 
the section of the form that inquires about mechanical malfunction/failure, he wrote: "Carb 
Icing."  
The pilot's delayed use of carburetor heat, which resulted in a loss of engine power during 
cruise, and an in-flight collision with snow-covered terrain.  Factors associated with the 
accident were an unfavorable wind, and the pilot's inadvertent stall of the airplane during the 
emergency descent.
On April 3, 2006, about 1000 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Taylorcraft BC12-65 
airplane, N36291, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power, about 16 miles northwest of Iliamna, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated 
as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when 
the accident occurred.  The solo private certificated pilot sustained minor injuries. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight originated about 
0930, from a remote off-airport site about 40 miles southwest of Iliamna, and was en route to 
Iliamna when the accident occurred.  
 
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on April 4, the pilot related that during the flight to Iliamna, 
weather conditions consisted of ceilings between 600 and 800 feet, along with winds of 25 
knots and blowing snow.  As the flight progressed towards Iliamna, he noted a rough running 
engine and a slight reduction in engine rpm.  He said that the application of carburetor heat 
and engine emergency procedures did not remedy the engine roughness, which was followed 
by a rapid loss of engine power, and subsequent loss of altitude.  The pilot said that he was 
unable to restore adequate engine power to maintain level flight, and he selected a snow-
covered plateau as a forced landing site.  He said that terrain features around the forced 
landing site required a downwind approach.  Just before touch down on the soft, snow-covered 
terrain, he said the left wing stalled and struck the ground, causing the airplane to cartwheel to 
the left. The airplane sustained structural damage to the left wing and fuselage.       
In the pilot's written report that was submitted along with the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft 
Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), dated April 25, he reported that weather conditions at 
the time of the accident were, in part: Visibility, 2 miles; clouds and sky condition, 2,000 feet 
broken; wind, 090 degrees at 20 knots, gusting to 35 knots; temperature, 20 degrees F, with 
light snow showers and blowing snow.  In the section of the form that inquires about and 
mechanical malfunction/failure, he wrote: "Carb Icing."  
