Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Angel Fire, NM
Accident Number:
CEN13FA183
Date & Time:
03/03/2013, 1320 MST 
Registration:
N3484X
Aircraft:
MOONEY M20E
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
4 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Before takeoff, strong, gusting wind from the west was present, so a fixed-base operator (FBO) 
employee asked the pilot about his intent to fly. He stated that the pilot seemed "confident" 
about his ability to fly the airplane and that he was not concerned about the wind. As the 
airplane departed, the reported wind was 33 knots gusting to 47 knots. The FBO employee 
stated that he saw the airplane "crab" into the wind about 40 degrees right of the runway's 
heading. The airplane rose and fell repeatedly as its wings rocked. When the airplane was 
between 75 and 150 feet above the ground, the left wing dropped, and the airplane then rolled 
left, descended inverted, and impacted terrain in a nose-down attitude. A postimpact 
examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or 
failures that would have precluded normal operation. A weather research and forecasting 
model indicated that, at the time of the accident, the accident site was located within a 
turbulent mountain-wave environment, with low-level windshear, updrafts and downdrafts, 
downslope winds, and an environment conducive for rotors (that is, a violent rolling wave of 
air occurring in lee of a mountain or hill in which air rotates about a horizontal axis). The pilot 
had no prior experience flying out of the accident airport and it was the highest elevation 
airport he had ever used. In addition, he had limited experience flying in mountainous areas.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's loss of control while flying in a turbulent mountain-wave environment. Contributing 
to the accident was the pilot's overconfidence in his ability to safely pilot the airplane in gusting 
wind conditions and his lack of experience operating in mountainous areas.
Page 2 of 8CEN13FA183
Findings
Personnel issues
Self confidence - Pilot (Factor)
Experience/qualifications - Pilot (Factor)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Terrain induced turbulence - Effect on operation (Cause)
Wind - Effect on operation (Cause)
Mountainous/hilly terrain - Effect on operation
Page 3 of 8CEN13FA183
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 3, 2013, about 1320 mountain standard time, a Mooney M20E, N3484X, impacted 
terrain after departing the Angel Fire Airport (KAXX), Angel Fire, New Mexico. The private 
pilot and three passengers were fatally injured. The airplane was substantially damaged and a 
post-impact fire ensued. The aircraft was registered to and operated by Verhalen Flyers LLC, 
Scottsville, Texas, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal 
flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight 
plan. The flight was departing KAXX at the time of the accident and was destined to the Dallas-
Fort Worth area.
When the pilot arrived at the fixed base operator (FBO), an employee from the FBO questioned 
the pilot's intent to fly in the windy weather. The pilot indicated that he planned to fly and that 
the winds would not be a problem. When the pilot radioed on universal communications 
(UNICOM) that he was taxiing to runway 17, the current wind and altimeter were relayed to 
the pilot by the FBO employee, which were repeated by the pilot. Due to snow piles on the 
airfield, the FBO employee could not see the takeoff and next saw the airplane airborne with a 
significant crab angle into the wind, about 40 degrees right of the runway heading. The 
airplane rose and fell repeatedly as its wings rocked. Then employee saw the airplane's right 
wing rise rapidly. The airplane rolled left, and descended inverted with the airplane's nose 
pointed straight down.
An eyewitness riding in a car along Highway 434, west of the airport, saw the airplane take off 
from the runway. The witness perceived that the airplane was struggling to gain altitude. When 
the airplane climbed between 75 to 150 feet above the ground, the airplane appeared to 
momentarily hover before the left wing dipped quickly and the airplane descended nose first to 
the ground.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 33, held a private pilot certificate for airplane single engine land. On October 13, 
2011, he was issued an unrestricted third class medical certificate. On his medical certificate 
application, the pilot reported having accumulated 380 total hours. The pilot's logbook was not 
available for review by the investigator. Paperwork filed with the pilot's insurance company 
reported that as of October 2012, the pilot accrued 459 hours with 384 hour in the same make 
and model as the accident airplane.
The pilot reported to the FBO manager that he had flown the accident airplane for five years. 
He added that KAXX was the highest airport that he had landed at, although he had flown to 
some lower elevation airports in Colorado and Wyoming on previous flights. The pilot's 
experience flying out of airports with high density altitude is not known.
A cousin of the pilot, who lived in the local area, reported that the night before the accident he 
had discussed airplanes and the airplane accidents in the Angel Fire area. The pilot reported to 
him that flying in wind did not bother him.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The four seat, low wing, single engine airplane, serial number 1156, was manufactured in 1966. 
It was powered by a 200-horsepower, fuel-injected, Lycoming IO-360-A1A engine which drove 
Page 4 of 8CEN13FA183
a two-blade, metal, constant speed, Hartzell HC-2YK-1BF propeller. The airplane's log books 
were almost completely consumed in the post impact fire. Information retrieved from receipts, 
reported that the airplane's most recent annual inspection occurred on December 7, 2012, at a 
tachometer and airframe total time of 4,752.65 hours. The engine had accrued 6,859.85 hours, 
with 1,736.75 hours since major overhaul. At the accident site, the airplane's tachometer read 
4,785.84 hours.
METEROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1315, an automated weather reporting facility located at KAXX, reported wind from 250 
degrees at 33 knots gusting to 47 knots, visibility 10 miles, a clear sky, temperature 47 degrees 
Fahrenheit (F), dew point 17 F, and a barometric pressure of 29.93 inches of mercury. Utilizing 
this weather, the density altitude was calculated at 9,549 feet.
KAXX and the accident site were located in a basin nearly encompassed by mountainous 
terrain. Mountains to the west and northwest of the airport have peaks between 10,470 and 
13,160 feet. A weather study was compiled for the accident site. An upper air sound for 1400 
mountain standard time (MST) depicted an unstable vertical environment which would allow 
mixing of the wind on the lee side of the terrain. Winds as high as 55 knots could occasionally 
reach the surface. Satellite imagery between 1300 and 1400 MST recorded a large amount of 
standing lenticular cloud near all of the mountainous terrain around the accident site. These 
clouds indicated the presence of a mountain wave environment. At 0322 and 1134, the 
National Weather Service issued wind advisories for the accident area that warned of a west of 
southwest wind between 25 and 35 miles per hour (mph) with gusts to 50 mph.
A Weather Research and Forecasting (MRF) model was created to simulate the accident's 
weather conditions. The WRF model indicated that the accident site at the accident time was 
located within a turbulent mountain wave environment, with low-level wind shear, updrafts 
and downdrafts, downslope winds, and an environment conducive for rotors.
The pilot did not receive a weather briefing and it is not known what weather sources the pilot 
referenced prior to takeoff.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The Angle Fire Airport is located at an elevation of 8,380 feet. It has one asphalt runway, 17-35, 
which is 8,900 feet long by 100 feet wide. The airfield is non-towered and utilizes a common 
traffic advisory frequency. The departure runway was runway 17, which has a 0.6% upgrade. 
An Automated Weather Observing System (AWOS-3) is located on airport property.
Information contained in KAXX's airport/facility directory contains remarks for "strong gusty 
crosswinds possible" and "high density altitude probable."
Located in the airport's FBO were posters and literature warning pilots about crosswinds, 
mountainous terrain, weight and balance, take off performance, density altitude, and runway 
17's upgrade.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest about 0.2 miles south-southwest of the airport. It was located near 
the intersection of the runway's extended centerline and Highway 434. The initial impact point 
was a crater on the highway's shoulder. The crater contained acrylic glass and near the crater 
was the airplane's propeller. Fifteen feet east of the crater was the main wreckage which was 
Page 5 of 8CEN13FA183
inverted. A postimpact fire consumed a majority of the fuselage and empennage. Both wings 
remained attached to the fuselage and displayed near symmetric accordion crushing. Both fuel 
tanks were breached and empty. The left wing's outboard section remained intact, along with 
its aileron. The inboard portion of the left wing, around the area of the fuel tank, was 
consumed by fire to include a majority of the left flap. The left main gear was thermally 
damaged and buckled. The right wing remained mostly intact, with its aileron and flap still 
attached at their respective locations. The right flap appeared set to 15 degrees. The right main 
gear was extended. The vertical stabilizer and horizontal stabilizers were buckled, torn, and 
thermally damaged. Flight control continuity was established from the ailerons to the cockpit 
controls. The rudder and elevator rods remained connected to their control surfaces until just 
forward of the vertical stabilizer where fire had destroyed and melted a majority of the control 
rods.
The airspeed indicator read 81 mph. The attitude direction indicator depicted a left wing low, 
inverted attitude. The tachometer read 2000 rpm. The altimeter's Kohlsman window read 
29.93.
The propeller fractured at the propeller flange. Both blades displayed leading edge nicks and 
gouges, deep, chordwise scratches, and leading edge polishing.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was conducted on the pilot by the Office of the Medical Investigator of the State of 
New Mexico. The autopsy noted the cause of death as a result of multiple blunt force injuries. 
The manner of death was ruled an accident.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Testing did not detect ethanol or 
drugs. Specimens from the pilot were not suitable to test for carbon monoxide; however, 
specimens from a passenger were tested and did not contain carbon monoxide.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Weight and Balance
An old copy of the airplane's weight and balance, marked "superseded 6/28/02" was located in 
the wreckage. Utilizing the data contained on the form and information on file with the Federal 
Aviation Administration, an estimated weight and balance was calculated for the accident 
airplane. Postmortem weights of the airplane occupants were obtained from the Office of the 
Medical Investigator. These weights were not corrected for clothing or water loss due to 
thermal injuries. Occupant seats were assumed in the forward positions for better forward 
center of gravity (CG). The occupants' baggage was consumed in the postimpact fire and could 
not be weighed. An estimate of ten pounds per bag was given to the six bags reported to be on 
the airplane. Twenty-eight gallons of fuel was reported to be in the tanks prior to flight. The 
airplane's weight was calculated at 2,518.77 pounds with a moment arm of 123.98 inches. This 
placed in airplane aft of the manufacturer's center of gravity moment envelope.
Excerpts from FAA Aeronautical Information Manual
In Chapter 7, Section 7-5-6, "Safety of Flight, Mountain Flying," the following described 
hazards to pilots during operation in mountainous terrain. 
"High density altitude reduces all aircraft performance parameters. To the pilot, this means 
Page 6 of 8CEN13FA183
that the normal horsepower output is reduced, propeller efficiency is reduced and a higher true 
airspeed is required to sustain the aircraft throughout its operating parameters."
"Mountain waves occur when air is being blown over a mountain range or even the ridge of a 
sharp bluff area. As the air hits the upwind side of the range, it starts to climb, thus creating 
what is generally a smooth updraft which turns into a turbulent downdraft as the air passes the 
crest of the ridge. From this point, for many miles downwind, there will be a series of 
downdrafts and updrafts."
History of Flight
Takeoff
Other weather encounter
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/13/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 459 hours (Total, all aircraft), 384 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MOONEY
Registration:
N3484X
Model/Series:
M20E 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1156
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/07/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2575 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
33 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4786 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-A1A
Registered Owner:
VERHALEN FLYERS LLC
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
VERHALEN FLYERS LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8CEN13FA183
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KAXX, 8380 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1315 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
33 knots / 47 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
250°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / -8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Angel Fire, NM (KAXX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Unknown
Destination: 
Dallas, TX 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1320 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Angel Fire Airport (KAXX)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
8380 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
17
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
8900 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
36.406944, -105.291111
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jason T Aguilera
Adopted Date:
01/30/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Richard Hammer; Federal Aviation Administration; Albuquerque, NM
Robert Collier; Mooney Aircraft Company; Kerrville, TX
Publish Date:
01/30/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86341
Page 8 of 8CEN13FA183
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
