Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sanford, FL
Accident Number:
ERA11LA221
Date & Time:
04/01/2011, 1545 EDT 
Registration:
N6781X
Aircraft:
CESSNA 310F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing gear collapse
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The flight instructor and private pilot were performing touch-and-go landings. While retracting 
the landing gear, they heard a loud bang. The gear-up light illuminated, indicating that all 
three landing gears were retracted and the doors were closed. The instructor concluded that 
the noise came from the landing gear doors closing into each other. The flight continued, and 
two more landings were planned: one touch-and-go and one full stop. The landing gear 
appeared to operate normally during the touch-and-go. Upon extending the gear for the full 
stop landing, the gear-down light failed to illuminate. After checking the gear down indicating 
system, a visual check with the tower controllers confirmed that all three landing gears were in 
the down position. During touchdown, the nose gear collapsed. A postaccident examination of 
the nose gear assembly revealed that the nose landing gear strut reservoir lacked air pressure 
and the fluid level was very low. This underserviced condition caused binding in the nose gear 
fork assembly and failure of a nose gear push rod, which prevented the nose gear from 
extending to the full down and locked position.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the nose landing gear due to inadequate servicing of the nose gear strut reservoir.
Findings
Aircraft
Nose/tail gear strut/axle - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Gear extension and retract sys - Failure (Cause)
Personnel issues
Scheduled/routine maintenance - Other/unknown (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA11LA221
Factual Information
On April 1, 2011, at 1545 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 310F, N6781X, registered to a private 
individual, incurred substantial damage to the fuselage after the nose gear collapsed during 
landing rollout at Sanford Orlando International Airport (SFB), Sanford, Florida. The certified 
flight instructor (CFI) and his private pilot-rated dual student were not injured. The 
instructional flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The flight 
originated from SFB at 1500.
The CFI reported that after takeoff, while retracting the landing gear, a loud ﬁbangﬂ was heard. 
It was assumed by the CFI that the noise came from the landing gear doors closing into each 
other. The gear-up light illuminated indicating that the landing gear were retracted and the 
doors were closed. The flight returned to SFB for two planned landings; first a touch-and-go 
and then a full stop. On the first landing; the gear were extended and a gear-down light 
illuminated. A touch-and-go was conducted without incident. Upon extending the gear for the 
second landing, the gear-down light failed to illuminate. The landing gear were recycled, and 
the gear light gave a gear-up indication. Another gear extension was attempted, and a gear-
down indication was not received. The CFI contacted the SFB tower to request a low fly-by for 
a visual inspection of the gear position. The tower controller reported all three gear were down 
and the airplane was cleared to land. The touchdown on the main gear was normal; but as 
weight was applied to the nose wheel, the nose gear collapsed.
The airplane was examined by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector under the 
direction of a NTSB investigator. The airplane was raised using aircraft jacks to take the weight 
off of the wheels.  The nose gear shock strut trunnion assembly remained in the compressed 
position. Approximately one inch of the strut trunnion surface was visible. An attempt to 
retract the nose landing gear was unsuccessful, due to the strut fork assembly coming into 
contact with the nose landing gear door attachment brackets. The nose strut trunnion was 
manually extended out of the cylinder until approximately three inches of the piston surface 
was visible. The nose landing gear assembly was then manually raised up into the wheel well 
area and fully retracted. The nose landing gear strut trunnion reservoir was checked for air 
pressure and was totally empty of air. The strut trunnion reservoir was checked for fluid which 
was found to be very low. There were no signs of fluid leakage around the nose landing gear 
strut trunnion. A review of the maintenance logbooks did not reveal any prior discrepancies 
with the nose landing gear assembly.
History of Flight
Landing-landing roll
Landing gear collapse (Defining event)
Page 3 of 5ERA11LA221
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
43, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/17/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/19/2010
Flight Time:
2400 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300 hours (Total, this make and model), 1965 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N6781X
Model/Series:
310F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
310-0081
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/11/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
23 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3245 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
I0-470 SERIES
Registered Owner:
Edward Moon
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
Edward Moon
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5ERA11LA221
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SFB, 55 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 19 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.84 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Sanford, FL (SFB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Sanford, FL (SFB)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Orlando Sanford International (SFB)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
55 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
Visual
Runway Length/Width:
9601 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
28.772778, -18.234444
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eric Alleyne
Adopted Date:
08/15/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Bob Haynes; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL
Publish Date:
08/15/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=78739
Page 5 of 5ERA11LA221
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
