The pilot was in cruise flight between 1,000 feet to 1,200 feet when he experienced a partial 
loss of engine power followed by a total loss of engine power. He made a forced landing to the 
only available forced landing area which was nonsuitable. The airplane collided with wires and 
terrain and a postcrash fire ensued. Examination of the airframe and flight controls revealed 
no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. Disassembly of the engine 
assembly revealed no precrash anomalies or discrepancies that would indicate the engine was 
not capable of running and producing power before the accident. 
Loss of engine power for undetermined reasons resulting in a forced landing to unsuitable 
terrain. 
 On August 1, 1997, about 0802 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 152, N93011, registered 
to Alternative Flying Club Inc., operated by Fort Myers Airways, as a 14 CFR Part 91 
instructional flight, experienced a reported loss of engine power in cruise flight, and crashed 
during a forced landing in the vicinity of Cape Coral, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane was destroyed by a postcrash fire. The 
about 42 minutes before the accident. 
runway 5 at about 0720. At about 0801, the pilot informed them that he was 5 miles south of 
the airport and seemed to be losing power. The tower operator asked the pilot to ident on the 
transponder, and asked what was the nature of his emergency. The pilot stated he was losing 
power and altitude. The pilot was instructed to proceed direct to the airport and asked to verify 
that he did not have an instructor pilot on board the airplane. The pilot stated at 0801:59, "I 
dont have an instructor, " followed by " 011 I dont know." There was no other recorded 
conversation with the pilot.
Examination of the airframe and flight control system revealed no evidence of a 
precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. Continuity of the flight control system was 
confirmed for pitch, roll, and yaw.
The engine assembly was shipped to the engine manufacture for further examination in 
the presence of the FAA. Textron Lycoming concluded that, "The engine disassembly did not 
reveal any precrash anomalies or discrepancies that would indicate that this engine was not 
capable of running and producing power prior to the accident." For additional information see 
Textron Lycoming Accident Investigation Engine Disassembly Report.
The engine assembly and accessories were released to Mr. Donald Carter, President,  
Alternate Flying Club Inc., on September 30, 1997.
