The experimental amateur built helicopter was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain 
while hovering in a field. The pilot reported that the helicopter was in a hover and he was 
surveying the field.  He momentarily directed his attention to the instruments within the 
cockpit and during that time the helicopter contacted crops.  The pilot stated that the 
helicopter experienced a 'dynamic rollover,' and came to rest on its side in the field. 
The failure of the pilot to maintain terrain clearance with the crops during a surveying flight.  A 
factor was the pilots diverted attention. 
 On August 1, 1997, at 0740 central daylight time, a Poor Boys Toys, Inc. Exec 90, experimental 
helicopter, N596PB, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while hovering in a 
field near Patricia, Texas.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the helicopter, was not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight conducted under 
Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight from Lamesa Municipal Airport, near Lamesa, Texas, at 0700.  
No flight plan was filed for the flight.
The pilot reported during a telephone interview, conducted by a representative of the Safety 
Board, that he was hovering the helicopter over a cultivated field.  The pilot further stated that 
he momentarily directed his attention to the gauges in the cockpit and during this time the 
skids of the helicopter became in contact with the crops.  The pilot stated that the helicopter 
experienced a "dynamic rollover" and came to rest on its side in the field.
According to the FAA inspector that traveled to the accident site, the pilot was not rated in 
helicopters; however, he was properly cleared by his flight instructor for the solo flight.
Examination of the helicopter by the FAA inspector revealed that both main rotor blades were 
bent.  The tailboon section of the helicopter was severed at the attaching point to the fuselage. 
The windscreen was compromised.
Multiple attempts to obtain a completed copy of the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report 
(NTSB Form 6120.1/2) were unsuccessful.
