The pilot was receiving an evaluation flight from a U.S. Department of Interior, Office of 
Aircraft Services, helicopter specialist.  The intent of the flight was to certify the pilot to fly 
future government contracted flights. The helicopter pilot performed several maneuvers during 
the evaluation, and then landed on the shore of a small lake to re-hook an external bucket to 
the bottom of the helicopter.  The terrain was level, but was in an area of soft marshy type 
tundra.  The helicopter was equipped with full length flat skis attached to the bottom of the 
landing gear skid tubes.  These tundra skis help prevent the helicopter skid tubes from sinking 
into soft terrain.  After the external bucket's cable was attached to the helicopter, the pilot 
began to lift the helicopter into a hover.  During the liftoff, the left skid tube remained stuck to 
the ground.  The helicopter then rolled onto its left side and received damage to the fuselage 
and rotor system. 
The pilot's inadvertent dynamic rollover during liftoff.  Factors associated with the accident 
were soft terrain and a snagged landing gear skid. 
 On August 1, 1997, about 1535 Alaska daylight time, a high skid equipped Bell 206-LIII 
helicopter, N94TA, crashed during takeoff from a remote lake, about 4 miles west of Wasilla, 
Alaska.  The helicopter was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area evaluation 
ride under Title 14 CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.  The helicopter, registered to and 
operated by Trans-Alaska Helicopters Inc., Anchorage, Alaska, sustained substantial damage.  
The certificated commercial pilot was not injured.  The evaluation pilot received minor 
injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  VFR company flight following 
procedures were in effect.  The flight originated at the Big Lake Airport, Big Lake, Alaska, about 
1400.
The operator reported the pilot was receiving an evaluation flight from a U.S. Department of 
Interior, Office of Aircraft Services, helicopter specialist.  The intent of the flight was to certify 
the pilot to fly future government contracted flights.  The helicopter pilot performed several 
maneuvers during the evaluation, and then landed on the shore of a small lake to re-hook an 
external bucket to the bottom of the helicopter.  The terrain was level, but was in an area of 
soft, marshy type tundra.  The helicopter was equipped with full length, flat skis attached to the 
bottom of the landing gear skid tubes.  These tundra skis help prevent the helicopter skid tubes 
from sinking into soft terrain.  After the external bucket's cable was attached to the helicopter, 
the pilot began to lift the helicopter into a hover.  During the liftoff, the left skid tube remained 
stuck to the ground.  The helicopter then rolled onto its left side and received damage to the 
fuselage and rotor system.
