Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
LEVELLAND, TX
Accident Number:
FTW98LA202
Date & Time:
05/01/1998, 1430 CDT 
Registration:
N459U
Aircraft:
Cessna 150M
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The flight instructor (CFI) and student pilot reported that during an instructional flight, the 
airplane encountered a severe downdraft that it was unable to out climb, while in the traffic 
pattern. This occurred after the flight departed from runway 17 to practice takeoffs and 
landings in the traffic pattern. The CFI reported that after turning crosswind, while the engine 
was still operating at full takeoff power, the airplane encountered a severe downdraft, which 
resulted in a rate of descent that exceeded 1,000 feet per minute. The CFI turned the airplane 
away from high tension power lines as he maneuvered the airplane towards a plowed field to 
the east-southeast of the airport. The CFI reduced power before the airplane impacted the 
ground in a landing attitude with the flaps retracted. The operator stated that virga and dust 
devils were observed in all quadrants near the time of the accident. An FAA inspector also 
observed signs of downdrafts and virga while en route to the accident site. On a previous flight, 
the operator experienced 'strong up and downdrafts due to the highly unstable weather 
pattern.'  The density altitude was calculated by the investigator-in-charge to be 5,600 feet. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's inaccurate weather evaluation, subsequent encounter with a severe downdraft, and 
failure (or inability) to compensate for the wind (downdraft) condition.  The high density 
altitude was a related factor. 
Page 2 of 6FTW98LA202
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) WEATHER EVALUATION - INACCURATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
2. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH DENSITY ALTITUDE
3. (C) WEATHER CONDITION - DOWNDRAFT
4. (C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 6FTW98LA202
Factual Information
 On May 1, 1998, at 1430 central daylight time, a Cessna 150M airplane, N459U, was destroyed 
upon impact with the ground following an encounter with a downdraft while in the traffic 
pattern near Levelland, Texas.  The flight instructor sustained minor injuries and the student 
pilot was not injured.  The airplane was owned by a private individual and was being operated 
by Levelland Aviation of Levelland, Texas, under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the instructional flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  The local 
flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the operator, the airplane departed from runway 17 to practice takeoffs and 
landings in the traffic pattern.  The flight instructor reported that after turning crosswind, 
while the engine was still operating at full takeoff power, the airplane encountered a severe 
downdraft, resulting in a rate of descent exceeding 1,000 feet per minute, which the flight 
instructor stated that the airplane was not capable of out climbing.  The flight instructor turned 
the airplane to avoid the north-south high tension power lines to the east of the airport, as he 
maneuvered the airplane towards a plowed field to the east-southeast of the airport.  
The flight instructor further stated that he reduced the engine power prior to impacting the soft 
plowed field perpendicular with the 14-inch high rows.  The airplane impacted the ground on a 
northeasterly heading in the landing attitude with the flaps in the retracted position.  The nose 
landing gear collapsed and the airplane nosed over coming to rest in the inverted position.
The operator stated that virga and dust devils were observed on all quadrants near the time of 
the accident.  While responding to the accident site, the FAA inspector also observed numerous 
clouds which were producing virga and downbursts by evidence of the dust and dirt being 
blown in localized areas, below or adjacent to the cloud formations.
In a previous flight, the operator also experienced "strong up and downdrafts due to the highly 
unstable weather pattern."  The density altitude was calculated by the investigator-in-charge at 
5,600 feet.
The 20 year old flight instructor, who is a citizen of India, had accumulated a total of 400 flight 
hours.  The 88 hour student pilot receiving instruction was a citizen of Saudi Arabia.  The 
operator stated that both were very proficient in the English language.   
Examination of the wreckage by the FAA inspector revealed that the engine assembly, with the 
propeller still attached, separated from the airframe.  The nose landing gear was torn off the 
fuselage and the vertical fin was crushed.  The tail section of the airplane separated from the 
fuselage aft of the cockpit.  
The 1976 model Cessna was equipped with shoulder harnesses for both occupants, and they 
both reported wearing them at the time of the accident.  The airplane's ELT was found in the 
armed position, and was activated by the ground impact.
Page 4 of 6FTW98LA202
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
20, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/23/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
400 hours (Total, all aircraft), 152 hours (Total, this make and model), 262 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 130 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 77 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N459U
Model/Series:
150M 150M
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
150-78407
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/27/1998, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
14 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5042 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
STEVEN C. BERNSTEIN
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
STEVEN C. BERNSTEIN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
LEVELLAND AVIATION
Operator Designator Code:
Page 5 of 6FTW98LA202
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LBB, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1356 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 8000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 14 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (Q24)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1430 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
LEVELLAND MUNICIPAL (Q24)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
3508 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
17
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6100 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
HECTOR     R CASANOVA
Adopted Date:
10/30/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
STANLEY P HINDS; LUBBOCK, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW98LA202
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
