Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
PISGAH, MS
Accident Number:
MIA99LA022
Date & Time:
11/01/1998, 1600 CST 
Registration:
N383FF
Aircraft:
FERGUSON RANS S-10 SAKOTA
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
 The airplane was observed flying down the centerline of the runway between 150 to 200 feet 
agl, and commence an abrupt steep bank to the left.  Once into the 45 to 50 degree bank, the 
nose dropped, and the ballistic recovery parachute was seen to partially deploy.  The airplane 
continued in the descending spiral until impact with the ground.  No evidence of  precrash 
malfunctions of flight controls were found. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during a low altitude maneuver resulting in the 
aircraft's uncontrollable descent until impact with the terrain. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO REVERSE DIRECTION
Findings
1. LOW ALTITUDE FLIGHT/MANEUVER - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS
Page 2 of 5MIA99LA022
Factual Information
 On November 1, 1998, about 1600 central standard time, an experimental, Ferguson 
Rans S-10 Sakota, N383FF, registered to a private individual, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 
91 personal flight, crashed while maneuvering overhead Pisgah Airstrip, Pisgah, Mississippi. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The amateur-built 
airplane was destroyed and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, sustained fatal injuries. 
The flight originated from the private strip about 20 minutes before the accident.
According to a witness, the pilot's father, the flight was performing a flyby maneuver at 
about 150 to 200 feet agl, on a heading of 180 degrees down the centerline of the runway, and 
at about the 2/3 point of the runway the flight entered an abrupt 45-to 50-degree left bank. 
During the left bank, the nose dropped and the ballistic recovery chute (BRS), was observed to 
deploy.  The left bank continued for about 270 degrees, the nose dropped 25 to 30 degrees 
below the horizon trailing the partially deployed BRS, and the airplane impacted the terrain in 
a nearly vertical attitude.  The engine sounded normal the whole time. The father mentioned 
that he thought the pilot had no acrobatic experience. 
A friend of the pilot who helped build the airplane and who had given dual instruction to 
the pilot about 5 to 6 weeks previously in the same airplane stated they performed maneuvers 
and steep turns above 5,000 feet agl.
Examination of the airplane by FAA personnel revealed the airplane impacted the 
ground in a near vertical attitude, upright, heading about 180 degrees. The ballistic recovery 
system, (BRS) drogue chute was about 60-feet forward of the wreckage and the main canopy 
was deployed behind the left wing and both appeared undamaged.  Severe fuselage crushing 
extended rearward to aft of the pilot's seat.  The wings, aft fuselage and empennage were 
minimally damaged.  
Flight control continuity from the cockpit control stick about the roll axis was 
impossible to confirm due to impact damage to rod ends under the cockpit floor, but was 
confirmed using control linkage outward of the damage to the flight controls. Pitch control 
continuity was confirmed from stick to elevator.  Rudder control path continuity was 
confirmed from pedals to control surface.  Engine control continuity was not possible due to 
impact damage. The Hobbs meter indicated 64.9 hours.  The two composite fuel tanks had 
been compromised, and the wreckage smelled of fuel.  The fuel lines and carburetors contained 
fuel and the pilot's father said the tanks were nearly full at takeoff.  The main fuel valve and the 
right fuel valve were found in the "on" position and the left valve was in an intermediate 
position.  Seat belts and harnesses were intact and still attached to their respective anchoring 
points.  The pilot was found with seat belt and harness fastened.  (For additional information 
see attached FAA Inspector's Statement).
Postmortem examination of the pilot was performed by Steven T. Hayne, M.D., Deputy 
Coroner, Rankin County, Pearl, Mississippi, on November 1, 1998, and revealed cause of death 
to be attributed to multiple traumatic injuries suffered in the crash.  No findings that could be 
considered causal were noted. Toxicological testing was conducted at the Federal Aviation 
Administration Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The tests were negative for 
ethanol, carbon monoxide, basic, acidic, and neutral drugs.
Page 3 of 5MIA99LA022
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
37, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/18/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
102 hours (Total, all aircraft), 28 hours (Total, this make and model), 67 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 21 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
FERGUSON
Registration:
N383FF
Model/Series:
RANS S-10 SAKOTA RANS S-10
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
0594173
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/29/1998, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
960 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
63 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
65 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
582 UL DCDI
Registered Owner:
DAVID M. BOSWELL
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
DAVID M. BOSWELL
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5MIA99LA022
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
JAN, 346 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2154 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
270°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 17 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
140°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
30°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1540 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
PISGAH, MS. 
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ALAN       C STONE
Adopted Date:
02/16/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
ALLEN M DAVIS; JACKSON, MS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5MIA99LA022
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
