Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
PUEBLO, CO
Incident Number:
FTW97IA003
Date & Time:
10/03/1996, 2037 MDT 
Registration:
N154ZV
Aircraft:
Beech 1900D
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Injuries:
16 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
Analysis 
The scheduled commuter flight had been en route for approximately 30 minutes and was in 
cruise flight at 13,000 feet MSL.  Both pilots complained of dizziness and disorientation.  After 
going on oxygen the symptoms dissipated and a normal landing was made at the intended 
destination approximately 10 minutes after the occurrence.  Examination of the aircraft, crew, 
luggage, and cargo provided no evidence of a problem and neither crew member had any 
physical manifestations such as smell or irritation.  One passenger indicated the possibility of 
dizziness.  No other aircraft in the area at the time reported any difficulty.  A test flight was 
conducted using the same crew, aircraft, route, and altitude.  During the flight, tests were 
performed by a industrial hygienist with negative results.  Tracking of the crew and aircraft for 
several months provided no additional insight. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
Partial incapacitation of the flightcrew for unknown reasons. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED - FLIGHTCREW
2. (C) INCAPACITATION - FLIGHTCREW
Page 2 of 5FTW97IA003
Factual Information
 On October 3, 1996, at 2037 mountain daylight time, a Beech 1900D, N154ZV, operated by 
Mesa Air Group, as Air Shuttle flight 7632, was involved in an incident involving partial crew 
incapacitation while on a flight from Denver, Colorado, to Pueblo, Colorado.  There was no 
damage to the aircraft and no injuries to the two crew or 14 passengers. The flight was 
operating as a scheduled domestic passenger flight under Title 14 CFR Part 135.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and an IFR flight plan was filed.  The crew made a normal 
approach and landing at Pueblo after going on oxygen.
The two crew members went on oxygen when they felt dizzy while in cruise flight at 13,000 feet 
msl.  They stated that the oxygen use made them feel better immediately.  One passenger 
complained of possible dizziness when interviewed by the HAZMAT team following arrival.  No 
fumes or smoke were discernible by either the crew or passengers.  The flight had been 
airborne for approximately 30 minutes when the event occurred.
A check with local, state, and federal officials covering the area between Colorado Springs, and 
Pueblo, was conducted with negative results and no other flights in the area at the time 
reported any abnormalities. 
The voice recorder transcript (copy attached) provided support for the pilots' report of 
dizziness and disorientation.  In addition, crew conversation, as recorded, provided 
information that the pilots discussed their lack of a recent meal.  However,  a review of the 
pilots' activities for the 72 hours prior to the incident provided information of normal meal 
habits and provided no information of common food intake or other activities.
The Pueblo Fire Department responded with a HAZMAT team which conducted air sampling 
and inspected the luggage and cargo with negative results.
Medical examination and partial toxicological test following the incident provided no evidence 
to explain the experience. (Copies attached)
Examination of the aircraft was conducted with negative results.  The aircraft had been 
involved in an accident on May 2, 1996, during which the right main landing gear collapsed.  
(FTW 96-F-A198)  No information was found in reviewing that accident and the repairs 
conducted that would contribute to this incident. (The Safety Board IIC was the same person as 
on this incident). 
A test flight was conducted on October 5, 1996 using the incident aircraft and crew and the 
services of an industrial hygienist.  The altitude of the incident flight and route were used and 
no information was found to explain the event.  A copy of the hygienist's report is attached. 
At the request of the Safety Board IIC, the aircraft and crew were tracked by the Director of 
Safety for Mesa Airlines from  return to service through the end of 1996.  No reports of any 
aircraft abnormalities have occurred, and neither pilot has experienced any difficulties since 
the incident.
Page 3 of 5FTW97IA003
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/26/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
12 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N154ZV
Model/Series:
1900D 1900D
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
UE-154
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
21
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Continuous Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
16950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-67D
Registered Owner:
MESA  AIR GROUP, INC.
Rated Power:
1279 hp
Operator:
MESA AIRLINES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Commuter Air Carrier (135)
Operator Does Business As:
AIR SHUTTLE
Operator Designator Code:
MASA
Page 4 of 5FTW97IA003
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PUB, 4726 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2054 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
DENVER, CO (DEN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 (PUB)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0000 
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
14 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
16 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
NORMAN     F WIEMEYER
Adopted Date:
03/31/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
JACK   MIDDLETON; DENVER, CO
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5FTW97IA003
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
