Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Birmingham, AL
Accident Number:
ERA11LA175
Date & Time:
03/02/2011, 1756 CST 
Registration:
N154MW
Aircraft:
BELL 206-L4
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
Analysis 
The helicopter pilot reported that, following a maintenance test flight to verify that a newly 
installed power turbine governor was accurately set, he flew over the anticipated landing area 
and entered the downwind leg of the traffic pattern. While turning to the base leg of the traffic 
pattern, about 500 feet above ground level and at 40 to 50 knots, he reported that he heard a 
loud bang and that the airframe ﬁlurched.ﬂ He entered an autorotation and located a vacant 
parking garage deck within gliding range. The engine-out audio warning sounded and segment 
lights illuminated. The pilot landed the helicopter and it skidded about 15 feet. A test run 
determined that the engine operated below the normal specifications for new engines. The 
pneumatic line from the power turbine governor was found to be leaking and was removed and 
sent to the NTSB's Materials Laboratory for further examination. That examination revealed 
superficial longitudinal tool marks that did not extend to the interior surfaces of the flared 
ends. The interior surface of the flared ends exhibited some localized fretting damage on one 
side, consistent with damage that could have been caused by inadequate torque at the 
connection; however, no other anomalies were noted. According to the engine manufacturer, 
the leak would not have caused the engine to operate below the normal specification. The 
postaccident examination revealed no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the 
helicopter or engine that would have precluded normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 7ERA11LA175
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 2, 2011, at 1756 central standard time, a Bell 206L4, N154MW, operated by 
Omniflight Helicopters Incorporated, performed a forced landing within the city limits of 
Birmingham, Alabama. The helicopter departed from Carraway Medical Center Heliport 
(AL49), Birmingham, Alabama, about 1741, for a local maintenance test flight. Day visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and a company visual flight rules flight plan was filed. The 
certificated airline transport pilot was the sole occupant and was not injured. The helicopter 
sustained substantial damage to the tail boom section just aft of the cabin. The flight was 
operated under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the pilot, the engine governor was replaced earlier in the day and the test flight 
was to confirm proper inflight settings. Prior to departure, the linear actuator was adjusted by 
maintenance personnel to the proper ground setting. During the flight, the pilot made several 
collective adjustments and noted some lag in the rpm indications on the N2, or engine core 
speed, gauge; however, with some collective adjustment, the rpm returned to the selected 
value. The pilot flew over the anticipated landing area, entered the downwind leg, and while 
turning to the base leg of the traffic pattern, approximately 500 feet above ground level, with 
an airspeed of 40 to 50 knots, and he reported hearing a "loud bang and the airframe lurched." 
He entered an autorotation and located a vacant parking garage deck within gliding range. The 
engine out audio sounded and segment lights illuminated. The pilot landed the helicopter and 
it skidded approximately 15 feet. He performed the emergency shutdown procedure; however, 
the engine had already stopped.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate with ratings for multiengine airplane and 
helicopter, a commercial pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land, and a 
flight instructor certificate with ratings for rotorcraft helicopter and instrument helicopter. The 
pilot reported 10,599 total hours of flight experience, of which 1,684 hours were in the make 
and model of the accident helicopter and all of which were as pilot in command. He also 
reported 360 hours as a flight instructor in the accident helicopter make and model.
HELICOPTER INFORMATION
The helicopter's most recent inspection was conducted on February 8, 2011, as part of the 
operator's Approved Airworthiness Inspection Program (AAIP). At the time of the accident, the 
helicopter had 4,613 total hours time in service. The helicopter was equipped with an Allison 
250-C30P engine which had 8,785 total hours time in service, 19,028 cycles, and had 138 hours 
time in service since its most recent inspection. 
Within the two weeks prior to the accident, the maintenance logbook contained the following 
entries. On March 2, 2011 the power turbine governor was removed and an overhaul 
serviceable governor was installed; all adjustments of the rigging were checked and no leaks or 
defects noted. February 24, 2011, a leak was noted at the fuel control outlet line to the fuel 
nozzle; the leak was repaired by retorquing the outlet line nut and no other leaks or defects 
were noted. On February 20, 2011, the fuel control unit was replaced in accordance with the 
Rolls Royce maintenance manual and the helicopter was test flown with no further defects 
noted.
Page 3 of 7ERA11LA175
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1753 recorded weather observation at Birmingham Regional Airport (BHM), Birmingham, 
Alabama, included wind from 110 degrees at 3 knots, visibility 10 miles, clear skies, 
temperature 20 degrees C, dew point 3 degrees C, and barometric altimeter 30.21 inches of 
mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
According to an FAA inspector, the helicopter came to rest on the top level of a parking garage. 
The tail boom separated aft of the cabin and the tail and the tail rotor impacted the right rear 
door prior to coming to rest. External examination of the engine did not reveal any 
abnormalities and the power turbine governor had been replaced prior to the accident flight. 
No eyewitnesses were located nor did the local authorities know about the accident until they 
were called to help secure the helicopter overnight.
A follow-on examination was conducted on March 29, 2011 by the NTSB. Cursory external and 
internal examination or the airframe and engine were conducted and no component failure 
was noted. The hoses, fittings, and lines were examined and revealed no damage or scrape 
marks; however, several lines were in contact with each other. N2 continuity was confirmed to 
the main rotor and tail rotor output drive shaft by hand rotation of the power turbine. N1 (low 
pressure) continuity was confirmed to the starter generator by hand rotation of the 
compressor, and both rotated smoothly. The throttle was found in the closed position and was 
manipulated by hand. 
The airframe fuel filter bowl was removed, and with the filter still installed, the bowl was full of 
fuel and was free of debris. The filter was removed from the bowl and the element was 
separated and free of debris. The fuel nozzle line fitting at the combustor case was released and 
separated from the engine. A drop of fuel dripped from the line and examination of the fuel line 
revealed moisture, consistent with fuel, inside. Fuel was present in the fuel pump line.
Collective movement revealed the power turbine governor range was 40 to 61 units. Electrical 
power from the battery was applied to the helicopter and the collective was exercised revealing 
the range was 39 to 70 units using beeper adjustment. The droop compensator was 10.625 
inches in length at the linear actuator and approximately 0.125 inches of adjustments on the 
rod end which correlated to a lower rpm setting.
Approximately 10 gallons of fuel were added to the main fuel tank and the fuel pump pressure 
was tested. The left and right fuel boost pump were tested separately and indicated 
approximately 8 psi on the cockpit fuel pressure gauge, which correlated to the bottom side of 
the green, or normal, operating range.
The Turbine Outlet Temperature gauge was checked and did not reveal an engine over 
temperature indication.
The freewheeling unit was removed and revealed wear step marks on the drive side splines. 
The coast side splines exhibited small areas of linear impact damage consistent with chatter 
damage. The unit operated normally when checked by hand.
The engine was removed from the helicopter and mounted in an engine test cell. A pneumatic 
leak check was accomplished on all pneumatic (Pc) lines and one Pc line between the Pc air 
filter and power turbine governor was found to have a leak at the Pc air filter aft connection B-
nut, no torque stripe was observed on the B-nut fitting. The engine was started and a normal 
Page 4 of 7ERA11LA175
light off occurred. The engine appeared to operate below normal specifications during the 
engine run. The engine appeared to operate normally during the deceleration and cool down 
period. During the post run engine shut down, no hydro braking was required and the N2 shut 
down appeared quicker than normal. The engine was restarted in order to simulate a 
deceleration and then a rapid acceleration. The first two attempts were unsuccessful; however, 
on the third attempt the engine had a normal response to the power changes. Specifications of 
the engine run are located in the public docket for this accident.
The N1 Pc line was removed and sent to the NTSB's Materials Laboratory for further 
examination. That examination revealed longitudinal tool marks which were superficial and 
did not extend to the interior surfaces of the flared ends. The interior surface of the flared ends 
on one side exhibited some localized fretting damage. A Zyglo dye penetrate test was 
performed on the line and no cracks were observed.
The power turbine governor was sent to the manufacturer for testing. External inspection 
revealed soot/carbon at the air regulator outlet. Drive shaft movement was normal and the 
drive shaft was supported by the drive bearings. The Pg orifice was removed and was found 
clear of any obstructions and the Pr diaphragm and spring appeared normal. Teflon shavings 
were observed at the bottom of the post in the inner diameter of the bushing. The Teflon 
sleeve, located on the drive shaft within the drive body assembly, had a longitudinal split along 
its total length. The Teflon sleeve was replaced and the power turbine governor was installed in 
a test cell that allowed dynamic testing under elevated temperatures. The unit was operated 
and no condition was found that would prevent normal operation. Results of the power turbine 
governor test may be found in the public docket for this accident.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern base
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Autorotation
Hard landing
Page 5 of 7ERA11LA175
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
43, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/06/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/23/2010
Flight Time:
10599 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1884 hours (Total, this make and model), 10484 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 51 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N154MW
Model/Series:
206-L4 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
52154
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/08/2011, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
138 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
4613 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ALLISON
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C30-P
Registered Owner:
CHASE EQUIPMENT FINANCE 
INC
Rated Power:
650 hp
Operator:
OMNIFLIGHT HELICOPTERS 
INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
RMXA
Page 6 of 7ERA11LA175
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BHM, 650 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1753 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
240°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.21 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Birmingham, AL (AL49)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Birmingham, AL (AL49)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1741 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Carraway Medical Ctr Heliport 
(AL49)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
672 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.533611, -86.738889 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Shawn Etcher
Adopted Date:
02/23/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Charlie Carlisle; FAA/FSDO; Birmingham, AL
Publish Date:
02/23/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=78486
Page 7 of 7ERA11LA175
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
