Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SHELTON, WA
Accident Number:
SEA99LA038
Date & Time:
03/02/1999, 1120 PST 
Registration:
N194AC
Aircraft:
Sikorsky S-64E
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
Analysis 
The pilot of the aero-logging helicopter had lowered a multiple-log load onto the landing site, 
hit the release switch to release the two choker cables, and then began to move away from the 
area. One of the choker lines momentarily failed to release, resulting in one end of one of the 
logs lifting into the air and then falling back to the ground. One of the ground crew members 
entered the landing area after the logs were initially lowered to the ground, but prior to the 
release of the second cable. When the end of the log lifted into the air and fell back to the 
ground, it fell on the crew member, inflicting fatal injuries. It was the opinion of some of the 
other crew members that the victim never noticed that the second cable had not yet released or 
that the end of the log was being lifted back into the air. According to Washington 
Administrative Code, Chapter 296-54, 'Logs shall be laid on the ground and the helicopter will 
be completely free of the choker()s) before workers approach the logs.' 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the victim to follow the procedure that required him to make sure that all choker 
lines had separated from the helicopter's release mechanism prior to entering the landing 
(collection area). 
Page 2 of 6SEA99LA038
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: HOVER
Findings
1. (F) EXTERNAL LOAD CABLE/HOOK - SNAGGED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: HOVER
Findings
2. (C) OBJECT - OTHER PERSON
3. (C) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - GROUND PERSONNEL
Page 3 of 6SEA99LA038
Factual Information
 On March 2, 1999, approximately 1120 Pacific standard time, a log being positioned by an 
aero-logging Sikorsky S-64E helicopter, N194AC, hit a ground crew member when a choker 
line momentarily failed to release from the long-line. The helicopter, which was being operated 
near Shelton, Washington, by Erickson Air Crane under 14 CFR Part 133, was not damaged, 
nor was its crew injured. The ground crew member received fatal injuries. The helicopter, 
which was bringing logs into the landing (collection point), was being operated under VFR 
conditions at the time of the accident. 
According to the aircrew, as the pilot-in-command started to move the aircraft away from the 
landing after lowering a multiple-log load to the ground, one of the two choker lines 
momentarily failed to separate from the long-line release mechanism. This resulted in the one 
end of one of the logs lifting back into the air and then falling to the ground. According to 
witnesses, one member of the ground crew, who was positioned separately from the others, ran 
into the collection area immediately after the logs initially touched the ground. When one end 
of the subject log lifted into the air and dropped back to the ground, it landed on the crew 
member, inflicting fatal injuries. An inspection of the release mechanism did not reveal why 
the line failed to immediately release. According to other ground crew members, a 
representative of Erickson Air Crane, and the Washington Safety Compliance Inspector who 
responded to the scene, occasionally a choker line will momentarily hang up during the release 
sequence. It could not be determined why the crew member had entered the landing prior to 
both choker lines separating from the release, but some of the other ground crew members felt 
that the victim had simply failed to notice that the second choker line had not yet released. The 
witnesses also felt that since the victim ran into the landing with his head down, he probably 
did not see the end of the log being lifted back into the air.
During the investigation, it was determined that the victim had worked as a member of the 
aero-logging ground crew for the same company for about the last seven years (except for 
seasonal layoffs). During those years, he had performed duties both at the location where the 
logs where lifted out after being felled, and at the landings where the logs were decked 
(stacked). It was also noted that Washington Administrative Code (WAC), Chapter 296-54 
(Safety Standards for Logging Operation), Section 296-54-559, Item 16, states that "Logs shall 
be laid on the ground and the helicopters will be completely free of the choker(s)before workers 
approach the logs."
Page 4 of 6SEA99LA038
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/30/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
16800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1500 hours (Total, this make and model), 10000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 45 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Sikorsky
Registration:
N194AC
Model/Series:
S-64E S-64E
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
64017
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/20/1999, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
42000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
14 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
7236 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
JFTD-12-4A
Registered Owner:
ERICKSON AIR CRANE CO. LLC
Rated Power:
4500 hp
Operator:
ERICKSON AIR CRANE CO. LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
ERICKSON AIR CRANE
Operator Designator Code:
Page 5 of 6SEA99LA038
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
5 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
4°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1110 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ORRIN      K ANDERSON
Adopted Date:
06/21/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
CHUCK   SICOTTE; RENTON, WA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA99LA038
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
