During the takeoff, the single-engine airplane 'began to run rough for a few minutes.'  The pilot 
landed the airplane at the airport, taxied to the ramp area, and conducted a ground run of the 
airplane.  No discrepancies were noted during the ground run, and the pilot performed the 
second takeoff.  During that takeoff/initial climb, approximately 400 feet agl, the engine began 
to run rough and then stopped completely.  The pilot landed the airplane in a field adjacent to 
the airport, and during the landing roll, the airplane struck a terrace, collapsed the nose 
landing gear, nosed over and came to rest inverted.  The operator reported an accumulated 
flight time of 3 hours since the last known refueling.  The pilot/operator estimated the fuel at 
the last takeoff was 8 gallons.  No evidence of fuel was found at the accident site or in the 
airplane.  The integrity of the fuel system was not compromised.  No discrepancies were noted 
during the 17-minute post-accident engine run. 
The pilot's failure to refuel resulting in loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.  A factor 
was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
 On October 1, 2000, at 1600 central daylight time, a Cessna 150L single-engine airplane, 
N11390, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power during takeoff/initial 
climb from the Nashville Howard County Airport, near Nashville, Arkansas.  The airplane was 
owned and operated by Pro Aviation, Inc., of Mountain Home, Arkansas.  The private pilot, 
sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-
country flight to Mountain Home, Arkansas, with a refueling stop planned at Hot Springs, 
Arkansas.  The 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 flight was originating at the time of the 
accident.  A flight plan was not filed.
The pilot reported that earlier in the day, he and a passenger departed Mountain Home, 
Arkansas, with full fuel for the cross-country flight to Nashville.  The GPS time recorded for the 
flight was 1 hour and 53 minutes.  After deplaning the passenger at Nashville, the pilot took 
another passenger for a local flight for 10 to 15 minutes in the vicinity of Nashville.  After 
returning the passenger to the Nashville Howard County Airport, the pilot departed for the 
return cross-country flight to Mountain Home.
During the takeoff, the airplane "began to run rough for a few minutes."  The pilot landed the 
airplane on runway 19, taxied to the ramp area, and conducted a ground run of the airplane.  
No discrepancies were noted during the ground run, and the pilot performed the second 
takeoff.  During the runway 19 takeoff/initial climb, approximately 400 feet agl, the engine 
began to run rough and then stopped completely.  With the engine stopped, the pilot 
determined that the airplane would not make the airport.  The pilot landed the airplane in a 
field adjacent to the airport, and during the landing roll, the airplane struck a terrace, collapsed 
the nose landing gear, nosed over and came to rest inverted.
Local authorities reported that the vertical stabilizer was damaged and the propeller blades 
were straight.  The FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, found no evidence of 
fuel at the site or in the airplane.  He further reported that the integrity of the fuel system was 
not compromised.  The operator reported an accumulated flight time of 3 hours since the last 
known refueling.  In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), it was 
reported that the estimated fuel on board at the last takeoff was 8 gallons.
At 1553, the local weather observation at Texarkana, Arkansas (31 nautical miles southwest of 
the accident site), reported the wind from 200 degrees at 10 knots.
The wings were removed from the airframe and the airplane was transported to Air Salvage of 
Dallas, Lancaster, Texas, for further investigation.  On November 15, 2000, the engine 
remained attached to the airframe with the original propeller installed for an engine run.  No 
discrepancies were noted during the 17 minute engine run at various power settings.
