The certificated commercial pilot started a southeasterly takeoff run on a 700 feet long airstrip.  
He added that the airplane's acceleration was slow due to wet, tundra-covered terrain.  As the 
airplane neared the end of the airstrip, just before it became airborne, he turned the airplane to 
the left to avoid striking a truck parked at the end of the airstrip, and the left wing struck a 
cabin at the end of the airstrip.  The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings and 
fuselage.  The pilot said that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the 
airplane. 
The pilot's selection of an unsuitable takeoff area.  Factors associated with the accident were 
wet and soft terrain. 
 On October 1, 2000, about 1900 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Piper PA-18-160 
airplane, N59645, sustained substantial damage during takeoff from a remote airstrip, about 15 
miles west of Naknek, Alaska, at 58 degrees, 43 minutes north latitude, 157 degrees, 01 minutes 
west longitude.  The certificated commercial pilot, and the one passenger aboard, were not 
injured. The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under 
Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, 
and no flight plan was filed.  The flight originated about 1750, from the Naknek Airport, 
Naknek.   
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on October 2, the pilot reported that as he started a southeasterly takeoff run on a 
700 feet long remote airstrip, the airplane's acceleration was slow due to wet, tundra-covered 
terrain.  He said that as he neared that end of the site, just before the airplane became 
airborne, he turned the airplane to the left to avoid striking a truck parked at the end of the 
airstrip, and the left wing struck a cabin at the end of the takeoff area.  The airplane sustained 
substantial damage to both wings and fuselage.   
The pilot said that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
