Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Peach Springs, AZ
Incident Number:
WPR09IA140
Date & Time:
03/03/2009, 1045 MST 
Registration:
N197AE
Aircraft:
EUROCOPTER AS 350 B2
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
7 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Sightseeing
Analysis 
The pilot heard a loud pop while descending into a canyon and had a loss of main rotor rpm. 
The pilot entered an autorotation to an open area and landed successfully. Examination of the 
engine revealed that it was intact and exhibited minimal impact related damage. Disassembly 
of the engine revealed that the rear bearing support housing was intact and undamaged. The 
number three bearing was intact, however, did not rotate freely. The inner race and ball 
bearings exhibited heavy rub marks and thermal damage and the outer race exhibited thermal 
damage. No oil residue was observed on the bearing components. The damage to the number 
three bearing was consistent with oil starvation. Debris was observed within the oil scavenge 
passage of the rear bearing support housing near the oil feed ring assembly. The rear bearing 
support housing (RBSH) was removed and placed on a flow test bench. The RBSH assembly 
flowed approximately one-half of the normal oil flow rate and irregular flow patterns were 
observed. Examination of the RBSH revealed no significant damage; however, the oil passages 
that feed oil to the number three bearing assembly contained deposits that most likely 
obstructed oil flow to the bearing. Analysis of the deposited material found that it was 
composed of coked synthetic oil. Prior to the incident, the engine manufacturer issued an 
Operating Information Letter that outlined recommended engine shutdown procedures. The 
two-step process consisted of a two minute idle period prior to shutdown followed after 
shutdown by motoring the engine with the starter motor for 10 seconds. The Operating 
Information Letter indicated that not following the procedures could result in coke build up in 
the number 2 and number 3 bearing oil jets and sump area. The operator reported that 
company pilots were instructed to comply with the recommended engine idle cool down 
procedure; however, company policy did not direct pilots to comply with the recommended 
post shutdown motoring after engine shutdown procedure due to concerns about depletion of 
oil in the engine oil reservoir. It was not determined if the bearing failure was a direct result of 
the operator not complying with the complete recommended shutdown procedure outlined by 
the engine manufacturer.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
Page 2 of 8WPR09IA140
A loss of engine power due to the failure of the number three engine bearing as a result of oil 
starvation due to coked oil obstructing the oil passages.
Findings
Aircraft
Engine (turbine/turboprop) - Failure (Cause)
Page 3 of 8WPR09IA140
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On March 3, 2009, at 1045 mountain standard time, a Eurocopter AS 350 B2 helicopter, 
N197AE, sustained minor damage following a loss of engine power and subsequent forced 
landing near the Canyon West Airport, Peach Springs, Arizona. The helicopter was registered 
to XEBEC, LLC, and operated by Papillon Airways, Inc., under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135. The commercial pilot and six passengers were not injured. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a company visual flight rules flight plan was 
filed for the air tour flight. The flight originated from the Boulder City Airport, Boulder City, 
Nevada, at 1015. 
In a written report submitted to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) on March 3, 
a representative employed by the operator reported the purpose of the flight was to transport 
passengers from the departure airport to a remote sightseeing area in the Grand Canyon. 
Approximately 30 minutes after departure, during the descent to the landing area, the pilot 
heard a "loud pop" followed by a loss of main rotor RPM. The pilot transmitted a mayday call 
and performed an autorotation. 
The pilot reported that while descending into a canyon, he heard a loud pop followed by a loss 
of rotor rpm and subsequent low rotor rpm warning horn. The pilot lowered the collective and 
regained rotor rpm when he observed multiple warning lights illuminated on the instrument 
panel. The pilot stated that he raised the collective to "check if I had any power available" and 
heard the low rotor rpm warning horn a second time. The pilot initiated an autorotation to a 
clear area adjacent to his position and landed without further incident. The pilot added that 
after landing, the engine was not running, however, the rotor blades were still turning.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The pilot, age 27, held a commercial helicopter pilot certificate, and a helicopter instrument 
rating. In addition, he held a flight instructor certificate, with a rotorcraft helicopter and 
instrument rating. His most recent second-class medical certificate was issued March 3, 2009, 
with no limitations.  
  
According to operator, the pilot had accumulated approximately 1,968 total flight hours, with 
503 hours in AS350 series helicopters.
HELICOPTER INFORMATION
The single-engine, seven-place helicopter was a Eurocopter AS350 B2 that had been converted 
to an AS350 ﬁSD2ﬂ under Supplemental Type Certificate SR01647SE. This STC conversion 
included the installation of the Honeywell LTS101-700D-2 engine in the AS350B2 in place of 
the original Turbomeca Arriel 1D1 engine.
The most recent maintenance performed on the engine was a 150-hour inspection on January 
28, 2009. At the time of inspection, the engine time since new (TSN) was 8319.9 hours, time 
since overhaul (TSO) 2095.9 hours, Ng cycles of 13192.05, and Np cycles of 9279.25.
TESTS AND RESEARCH 
The Honeywell LTS101-700D-2 turboshaft engine was removed from the helicopter and 
Page 4 of 8WPR09IA140
shipped to Honeywell Aerospace, Phoenix, Arizona, for examination and disassembly. The 
examination commenced on May 5, 2009 under the supervision of NTSB investigators. 
The engine was intact with nominal impact damage noted. Various airframe components 
including the aircraft starter/generator, power shaft and adapters, aircraft fire detection 
system, torque measurement transducer and associated hardware, engine exhaust tailpipe, 
inlet adapter, and various airframe clamps and bracket hardware remained installed on the 
engine.  
The power turbine rotated about 5 degrees by hand before binding. The gas producer shaft 
rotated freely via the axial compressor rotor. Rotational continuity was established throughout 
the power turbine accessories, accessory gearbox, and output shaft. 
The gas generator module was intact. The compressor bearing retainer assembly was intact 
and undamaged. The number one bearing liner and seal rotor were intact and undamaged. The 
compressor vane assembly and axial compressor rotor were intact and undamaged. A black 
residue was observed on all axial compressor rotor blades. The compressor impeller was intact 
and undamaged. Evidence of oil was observed near the hub of the inducer of the compressor 
impeller. Rub marks were observed on the compressor impeller blades near the inducer.
The compressor assembly shaft was intact and undamaged. The impeller shroud was intact and 
appeared undamaged. Evidence of oil was observed along the flowpath of the impeller shroud.  
Rotational score marks were observed at the inducer of the impeller shroud at the 11 o'clock 
position.  The compressor diffuser assembly, diffuser housing assembly, and Gas Producer 
(GP) turbine nozzle were intact and undamaged. 
 
The GP turbine nozzle ring seals were intact and undamaged. The compressor shaft spur gear 
and low fence link assembly actuator were intact and undamaged. The number two roller 
bearing was intact and black in color. When the number two roller bearing was rotated, some 
resistance was noted.
The number one ball bearing was intact, undamaged and rotated freely. The number one ball 
bearing was not removed from the compressor housing. Evidence of seal leakage was noted.
Examination of the power turbine module revealed that the rear bearing support housing was 
intact and undamaged. Debris was observed within the oil scavenge passage of the rear bearing 
support housing near the oil feed ring assembly. The oil sump area of the rear bearing support 
housing was black in color. The rear bearing support was removed and installed on a flow test 
bench. The flow test revealed that the assembly flowed approximately one-half of the normal 
oil flow. Irregular flow patterns were observed from the oil feed ring during the flow test.
The combustor liner assembly was intact and undamaged. The power turbine nozzle assembly 
was intact. Rotational scoring was observed around a 360-degree circumference of the power 
turbine nozzle assembly which corresponded to the power turbine blades.
  
The number three bearing spacer was undamaged. The oil feed ring assembly was intact and 
black in color. Debris was observed adhering to the oil feed ring assembly.
The number two bearing outer race was intact and black in color. The number two bearing seal 
assembly was intact.
Page 5 of 8WPR09IA140
Scoring was observed on the power turbine shaft, which corresponded to the number three 
bearing inner race. The shaft of the power turbine rotor assembly was intact and discolored 
near the number three bearing.
Further examination of the number two bearing, number three bearing, oil feed ring and rear 
bearing support housing revealed the following:
Number Two Roller Bearing
Examination of the number two roller bearing revealed nominal mechanical damage. The outer 
liner, inner race, cage, and rolling elements of the bearing exhibited heat discoloration. The 
inner race rotated freely with respect to the cage and rolling elements. The rolling elements 
rotated freely within the pockets. Light and uniform wear was observed on the bearing 
components. Oil residue was observed on the bearing components.
Rear Bearing Support Housing
Examination of the rear bearing support housing revealed no significant damage. The 
accessible oil passages that feed the oil supply ring and number three ball bearing were 
examined internally using a borescope. The borescope examination revealed evidence of 
deposits consistent with coked oil on the walls of each passage.
Oil Feed Ring
X-ray examination of the oil feed ring revealed a blockage in the main oil passage. A cross 
section through the oil passages revealed long, smooth flakes/chips of black colored material in 
the main passage, near the aft end. The flakes/chips blocked the inlets of the two aft oil jets, 
which feed the number three ball bearing. An Energy Dispersive x-ray (EDX) and infrared 
analysis revealed that the flakes/chips were "most likely composed of coked synthetic oil."
Number Three Bearing
Examination of the number three bearing revealed that the inner race sections and balls 
exhibited rub type damage, deformation and heat like discoloration. The outer race exhibited a 
zone of "highly heat affected microstructure emanating from the rubbed ball contact surface."  
Heat affected material from the balls and/or the forward race was deposited on the outer race, 
aft inner race, and cage. The cage was intact and exhibited a moderate amount of pocket wear. 
No distinct evidence of oil residue was observed on the bearing components.  
Additional details pertaining to the teardown, exam and maintenance records are contained 
within the public docket for this accident.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
On January 30, 2009, Honeywell International Inc, issued an Operating Information Letter 
(OIL) to all owners, operators, airframe manufacturers, distributors, sales and service 
organizations, and field service representatives utilizing the LT101 series engine. The purpose 
of the letter was "to provide information which specifies the intent of the non-emergency 
engine shutdown procedure and maintenance actions to be taken if these shutdown procedures 
cannot be followed."  
The letter stated, in part "...The shutdown procedure consists of the following steps. The first 
step requires the power lever to be set to idle for a minimum of 2 minutes prior to shutdown. 
This second step after shutdown is that the engine is to be motored using the starter motor for 
Page 6 of 8WPR09IA140
10 seconds. These steps provide a means to stabilize the engine component temperatures to 
idle conditions prior to shutdown and ensure temperature stabilization to the engine. If the 
procedure is not followed based on experience seen in development and fielded engines, coke 
built up in the No 2 and No 3 bearing oil jets and sump area will occur. Coke build up in these 
locations may result in a loss of oil flow to the bearings which will lead to a bearing failure."
During the course of the examination, a representative from the operator reported that 
company pilots were instructed to comply with the recommended engine idle cool down 
procedure; however, company policy did not direct pilots to comply with the recommended 
post shutdown cranking/motoring after engine shutdown procedure due, in part, to 
operational concerns regarding the depletion of oil in the engine oil reservoir.
History of Flight
Enroute-descent
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
27, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/03/2009
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/26/2008
Flight Time:
1968 hours (Total, all aircraft), 503 hours (Total, this make and model), 1078 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Page 7 of 8WPR09IA140
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
EUROCOPTER
Registration:
N197AE
Model/Series:
AS 350 B2 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3909
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/26/2009, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4961 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
34 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
4602 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Honeywell
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
LTS 101
Registered Owner:
XEBEC LLC
Rated Power:
732 hp
Operator:
Papillon Airways
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LAS
Distance from Accident Site:
52 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0545 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
83°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Broken / 16000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 16000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Boulder City, NV (61B)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Grand Canyon, AZ 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0915 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
6 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
7 None
Latitude, Longitude:
35.990278, -113.816389
Page 8 of 8
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis J Hogenson
Adopted Date:
07/22/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Charlie W Bierman; FAA FSDO; Las Vegas, NV
Lindsay Cunningham; American Eurocopter; Grand Prairie, TX
Dana Metz; Honeywell Aerospace; Phoenix, AZ
Dean Brandt; Papillon; Boulder City, NV
Publish Date:
07/22/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
