Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Salinas, CA
Accident Number:
WPR12LA241
Date & Time:
06/01/2012, 1059 PDT 
Registration:
N125CW
Aircraft:
WESTCOTT PROWLER JAGUAR
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Witnesses reported that the airplane accelerated down the runway, and immediately after 
takeoff the nose pitched up, and the airplane stalled, rolled, pitched down, and impacted the 
ground nose first. A postaccident examination of the flight control surfaces revealed no 
evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. 
The forensic pathologist who performed the postmortem examination of the pilot reported that 
the pilot experienced a sudden cardiac event as a result of coronary artery atherosclerosis while 
piloting the airplane. The cardiac event is commonly associated with sudden unexpected death 
and would have resulted in incapacitation.
 
 
 
 
 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 6WPR12LA241
The pilot's inability to maintain airplane control during takeoff due to an incapacitating cardiac 
event. 
 
 
 
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not specified (Cause)
Personnel issues
Cardiovascular - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 6WPR12LA241
Factual Information
HISTORY OF THE FLIGHT 
On June 1, 2012, at 1059 Pacific daylight time, an experimental Westcott Prowler Jaguar, 
N125CW, impacted terrain immediately after takeoff at the Salinas Municipal Airport, Salinas, 
California. The airplane was registered to, and operated by, the owner/builder under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The airline transport pilot was fatally 
injured. The airplane was destroyed and involved in a post-accident fire. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had not been filed. 
According to the Monterey County Sheriff, witnesses reported observing the airplane accelerate 
down runway 26. Immediately after takeoff the nose pitched up, the airplane stalled, rolled, 
and pitched down, then impacted the ground nose first. A post-crash fire ensued.  Witnesses 
stated that they could audibly hear the engine operating all the way up to ground impact. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The pilot, age 73, held an airline transport pilot certificate with an airplane multiengine land 
rating and commercial privileges for airplane single engine land. He held a third-class medical 
certificate issued February 8, 2012, with the limitation that he wear lenses for distant vision, 
and have glasses for near vision.  The pilot reported on his medical application that his flight 
experience included 20,000 flight hours and 75 hours in the previous 6 months.  The pilot's 
logbook was not located and was not examined by investigators. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
The experimental category tandem configured, low wing, airplane with retractable landing 
gear, serial number 0012, was manufactured in 2007. It was powered by a Rodeck V8 350-hp 
engine.  Airplane maintenance records were not located and were not examined by 
investigators. 
WRECKAGE & IMPACT INFORMATION 
The wreckage was located on the south side of runway 26 near taxi way D. A Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) Inspector examined the wreckage and reported that all flight control 
surfaces were present and that the airplane had been consumed by a post-crash fire. 
Airport surveillance cameras captured the airplane's last few seconds prior to the accident. 
Camera 7 was located on the south side of the runway near the approach end of runway 26. The 
imagery depicted the airplane passing through the upper right corner of the camera's field of 
view at an approximately 30° angle climb at 1058:45, and exiting the frame at 1058:47. The 
airplane reenters the frame at 1058:49 in an extreme nose down attitude, impacts terrain at 
1058:54, and was immediately followed by a fire ball explosion. 
Camera 9, located on a building on the north side of runway 26, views the intersection of taxi 
way D and runway 26/08. The camera imagery depicts the airplane entering the field of view at 
1058:52 in an extreme nose low attitude with the left wing pointing towards the ground. The 
airplane rolls approximately 90° to its left and impacts the terrain inverted nose first 2 seconds 
later.  A fireball explosion immediately follows. 
MEDICAL & PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
Page 4 of 6WPR12LA241
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on June 4, 2012, by the Monterey County Forensic 
Pathologist, at the Monterey County Coroner Facility, Salinas, California.  The pathologist's 
summary stated that the pilot most likely died  suddenly as a result of coronary artery 
atherosclerosis (heart attack due to hardening and narrowing of arteries that supply the heart 
muscle), commonly associated with sudden unexpected death. No rapidly fatal injuries 
sustained in the airplane crash were observed at autopsy. 
The FAA's Forensic Toxicology Research Team CAMI performed forensic toxicology on 
specimens from the pilot. The following results were reported; no carbon monoxide detected in 
blood, no cyanide detected in blood, no ethanol detected in vitreous, and no listed drugs 
identified in urine.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) 
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial; 
Flight Engineer
Age:
73
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/29/2012
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 20000 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6WPR12LA241
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
WESTCOTT
Registration:
N125CW
Model/Series:
PROWLER JAGUAR 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
0012
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
AMA/EXPR
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
Rodeck V8
Registered Owner:
WESTCOTT CHARLES R
Rated Power:
350 hp
Operator:
WESTCOTT CHARLES R
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSNS, 85 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1101 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.89 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Salinas, CA (KSNS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Unknown
Destination: 
Salinas, CA (KSNS)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Salinas Municipal Airport (KSNS)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
85 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
26
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6000 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 6 of 6WPR12LA241
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
36.662778, -121.610000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Van McKenny
Adopted Date:
02/03/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Wilbert J Robinson; Federal Aviation Administration; San Jose, CA
Publish Date:
02/03/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=83828
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
