The pilot reported that on the previous flight the left engine surged at 14,700 feet and the flight 
could not be conducted at the planned altitude of 19,000 feet. He stated that during descent to 
land the engines performed normally at lower altitudes. After landing he talked with a 
mechanic on the telephone and a decision was made to conduct the next leg of the trip at a 
lower altitude. During the takeoff, a loss of power was experienced and the pilot attempted to 
return to the airport.  During the turn back to the airport, the airplane lost altitude and the 
pilot decided to turn away from the populated areas and land the airplane in a field. During the 
landing the airplane struck a ditch. An examination of the airplane subsequent to the accident 
did not reveal any defects that would have resulted in a loss of engine power.
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. Contributing to the accident was the 
unsuitable terrain for the forced landing.
On July 2, 2008, about 0700 central daylight time, a Smith Aerostar 601P, N601TS, piloted by 
an airline transport pilot, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing following a loss 
of engine power on takeoff from the Chandler Field Airport, Alexandria, Minnesota.  The 14 
CFR Part 91 business flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions on an instrument 
flight rules flight plan.  There were no injuries reported to the pilot or three passengers.  The 
flight was originating at the time of the accident and Saint Louis, Missouri, was the intended 
destination.
The pilot reported that on the previous flight the left engine experienced surging at 14,700 feet 
and the flight could not be conducted at the expected altitude of 19,000 feet.  He stated that 
during descent the engines performed normally at lower altitudes. After landing, he talked with 
a mechanic on the telephone and a decision was made to conduct the next leg of the trip at a 
lower altitude. He stated that during the takeoff, as he rotated, he noticed that the airplane's 
performance was less than usual. He determined that insufficient runway remained to abort 
the takeoff and he elected to continue and return to the airport.  He stated that he was unable 
to determine which engine was the reason for the power loss. He stated that he was unable to 
climb higher than 150 feet above the ground or to accelerate beyond 110 miles per hour. The 
pilot reported that while attempting to turn back to the airport he lost speed and decided to 
turn the airplane away from the populated areas and land in a field that was southeast of the 
airport.  He reported that he touched down on level terrain, but the airplane subsequently 
struck a drainage ditch during the landing.
Both engines were Lycoming model IO-540-S1A5 engines and each had 4,316.5 hours total 
time in service.  The most recent overhaul of the engines was performed on July 1, 1994, and 
each engine had accumulated 458 hours since that overhaul. 
The airplane was examined subsequent to the accident. Both engines were rotated by hand and 
"thumb" compression was evident. Fuel was found in the fuel lines leading to the fuel servos 
and to the fuel manifolds. Fuel was found within the airplane's fuel tanks. Magneto timing was 
checked and was found to be within specifications.  Examination did not reveal any defects that 
would have resulted in a loss of engine power.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
