The pilot reported that the airplane was about 300 ft above the ground and on final approach 
when the engine "quit suddenly with no surging or other warning signs." He selected the 
auxiliary fuel pump to the high position and switched fuel tanks. The pilot stated that the 
engine "came back to life momentarily and then quit again." The airplane was unable to reach 
the runway, and the pilot made a forced landing in a lagoon about 1/4 mile short of the runway, 
during which the right wing sustained structural damage. 
Examination of the fuel system revealed that the right fuel tank was full and that the left fuel 
tank had 15 gallons of fuel remaining. Evidence of fuel was also noted in the lines from the fuel 
tanks to the fuel manifold valve. Internal engine continuity was confirmed, and compression 
and suction were observed on all of the cylinders. The spark plug electrodes were normal in 
appearance. The engine-driven fuel pump and magnetos were tested, and no evidence of a 
preexisting malfunction was found. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be 
determined.
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined during postaccident 
examinations and testing.
On January 3, 2015, about 1015 eastern standard time (EST), a Cessna P206, N2534X, was 
force landed in a lagoon following a total loss of engine power during an approach to Key West 
International Airport (EYW), Key West, Florida. The airline transport pilot and three 
passengers received minor injuries and two passengers were not injured. The airplane was 
substantially damaged. The airplane was operated by Exec Air Inc. under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Day, visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed. The flight originated at Naples, Florida (APF) about 0920.
The pilot reported the following. About 300 feet above the ground, on final approach to runway 
9, the engine "quit suddenly with no surging or other warning signs." He selected the auxiliary 
fuel pump to the high position and switched fuel tanks. The engine "came back to life 
momentarily and then quit again." Unable to make the runway, the airplane landed short in a 
lagoon, about one quarter mile from the runway. The airplane came to rest in about 3 feet of 
salt water. The pilot reported that he departed APF with about 78 gallons of fuel on board. 
An inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration responded to the accident site and 
examined the wreckage. The right wing exhibited structural damage from impact forces. The 
fuel selector was in the "off" position; however, he reported that the selector handle was moved 
to off from the "right tank" position by recovery personnel. The wing tanks were also de-fueled 
prior to his arrival. About 15 gallons of fuel were recovered from the left tank and about 40 
gallons of fuel were recovered from the right tank. The nose gear was crushed upward, into the 
underside of the engine. There was no fuel or oil observed on the exterior surfaces of the 
airplane. A fueling record was recovered that indicated 42.2 gallons of fuel was purchased at 
APF prior to the flight.
Fuel was observed in the lines between the electric boost pump and the engine-driven fuel 
pump, in the line from the engine-driven pump to the fuel metering valve, and there was fuel in 
the line entering the fuel manifold valve and inside the valve. The engine-driven fuel pump 
appeared normal and the drive shaft was intact. The top six spark plugs were removed and 
were normal in appearance. The engine was turned by hand; internal continuity was 
established and compression and suction was confirmed an all six cylinders. The magnetos 
were tuned by hand; the impulse couplings appeared to operate normally. No spark was 
observed on the ignition leads when the magnetos were turned. The magnetos and ignition 
harnesses were retained by the FAA inspector for additional examination and testing.
On April 9, 2015, the magnetos, ignition harnesses, and engine driven fuel pump were 
examined at the Continental Motors facility at Mobile, Alabama under the direction of the 
NTSB. 
The fuel pump (part # 638154-1; serial # 1752) did not exhibit external damage. The spline on 
the fuel pump was intact and the unit rotated when actuated by hand. The fuel pump was 
installed on a test stand and ran at rpms between 700 and 3,200 for several minutes. The unit 
functioned as designed and the recorded pressure was high.
The left magneto (Slick model # 6210; serial # 90080047) did not exhibit external damage. 
The left magneto was installed on a test bench and ran at different rpms for several minutes. A 
blue spark was observed on each lead at varying rpms. The right magneto (Slick model # 6210; 
serial #91040206) did not exhibit external damage. The right magneto was installed on a test 
bench and ran at different rpms for several minutes. A blue spark was observed on each lead at 
varying rpms.
Two passengers reported to an FAA inspector that the airplane was "chartered" by a third 
passenger for the round trip flight to EYW. A credit card receipt for $1,180.80 was provided to 
investigators, on the third passenger's credit card and charged by the operator, Exec Air. Exec 
Air holds an FAA Airline Certificate for On Demand Airplane operations. The certificate only 
has 1 approved aircraft, a Cessna 182. The Cessna 206 used in the accident flight is not 
approved on the certificate. The owner of Exec Air reported after the accident that the charge to 
the passenger's credit card was for anticipated expenses incurred during the personal flight. 
The FAA is pursuing certificate action against the operator and pilot for conducting an 
unauthorized charter flight. At the time of this writing, that action was still pending.
