The pilot had given an airplane ride to a passenger earlier in the day, and departed on a second 
flight with another passenger.  Two witnesses described the airplane's flight path from east to 
west over their heads and then returning from the south over the river.  They described the 
engine noise as smooth and without interruption.  The airplane descended into the river 
channel, below the tops of the trees, at a steep angle of bank.  The airplane 'fluttered' as it 
continued through a steep left turn and struck the treetops along the riverbank.  The airplane 
continued through the trees approximately 500 feet before it struck terrain and caught fire.  
Several composite propeller fragments and pieces of angular cut wood were found along the 
wreckage path.  Other than extensive fire damage, no discrepancies were noted in the wreckage 
of the airframe or engine.  Immediately after the crash, the pilot reported to one of the 
witnesses, 'I don't understand.  I just couldn't get it out of my bank.' 
the pilot's failure to maintain adequate altitude/clearance from the trees while maneuvering at 
low altitude. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 1, 1999, at 1530 Eastern Standard Time, a homebuilt Long-EZ airplane, N743TC, 
was destroyed during a collision with trees and terrain while maneuvering over the 
Rappahannock River, Remington, Virginia.  The airplane was consumed by post-crash fire.  
The certificated airline transport (ATP) rated passenger was seriously injured, and the ATP 
rated pilot/owner died as a result of his injuries on November 3, 1999.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the personal flight that originated at the Culpeper Regional Airport 
(CJR), approximately 1515.  No flight plan was filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 
91.
In telephone interviews, two witnesses who were fishing in the Rappahannock River at the time 
of the accident described seeing the accident airplane earlier in the day and at the time of the 
accident.  Both witnesses described the airplane's flight path from east to west over their heads 
and then returning from the south over the river.
The first witness said:
"They flew over us.  They were up fairly high heading [west].  They circled around and when 
they came back over the river he was making an extreme hard left to go back [west] and when I 
saw him, I could see the underbelly.  The wings were at about a 60 or 70 degree angle and it 
sort of fluttered a little bit.  
"It looked like he was gonna make it but he hit the very, very, top of the trees.  He just kept 
clipping off the tops.  They were really big tall trees.  There was no explosion, just a big 'woof' 
and a black cloud of smoke."
When questioned about the sound of the airplane's engine, the witness said:
"The engine sounded fine.  I commented to my son how good it sounded.  The plane sounded 
outstanding.  Good running, real smooth running machine."
The second witness provided a telephone interview, a written statement, and a diagram of the 
airplane's flight path.  He said the airplane crossed over head from east to west and turned left 
over the woods on the west side of the river.  The witness stated the airplane continued in a left 
turn and reappeared over the river, heading north towards his position.  He said:
"He banked down left into the river channel and never came out of his bank.  He was flying 
about 200 to 250 feet then he banked it down into the river like the biplanes do.  It was 
something around a 45-degree bank.  Halfway between 90 degrees and zero.  It was a fairly 
aggressive bank.  I don't know where he lost control, whether it was over the trees or over the 
channel.  He appeared to be back under control before he hit the trees; he just couldn't get the 
nose up.  When he dove into the river, I didn't think anything of it.  But he just didn't pull out.  
The pilot said, 'I don't understand.  I just couldn't get it out of my bank'."
When questioned about the sound of the airplane's engine, the second witness said:
"I didn't notice any unusual sounds.  If there was smoke, or a sputter, or a stall, I think I would 
have recognized it."
In a telephone interview, a friend and coworker of the pilot said he was at the Culpepper 
Airport waiting for the airplane to return when he learned of the accident.  He said he flew with 
the pilot/owner just prior to the accident flight.  According to the witness:
"I flew for about half and hour.  Then I jumped out and [the passenger] jumped in.  The plane 
flew great.  I sat in the back seat.  The back seat had a side-stick, but no rudder or engine 
controls."
When asked if the routing of his flight was similar to that of the accident flight, the witness 
said:
"No.  When I flew, we flew out to the west and flew around.  We climbed to altitude and I got to 
fly around a while.  [The pilot] demonstrated some of the characteristics of a canard airplane.  
It handled really nice."
The witness said that after landing, the pilot serviced the airplane with fuel and then departed 
on the accident flight.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight approximately 38 degrees, 32 minutes 
north latitude, and 77 degrees, 45 minutes west longitude.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held an airline transport pilot's certificate with ratings for airplane multi-engine land.  
He held a commercial pilot's certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land and single 
engine sea.  A review of the pilot's logbooks revealed that entries stopped on March 10, 1999.  
However, several handwritten notes were attached to the pages and noted flight time until 
August 1, 1999.  The pilot logged approximately 3,000 hours of total time with approximately 
60 hours noted in the Long EZ.
The pilot's most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) first class medical certificate 
was issued July 13, 1999.  The pilot reported 3,000 hours of flight experience on that date.
The passenger held an airline transport pilot's certificate with ratings for airplane multi-engine 
land and a commercial pilot's certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land.
The passenger's most recent FAA first class medical certificate was issued May 12, 1999, and he 
reported 2,400 hours of flight experience on that date.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane's maintenance records were not recovered.  Searches of the accident site, the 
airplane's hanger, the pilot's vehicle, and his home were unsuccessful.  However, the first entry 
in the pilot's logbook that reflected a flight in N743TC was recorded on October 4, 1997.  In the 
remarks section it stated, "First flight of rebuilt Long EZ with retractable gear."
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Weather reported at Manassas Regional Airport, 20 miles northeast of CJR, was clear skies 
with winds from 130 degrees at 9 knots.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The wreckage was examined at the site on November 2, 1999, and all major components were 
accounted for at the scene.  The wreckage path was oriented 210 degrees and measured 
approximately 460 feet from the initial point of tree contact to the main wreckage.  The 
wreckage path was divided into one-foot increments called wreckage points (WP).  The first 
tree contact (WP zero) was 60 feet west of the river's edge, approximately 45 feet above the 
ground.  
Structural foam, aircraft skin, and composite propeller fragments were scattered along the 
wreckage path from WP 160 to the main wreckage.  The left rudder and the left winglet were at 
WP 220 and 235 respectively.  Several angular cut branches were found along the wreckage 
path.
The main wreckage came to rest upright, oriented 320 degrees, and was consumed by post-
crash fire.  An elliptical burn scar, approximately 90 feet long and 30 feet wide, surrounded the 
main wreckage.  Trees inside the scar were burned to heights approximately 40 feet above the 
ground.
The airframe, instruments, gauges, and controls were destroyed by fire.  Power control cable 
continuity was established from the cockpit to the engine.  Routing of flight control cables, 
push-pull tubes, and bellcranks was determined from the cockpit to the flight control surfaces.  
Control continuity could not be determined.  Excessive deformation, melting, and complete 
destruction of components by fire was noted throughout the flight control system.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner for the 
Commonwealth of Virginia.  
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The engine was removed from the site and examined in a maintenance garage in Remington, 
Virginia, on November 2, 1999.  The engine and its associated components were extensively 
damaged by fire.  Impact and fire destroyed the accessory case.  The composite propeller blades 
were fragmented and fire damaged.  Impact and fire destroyed the oil sump and carburetor. 
The fragmented, melted accessory case and its associated components were removed from the 
back of engine to facilitate rotation of the internal components.  
The spark plugs were intact and the electrodes were tan and gray in color.  The cylinders, 
pistons, and valves were examined by borescope.  These components displayed uniform wear 
and no anomalies.
The engine was rotated by hand and continuity was established throughout the powertrain and 
valvetrain.  Compression was confirmed using the thumb method.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Examination of fuel records revealed that N743TC was serviced with 18.5 gallons of 100LL 
aviation fuel prior to the accident flight.
The aircraft wreckage was released to the pilot/owner's roommate on November 6, 2000.
