The airplane's engine lost power as a result of fuel exhaustion, and during the ensuing forced 
landing the airplane struck trees.  According to the flight instructor, he visually confirmed that 
each fuel tank was 1/2 full before departing on a local training flight.  He estimated that he had 
approximately 2 hours of flying time, based on the quantity of fuel in the tanks.  The flight 
departed, flew approximately one hour, and returned to the airport.  The student was executing 
touch-and-go landings, and on the fourth takeoff/climb, as the airplane turned crosswind, the 
engine began to 'sputter.'  The flight instructor assumed control of the airplane and aligned it 
with runway 13.  After the airplane had overflown 1/2 of the 3,601-foot runway, he advanced 
the throttle to see if the engine would respond. The engine responded, and he initiated a climb 
to set up for another landing.  As the instructor turned the airplane back toward runway 31, the 
engine lost total power.  The airplane came to rest 0.5 miles north of the approach end of 
runway 31.  The FAA inspector, who examined the airplane, stated that both fuel tanks 
contained residual fuel only. 
Fuel exhaustion as a result of the flight instructor's failure to refuel the airplane.  A factor was 
the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
 On November 1, 1999, at 1630 central standard time, a Cessna 172B airplane, N7833X, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted trees and terrain during a forced landing near 
Beaumont, Texas.  The certified flight instructor and student pilot were not injured.  The 
airplane was registered to an operated by a private individual.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight and a 
flight plan was not filed.  The local flight originated from the Beaumont Municipal Airport, 
Beaumont, Texas, at 1500. 
According to the flight instructor, he visually confirmed that each wing fuel tank was 1/2 full 
during the preflight inspection.  He estimated that he had approximately 2 hours of flying time 
based on the quantity of fuel in the tanks.  The airplane departed and flew approximately one 
hour before returning to the airport.  The student was executing touch-and-go landings on 
runway 31, and during the fourth takeoff/climb, as the airplane turned cross-wind, the engine 
began to "sputter."  The flight instructor assumed control of the airplane and turned the 
airplane toward runway 13.  The airplane had overflown 1/2 the length of the 3,601-foot 
runway when the instructor advanced the throttle to see if the engine would respond.  The 
engine responded, and the instructor initiated a climb, intending to initiate another approach.  
The instructor turned the airplane back toward runway 31, and simultaneously, the engine 
"sputtered" and lost total power.  The instructor executed a forced landing to a field.  While on 
short final to the field, the airplane's wings struck trees, and the airplane contacted the ground.  
The airplane came to rest upright, 0.5 miles from the approach end of runway 31.  The 
instructor stated that he visually checked the fuel tanks after the accident, and there "appeared 
to be little fuel in both tanks."     
The FAA inspector, who examined the airplane, reported that both wing spars were structurally 
damaged.  He added that the fuel tanks contained "residual fuel only."
