Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Tuckerman, AR
Accident Number:
FTW02LA137
Date & Time:
05/02/2002, 1645 CDT 
Registration:
N3146S
Aircraft:
Cessna 182G
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
While in cruise flight, approximately two hours and ten minutes after departure, the engine 
lost power, and the pilot was unable to restart the engine.  During the forced landing, the 
airplane touched down in a rice field.  During the landing roll, the nose landing gear impacted a 
levee, and the airplane nosed over coming to rest inverted.  Earlier in the day during a fuel 
stop, an individual loaned the pilot a pair of needle nose pliers after the pilot stated that the 
locking tabs were broken from the cap on the left main fuel tank.  The individual suggested to 
the pilot that he purchase a new fuel cap; however, the pilot did not purchase one.  At the 
departure airport, ground personnel reported to the pilot that the left main tank had a "bad 
fuel leak."  After fueling the airplane, the pilot duct taped the left main fuel tank filler cap.  An 
examination of the fuel system by an FAA inspector revealed that the left fuel filler cap was 
loose and its clip was broken.  No fuel was found in either tank, and there was no evidence of a 
fuel spill; however, there was blue streaking from the left fuel tank filler port.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's operation of the airplane with a known equipment deficiency, which resulted in fuel 
leakage and a loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.  A contributing factors was the lack 
of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Page 2 of 6FTW02LA137
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,CAP - LEAK
3. FLUID,FUEL - SIPHONING
4. (C) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
5. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - DIRT BANK/RISING EMBANKMENT
Page 3 of 6FTW02LA137
Factual Information
On May 2, 2002, at 1645 central daylight time, a Cessna 182G single-engine airplane, N3146S, 
was substantially damaged when it impacted a levee during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power near Tuckerman, Arkansas.  The airplane was registered to Silver Air Inc. of 
Wilmington, Delaware, and operated by Silverwing Aviation of Searcy, Arkansas.  The 
commercial pilot sustained minor injuries, and his  passenger was seriously injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed 
and activated for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The cross-country 
flight departed from Sherman Army Field (FLV), Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, approximately 
1430, for a destination of Newport, Arkansas.
The 1050-hour pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, (NTSB Form 
6120.1/2), that he "had the airplane topped off before leaving FLV."  He took off and climbed 
out with the fuel selector in the "BOTH" position.  After leveling off, he switched the fuel 
selector to the "LEFT" tank, and flew for approximately 1 hour and 20 minutes, then switched 
to the "RIGHT" tank.  The engine sputtered after just a few minutes so he checked the 
carburetor heat and switched back to "BOTH".  "The engine began running normal again."  The 
pilot stated that they were in VFR conditions and could see his destination, so he canceled his 
IFR clearance.  The enginelost power and his attempt to restart it was unsuccessful, so he 
landed in a field short of his destination.  During the landing roll in the field, the nose landing 
gear impacted a levee and separated.  The airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.
According to an FAA inspector, earlier in the day, the airplane departed Newport for Fort 
Leavenworth.  During a fuel stop at Harrisonville, Missouri, an individual loaned the pilot a 
pair of needle nose pliers after the pilot stated that the locking tabs were broken from the cap 
on the left main fuel tank.  The individual suggested to the pilot that he purchase a new fuel 
cap; however, the pilot did not purchase one.  The airplane was serviced with 46.390 gallons of 
100LL fuel, and the airplane departed for the 15 minute flight to Fort Leavenworth.  After 
landing, the pilot purchase approximately 27 gallons of 100LL fuel from a self service pump.  
Ground personnel reported to the pilot that the left main tank had a "bad fuel leak," and the 
pilot stated that the cap was broken.  The pilot was offered duct tape, and he taped the left 
main fuel tank filler cap with approximately 2 square feet of the duct tape.  During the flight to 
Newport, approximately two miles west of Tuckerman, the engine lost power.  The airplane 
was found in a rice field about 60 feet short of a private grass strip, which the pilot was 
attempting to land.
An examination of the airplane, by FAA inspectors who responded to the accident site, revealed 
that the landing gear, the firewall, and the left wing spar were damaged.  Examination of the 
fuel system revealed that the left fuel filler cap was loose and the clip was broken.  No fuel was 
found in either tank, and there was no evidence of a fuel spill; however, there was blue 
streaking from the left fuel tank filler port to the trailing edge of the wing.
The total fuel capacity of the Cessna 182G is 65 gallons
Page 4 of 6FTW02LA137
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
25, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/12/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/13/2002
Flight Time:
1050 hours (Total, all aircraft), 18 hours (Total, this make and model), 927 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 125 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N3146S
Model/Series:
182G 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18255646
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/27/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3495.6 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-470-R
Registered Owner:
Silver Air, Inc.
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
Silverwing Aviation
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW02LA137
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
JBR, 262 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
28 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1653 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
70°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2200 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.89 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Leavenworth, KS (FLV)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Newport, CT (M19)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1430 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
35.726944, -91.242778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Douglas D Wigington
Adopted Date:
09/30/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael L Wilson; FAA FSDO; Little Rock, AR
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW02LA137
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
