Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Kingman, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX02LA147
Date & Time:
05/01/2002, 1858 PDT 
Registration:
N90802
Aircraft:
Air Tractor AT-802A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
The airplane ground looped during landing and the left main landing gear strut fractured and 
separated.  The pilot told a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that the landing 
gear strut collapsed unexpectedly, and without warning, during the landing roll, and the 
airplane ground looped to the right.  It was not subjected to an abnormal load during landing 
and the airplane was relatively light with no chemical load aboard and about 1,300 pounds of 
fuel.  The inspector examined the airplane and said the left landing gear leaf broke inside the 
saddle.  There was rust and beach marks in the fracture face indicative of a pre-existing crack.  
The FAA inspector said the left landing gear strut, a single spring steel leaf, separated in the 
shoulder area where the strut enters the saddle at the fuselage skin line.  The left landing gear 
wheel was broken in the outboard flange area and the tire was deflated.  The tire exhibited deep 
radial scratch marks on the outboard side wall.  The aileron hinge bracket at the left wing tip 
was bent inboard and striations on the left wing lower surface were oriented spanwise.  The left 
wing outer half-span was bent upward accompanied by compression wrinkling of the upper 
wing skin.  Examination of the fracture by a metallurgical laboratory revealed that the strut 
met the manufacturer's chemical, hardness, and materials specifications for the component.  
The fracture through the strut was characterized by two distinct modes.  The first was 0.08 
inches in depth and 0.37 inches in width and exhibited features consistent with fatigue.  The 
fatigue crack had multiple initiation sites along the top surface in an area that had fretting 
damage.  The remainder of the fracture face displayed gross overload features.  According to 
the laboratory report, the transverse failure of the strut resulted from an overload condition, 
with high side and drag loads, well in excess of the design ultimate load for the component.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the pilot to maintain directional control during landing.
Page 2 of 6LAX02LA147
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
3. LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR STRUT - OVERLOAD
4. LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR STRUT - FRACTURED
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - RUNWAY
Page 3 of 6LAX02LA147
Factual Information
On May 1, 2000, at 1858 Pacific daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-802A, N90802, main landing 
gear collapsed during landing roll at the Kingman, Arizona, airport.  The airline transport 
certificated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  
The flight departed from Eagle Airpark, Bullhead City, Arizona, about 1840.  The repositioning 
flight of the agricultural application aircraft was operated under 14 CFR Part 91 by Eagle 
Aviation.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot told an inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (Las Vegas, Nevada) 
Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) that the landing gear strut collapsed unexpectedly, and 
without warning, during the landing roll, and the airplane ground looped to the right.  It was 
not subjected to an abnormal load during landing and the airplane was relatively light with no 
chemical load aboard and about 1,300 pounds of fuel. 
The inspector examined the airplane and said the left landing gear leaf broke inside the saddle.  
There was rust and beach marks in the fracture face indicative of a pre-existing crack.  The 
model year 2000 airplane had about 1,100 hours total flying time and had recently received a 
100-hour maintenance inspection; however, the inspector said the area where the crack 
occurred was difficult to inspect.
The FSDO inspector said the left landing gear strut, a single spring steel leaf, separated in the 
shoulder area where the strut enters the saddle at the fuselage skin line.  The left landing gear 
wheel was broken in the outboard flange area and the tire was deflated.  The tire exhibited deep 
radial scratch marks on the outboard side wall.  The aileron hinge bracket at the left wing tip 
was bent inboard and striations on the left wing lower surface were oriented spanwise.  The left 
wing outer half-span was bent upward accompanied by compression wrinkling of the upper 
wing skin.
Examination of the fracture by a metallurgical laboratory revealed that the strut met the 
manufacturer's chemical, hardness, and materials specifications for the component.  The 
fracture through the strut was characterized by two distinct modes.  The first was 0.08 inches 
in depth and 0.37 inches in width and exhibited features consistent with fatigue.  The fatigue 
crack had multiple initiation sites along the top surface in an area that had fretting damage.  
The remainder of the fracture face displayed gross overload features.  According to the 
laboratory report, the transverse failure of the strut resulted from an overload condition, with 
high side and drag loads, well in excess of the design ultimate load for the component.  The 
complete metallurgical report is in the docket for this accident.
Page 4 of 6LAX02LA147
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/01/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/01/2001
Flight Time:
30000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 200 hours (Total, this make and model), 28000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 95 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Air Tractor
Registration:
N90802
Model/Series:
AT-802A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
92
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
33 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
1107 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney Canada
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
PT6-65
Registered Owner:
William R. Dare
Rated Power:
750 hp
Operator:
William R. Dare
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
Eagle Aviation
Operator Designator Code:
Page 5 of 6LAX02LA147
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
IGM, 3449 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1856 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.82 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / -9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Bullhead City, AZ (A09)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Kingman, AZ (IGM)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1840 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Kingman (IGM)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
3449 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
21
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6831 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
35.265833, -113.941111
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
RICHARD B PARKER
Adopted Date:
04/25/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Frank Vavra; Federal Aviation Administration; Las Vegas, NV
T Hirsch; Air Tractor, Inc.; Olney, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX02LA147
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
