The commercial pilot was conducting an agricultural application flight. He reported that, after 
reaching a field and during the first turn, the engine experienced a partial loss of engine power. 
During the subsequent attempt to land, the pilot turned the helicopter to avoid power lines. 
The helicopter subsequently landed hard and rolled onto its right side. 
A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. The engine was test run 
with no anomalies noted. The reason for the partial loss of engine power could not be 
determined.
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation. 
On February 1, 2015, about 0030 Pacific standard time, a Robinson R44 II, N510KJ, force 
landed following a partial loss of engine power approximately 5 miles east of Calexico, 
California. The commercial pilot was not injured, and the helicopter was substantially 
damaged. The helicopter was registered and operated by John Reed Aviation as a 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight. Night, visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The local flight originated at Calexico International 
Airport, Calexico, California, about 0025.
The pilot reported in a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), that the pilot who flew the helicopter on the previous flight stated 
to him prior to the accident flight that there was a "feeling and increasing vibration on the 
pedals." A subsequent examination of the helicopter revealed no anomalies. He further stated, 
"I started it [the accident helicopter], and did a hover control check to make sure everything 
was working properly, after that I took off to do the high recon of the field. There were power 
lines to the north, after the recon I set up for my first practice pass (south to north) wind was 
out of the west so the turns where going to be to the west." After reaching the field and during 
the first turn, the engine experienced a partial loss of power. He further stated "I started my 
pull, to perform a 'P' turn [A turning maneuver where at the conclusion of the spray pass, the 
helicopter pulls up, initially turns to the right, and then makes a left turn until it is lined up for 
the next pass], with the same inputs on the controls as I've done plenty of times in the past, and 
as the aircraft started to gain altitude and lose airspeed, the RPMs went down, it felt like the 
governor was not able to keep them on the green, I lowered collective and rolled throttle on, 
also I turned to the west to avoid the power lines, I flared as I got close to the ground–" The 
helicopter landed hard and rolled onto its right side, resulting in substantial damage to the 
forward fuselage and tailboom.
The pilot reported to the NTSB that he accumulated a total time of 583 hours in rotorcraft, and 
40 hours in the last 90 days. He also accumulated a total night flying experience of 85 hours.
The United States Naval Observatory data indicated that the sunset and end of civil twilight at 
the accident site were at 1714 and 1740, respectively. The moon was in a waxing gibbous phase, 
with 96% of the moon's visible disk illuminated.
Examination of the helicopter was performed by the NTSB and a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector. The agricultural sprayer assembly was removed from the 
fuselage prior to the examination of the wreckage. The main rotor blades, tail boom sections, 
drive shaft, tail rotor assembly and four transmission drive belts were removed from the 
helicopter prior to the examination and found with the main wreckage. The four transmission 
drive belts were cut to facilitate their removal and revealed normal wear. A section of the tail 
rotor pitch control rod, about 3 feet in length, separated from the aft control rod end, and was 
not found during the examination. Examination of the fuselage revealed that the windshield 
separated from both left and right sides and was buckled in several locations. The main rotor 
blades remained intact and were buckled in several locations. The tail rotor assembly was 
intact and the stinger separated near the aft attachment. The tail rotor blade pitch movement 
moved freely by hand. The engine cowling and fan shroud was undamaged. The instrument 
panel was undamaged. Control continuity was established from the cabin controls to the 
swashplate and damaged tail rotor control rod. Examination of the Lycoming IO-520-AE1AA 
engine revealed no anomalies. The helicopter was setup for a test run and the engine started 
with little hesitation. The engine ran smoothly for several minutes and a magneto check was 
performed. Several throttle bursts were applied and the engine was shut down normally.
