The instrument-rated commercial pilot was approaching the destination airport after a cross-
country flight in night instrument meteorological conditions. According to radar track data and 
air traffic control communications, while receiving radar vectors to the final approach course, 
the pilot did not always immediately comply with assigned headings and, on several occasions, 
allowed the airplane to descend below assigned altitudes. According to airplane performance 
calculations based on radar track and GPS data, the pilot made an engine power reduction 
about 2.5 minutes before the accident as he maneuvered toward the final approach fix. 
Following the engine power reduction, the airplane's airspeed decreased from 162 to 75 knots 
calibrated airspeed, and the angle of attack increased from 2.7° to 14°. About 4 miles from the 
final approach fix, the airplane descended below the specified minimum altitude for that 
segment of the instrument approach. The tower controller subsequently alerted the pilot of the 
airplane's low altitude, and the pilot replied that he would climb. At the time of the altitude 
alert, the airplane was 500 ft below the specified minimum altitude of 2,000 ft mean sea level. 
According to airplane performance calculations, 5 seconds after the tower controller told the 
pilot to check his altitude, the pilot made an abrupt elevator-up input that further decreased 
airspeed, and the airplane entered an aerodynamic stall. A witness saw the airplane abruptly 
transition from a straight-and-level flight attitude to a nose-down, steep left bank, vertical 
descent toward the ground, consistent with the stall. Additionally, a review of security camera 
footage established that the airplane had transitioned from a wings-level descent to a near-
vertical spiraling descent. A postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation during the accident flight.
Although the pilot had monocular vision following a childhood injury that resulted in very 
limited vision in his left eye, he had passed a medical flight test and received a Statement of 
Demonstrated Ability. The pilot had flown for several decades with monocular vision and, as 
such, his lack of binocular depth perception likely did not impede his ability to monitor the 
cockpit instrumentation during the accident flight.
Page 2 of 12CEN15FA136
The pilot had recently purchased the airplane, and records indicated that he had obtained 
make and model specific training about 1 month before the accident and had flown the airplane 
about 10 hours before the accident flight. The pilot's instrument proficiency and night currency 
could not be determined from the available records; therefore, it could not be determined 
whether a lack of recent instrument or night experience contributed to the pilot's difficulty in 
maintaining control of the airplane.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed during the instrument approach in night 
instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in the airplane exceeding its critical 
angle of attack and an aerodynamic stall/spin at a low altitude.
