Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
COLBERT, GA
Accident Number:
ATL99LA037
Date & Time:
01/02/1999, 1601 EST 
Registration:
N7295P
Aircraft:
Piper PA-24-250
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The preflight inspection of the fuel tanks by the pilot revealed the tanks were filled to the 
bottom of the filler neck, which the pilot believed was appropriately full. After starting the 
engine, fuel began leaking from the fuel sump drain hose. The pilot operated the spring loaded 
valve handle inside the airplane which apparently stopped the leak. Shortly after departing, the 
engine began running rough upon which the pilot began a deviation to another airport. During 
this time, the engine began running smoothly whereupon the pilot continued to his initial 
destination. During descent, the engine began running rough and the pilot decided the tanks 
had been exhausted. The pilot performed a forced landing causing substantial damage. The 
airplane cruising endurance based on 75% power and 90 gallons of fuel on board is 5.4 hours. 
However, the usable fuel capacity on this airplane when the fuel tanks are filled to the bottom 
of the filler necks is approximately 80 gallons. The actual flight time of this aircraft was 5.55 
hours. A Federal Aviation Administration inspector who examined the airplane noted only 
residual fuel was found in the selector valve and no leaks were found in the fuel system. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Inadequate planning/decision by the pilot, which resulted in fuel exhaustion due to an 
inadequate supply of fuel. 
Page 2 of 6ATL99LA037
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) PLANNING/DECISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
3. (C) FUEL SUPPLY - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
4. (F) OBJECT - UNDETERMINED
Page 3 of 6ATL99LA037
Factual Information
 On January 2, 1999, about 1601Eastern Standard Time, a Piper PA-24-250, N7295P, collided 
with an unknown object during a forced landing near Colbert, Georgia. The airplane was 
operated by the owner under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and Instrument Flight 
Rules (IFR). Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the accident site and an IFR 
flight plan was filed for the personal flight. There were no injuries to the commercial pilot and 
the airplane was substantially damaged. The flight originated at Allaire Airport in Belmar, NJ, 
at 1028 the same day destined for the Gwinnett County Airport, Lawrenceville, Georgia.
  According to the pilot, the visual preflight inspection of the aircraft fuel tanks revealed that 
both tanks were filled to the bottom of the filler neck which the pilot believed was appropriately 
full (see attached flight manual). After starting the engine, fuel began leaking from the fuel 
sump drain hose. The pilot operated the spring loaded valve handle inside the airplane which 
apparently stopped the leak. No fuel was witnessed leaking from the drain hose thereafter. The 
pilot had estimated the flight would take close to five hours with anticipated head winds. 
Shortly after departing, according to the pilot, the engine began running rough upon which he 
began a deviation to another airport. During this time, the engine began running smoothly 
whereupon the pilot continued to his initial destination. According  to the pilot, after an 
uneventful five hours of flight, during descent, the engine began running rough. The pilot 
stated, he decided the tanks had been exhausted and immediately asked Air Traffic Control for 
help to the nearest airport located in Athens, Georgia. After descending  through the clouds at 
600 feet, the pilot lowered the landing gear and applied full flaps. The airplane was landed on a 
wet and slightly downhill road. The pilot stated that the right wing hit something before the 
airplane settled over a drainage ditch along the side of the road (see attached Pilot/Operator 
Aircraft Accident Report).
  The following airplane endurance approximations are based on data obtained in the Piper 
Airplane PA-24-250 Aircraft Information Manual: The airplane cruising endurance based on 
75% power and 90 gallons of fuel on board is 5.4 hours. Note, this cruising range figure 
includes 45 minutes fuel reserve plus allowance for fuel used during taxi, takeoff, climb, and 
cruise at the stated power. The usable fuel capacity on this airplane when the fuel tanks are 
filled to the top of the filler necks is 90 gallons, however when the tanks are filled to the bottom 
of the filler necks, the approximated quantity of usable fuel is 80 gallons. The actual flight time 
of this aircraft was 5.55 hours.
  According to a Federal Aviation Administration inspector who examined the airplane, four 
feet of the main right wing was torn off, the main landing gear was broken off, the left 
horizontal stabilizer was bent, and one propeller blade was bent. The inspector also noted that 
only residual fuel was found in the selector valve and no leaks were found in the fuel system.
Page 4 of 6ATL99LA037
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/02/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1478 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1000 hours (Total, this make and model), 1376 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 41 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N7295P
Model/Series:
PA-24-250 PA-24-250
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
24-2474
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/17/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
40 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5980 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-540
Registered Owner:
95 POPPA INC.
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
JOSEPH J. FRIEND
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ATL99LA037
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
AHN, 802 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1532 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
45°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
2.5 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 600 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 22 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
100°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
0°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
ALLAIRE, NJ (BLM)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
LAWRENCEVILLE, GA (LZU)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1028 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
ATHENS/BEN EPPS AIRPORT (AHN)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
PRESTON    E HICKS
Adopted Date:
04/25/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
PATRICK   SCHIPPERT
THOMAS   SULLY
SCOTT M GRABON
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ATL99LA037
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
