National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Kenai, AK
Accident Number: ANC04LA060
Date & Time: 06/02/2004, 2010 AKD
Registration: N5180
Aircraft: Cessna 180E
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airline transport certificated pilot was departing in a tailwheel-equipped airplane.
The pilot reported he was aware of a left crosswind that was near the limit for his airplane.
The pilot indicated that he applied takeoff power and about 350 feet into the takeoff roll, the tailwheel lifted off the runway.
The airplane began to veer to the left and the pilot pulled the engine power to idle and attempted to correct the left turn by application of brakes and flight controls.
The airplane ground looped to the left, and the right wing struck the runway.
The airplane then nosed over and received damage to the propeller, right wing, the vertical stabilizer, and the rudder.
The wind conditions consisted of a direct left crosswind at 14 knots, with gusts to 21 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for a crosswind condition and his failure to maintain directional control which resulted in an inadvertent ground loop and nose over.
A factor contributing to the accident was a direct crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 5.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight to Fairbanks, Alaska, under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the pilot.
The airline transport certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
No flight plan was filed, nor was one required.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on June 2, the pilot reported that he was departing on runway 19R in his tailwheel-equipped airplane.
He said he was aware of a left crosswind that was near the limit for his airplane.
The pilot indicated that he applied takeoff power, and about 350 feet into the takeoff roll, the tailwheel lifted off the runway.
The airplane began to veer to the left and the pilot pulled the engine power to idle and attempted to correct the left turn by application of brakes and flight controls.
The pilot said the airplane ground looped to the left, and the right wing struck the runway.
The airplane then nosed over and received damage to the propeller, right wing, the vertical stabilizer, and the rudder.
At 1953, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Kenai was reporting in part:  Wind, 110 degrees (true) at 14 knots, gusts to 21 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, clear; temperature, 61 degrees F; dew point, 30 degrees F; altimeter, 29.96 inHg.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
