National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Midland, MI
Accident Number: CHI04CA132
Date & Time: 06/01/2004, 0915 EDT
Registration: N959B
Aircraft: Cessna 150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane collided with the terrain following a loss of control during a go-around.
The student reported he maintained an airspeed of 70 miles per hour with 20 degrees of flaps until he began the landing flare.
He stated the airplane ballooned and drifted "slightly right" during the flare.
He applied left aileron in an attempt to realign the airplane, but it veered to the left.
He stated he then added full power at which time the airplane banked to the left.
The left wing contacted the ground and the airplane cart wheeled, slid across a taxiway, and came to rest alongside a ditch.
The student pilot stated he made 5 takeoffs and landing with his flight instructor on the morning of the accident.
The accident occurred on the first solo landing of the day.
The accident occurred on the student's second supervised solo flight.
He reported having .5 hours of pilot in command flight time prior to this flight.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot failed to maintain control of the airplane during the go-around.
A factor associated with the accident was the student's lack of experience.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 2.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
