The airline transport pilot and non-instrument-rated private pilot were conducting a three-leg 
Civil Air Patrol (CAP) "compassion flight" to transport a passenger from Florida to Louisiana. 
The pilots departed the CAP squadron's home base in Alabama and flew to Florida, where they 
encountered a 2 1/2-hour delay while waiting for the passenger to arrive. After picking up the 
passenger, they subsequently transported her to her destination in Louisiana. The pilots then 
departed on the 1-hour return flight in dark night conditions to their home base, where a 
squadron meeting was scheduled for that evening. All three flights were conducted under 
instrument flight rules (IFR).
During the accident flight, the weather at the destination airport deteriorated from visual 
meteorological conditions to instrument meteorological conditions, with low cloud ceilings, 
reduced visibility, and fog; these conditions had been forecasted to develop. The mission pilot 
should have been aware of both the forecast and actual weather conditions, as he had received 
an electronic weather briefing, filed an IFR flight plan, and had filed an alternate destination in 
the event of poor weather at the intended destination. However, the airport the pilot selected as 
an alternate was located only 10 nautical miles northwest of the destination airport and was 
affected by the same weather conditions; both airports reported 1/2 statute miles visibility and 
vertical visibility about 200 ft about the time of the accident.
As the flight approached the destination, the pilot elected to divert to the alternate airport and 
received vectors for an instrument landing system (ILS) precision approach. The investigation 
was unable to determine why the pilot chose to divert. About 300 ft agl (100 ft above the 
decision height where the runway environment must be visible), the pilot initiated a missed 
approach procedure. Radar data showed that, rather than completing the prescribed climb to 
2,000 ft on runway heading, the airplane entered a shallow right turn and continued to 
descend until radar contact was lost. The airplane impacted trees and terrain and was 
destroyed by a postcrash fire. Examination of the airplane and its systems identified no engine, 
airframe, or avionics anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. Additionally, no 
medical factors were identified that could explain the sequence of events.
Page 2 of 19ERA16FA100
CAP required that all flight activities obtain a flight release before departure. As part of the 
flight release process, pilots were required to consult with a flight release officer (FRO), who in 
part ensured the pilot was qualified in the airplane and met currency requirements and input 
the route of flight into an electronic log system. A CAP member could become qualified as an 
FRO by completing a one-time online course; they were not required to be rated pilots, FROs 
were not required to flight follow a flight, and were not responsible for the actual conduct of 
the flight. The FRO who released the accident flight had a phone conversation with the pilot 
before the first leg of the trip to cover all three legs. They discussed the pilot's health and 
readiness to fly, the clouds at altitude that would require the pilot to file an IFR flight plan on 
each leg and assessed that the operational risk management for the flights was low.
While the risk assessment completed on the morning of the accident may have been accurate at 
that time, the delay encountered in picking up the passenger resulted in a significant change in 
the circumstances of the flight, introducing the risk factors of deteriorating weather conditions 
at the destination, a longer duty day, and the pressure to return in time for the squadron 
meeting. It could not be determined whether the pilot completed a risk assessment specifically 
for the accident flight taking these factors into account, but even if he had, he was not required 
to discuss the risk assessment with the FRO or otherwise obtain explicit approval to depart on 
the accident flight.
The pilot's alternate airport choice was likely one of convenience rather than one that was 
chosen with operational considerations in mind. Additionally, the selected alternate did not 
meet the legal minimum weather requirements to be filed as an alternate. At the time of 
departure, the airplane had about 5 hours of fuel onboard, well in excess of IFR-required fuel 
reserves. This gave the pilot the flexibility of selecting other alternate airports that may have 
been farther away but were experiencing better weather conditions. A witness at the departure 
airport stated that, although the pilots had expressed some concern about the weather 
conditions before departing, they indicated that they wanted to return before conditions 
deteriorated and so that they could attend their squadron meeting. It is likely that the pilot was 
affected by "get-there-itis" as he made the decision to continue to his planned destination even 
though there were choices available that were significantly less risky, such as staying overnight 
and completing the flight the next morning or diverting to an airport that was not affected by 
the widespread coastal fog at the destination and alternate airports.
The pilot's logbooks were not recovered and his total instrument experience, recency of 
experience, and experience in the accident airplane could not be determined.. The pilot's 
failure to climb the airplane during the missed approach procedure is consistent with the 
effects of spatial disorientation in the form of a somatogravic illusion. During this illusion, the 
vestibular system indicates a climb even though, in fact, the airplane is level. The sensation 
typically occurs when there are few visual cues (flying away from an airport at night in poor 
weather) and the airplane is accelerating, such as during a missed approach. Because a 
somatogravic illusion occurs within the vestibular system and antihistamines may affect the 
functioning of the vestibular system, it is possible that the pilot's use of doxylamine contributed 
to the illusion; however, without a blood level to indicate the amount of the drug remaining in 
the pilot's system, whether it contributed to the accident could not be determined.
Page 3 of 19ERA16FA100
The pilot's loss of airplane control during a missed approach in instrument meteorological 
conditions due to spatial disorientation. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's inadequate 
preflight and inflight weather planning which resulted the pilot's selection of an unsuitable 
alternate airport, and the Civil Air Patrol's inadequate flight release procedures and inadequate 
oversight of the flight.
