The private pilot and passenger planned on a short flight around the traffic pattern in an open-
cockpit, light sport airplane. Shortly after takeoff, as the pilot turned downwind, he heard a 
"crack," and the engine started to vibrate and lose power. The pilot applied power, but the 
engine did not respond. He turned sharply left and then tried to stop the turn and descend, but 
the airplane continued to turn and descend until it impacted terrain. A witness saw two objects 
fall from the airplane shortly after the engine sound "stopped." Both objects were retrieved. 
The first object was the passenger's knitted hat, the top of which was "chewed up" and had a 
line burnt/melted into it. The other object was one of the propeller blades. The accident is 
consistent with the passenger's hat exiting the cockpit and impacting the three-bladed pusher 
propeller, which led to the separation of one of the propeller blades and the subsequent loss of 
engine power. 
The loss of engine power due to a propeller failure when the passenger's hat exited the cockpit 
and impacted the three-bladed pusher propeller, separating one of the propeller blades.
On November 5, 2017, about 1140 central standard time, a T-Bird II airplane, N618ER, 
impacted terrain near St. Marys, Kansas. The pilot and passenger received serious injuries and 
the airplane was substantially damaged during the accident. The airplane was registered to and 
operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part
 
91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time. 
The pilot reported that he and the owner of the airplane planned to take the airplane for a 
flight around the traffic pattern to see if they were clothed warmly enough for another flight. 
They departed from runway 36, climbed to about 1,000 ft, and turned left for the downwind 
when they heard a loud "crack" and the engine started to vibrate. To avoid powerlines, the pilot 
applied power, but the engine did not respond. He turned sharply left, adding that he tried to 
stop the turn and decent; however, the elevators and ailerons did not respond. The airplane 
continued to turn and dropped rapidly, until it impacted a ravine.
A neighbor reported that she saw something "flutter" into a tree and something fell when the 
engine sound "stopped". The object in the tree was retrieved and was the passenger's knitted 
hat. The top of the hat was "chewed up" and had an area in the shape of a line, burnt/melted in 
it. The object that fell in the yard was also retrieved and was one of airplane's propeller blades. 
An examination of the airplane found substantial damage to the fuselage, and one blade from 
the three-bladed pusher propeller had separated from the propeller hub.
