While in cruise flight, at an altitude of 1,000 feet, the airplane's engine lost power.  The pilot 
applied full throttle; however, the engine failed to respond, and the airplane continued to lose 
altitude and airspeed.  At an altitude of 800 feet, the pilot applied carburetor heat and looked 
for a place to land.  He performed a forced landing on a road, during which the airplane 
impacted a road sign.  Examination of the airplane revealed the throttle and carburetor heat 
controls were observed in the off position, and approximately 17 gallons of fuel was drained 
from the airplane, with no contamination observed.  Fuel was also observed in the carburetor 
bowl, gascolator, and fuel lines.  The throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control linkages 
were connected and operated smoothly.  The throttle and carburetor heat controls were 
observed in the off position.  The engine was test run on the airframe.  It started normally and 
was operated between 1500 and 1700 RPM.  During the test run, operational checks of the 
magnetos, mixture and carburetor heat controls revealed no anomalies.  Interpolation of a 
carburetor icing probability chart revealed that atmospheric conditions were conducive to 
"icing at glide or cruise power."
Carburetor icing, and the pilot's delayed application of carburetor heat, which resulted in a loss 
of engine power, and subsequent force landing.  A factor in the accident was carburetor icing 
conditions.
On July 1, 2006, at 1245 eastern daylight time, a Bellanca 7GCBC, N50619, was substantially 
damaged during a forced landing in Toms River, New Jersey.  The certificated commercial pilot 
was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local banner towing flight 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, as he was flying westbound at an altitude of 1,000 feet, the airplane's 
engine lost power.  The pilot applied full throttle; however, the engine did not respond, and the 
airplane continued to lose altitude and airspeed.  At an altitude of 800 feet, the pilot applied 
carburetor heat and looked for a place to land.  He performed a forced landing on a road, 
during which the airplane impacted a road sign.  The airplane subsequently spun around, the 
landing gear impacted a curb, and the airplane skidded to a stop in a grass area. 
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
that approximately 17 gallons of fuel were drained from the airplane, with no contamination 
observed.  Fuel was also observed in the carburetor bowl, gascolator, and fuel lines.  The 
throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control linkages were connected and operated smoothly.  
The throttle and carburetor heat controls were observed in the off position.
The engine was test run on the airframe.  It started normally and was operated between 1500 
and 1700 RPM.  During the test run, operational checks of the magnetos, mixture and 
carburetor heat controls revealed no anomalies.
Weather reported at McGuire Air Force Base, Wrightstown, New Jersey, approximately 22 
miles to the northwest, at 1255, included winds from 290 degrees at 7 knots, visibility 7 miles, 
scattered clouds at 5,000 feet, temperature 84 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 61 degrees 
Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting of 30.16 inches of mercury.
Interpolation of a carburetor icing probability chart revealed that atmospheric conditions were 
conducive to "light icing at glide or cruise power."
