The private certificated pilot was in cruise flight about 2,000 feet above the ground (agl) on a 
Title 14, CFR Part 91, cross-country personal flight.  He began to smell, and then see, what 
appeared to be smoke emanating from the engine, which subsequently lost power.  He lowered 
the flaps and landing gear and performed an emergency landing on a beach.  During the 
landing roll, the nose gear collapsed.  The pilot reported that while waiting for rescue, he 
discovered that the number four cylinder connecting rod had fractured, and was protruding 
through the top of the engine case.  Postaccident examination of the engine revealed that the 
number 4 connecting rod was fractured at the base of the rod beam.  Fragments of the rod cap, 
the rod bearing, and the connecting rod bolts had thermal and mechanical damage.  The rod 
cap bolts were necked down at the point of fracture.  Fragments of the rod bearing were located 
in the engine oil sump.  The engine had accrued 1,482 hours since its last overhaul in 1970, and 
9 hours since its last annual inspection on June, 24, 2006.   The engine manufacturer's 
recommended Time Between Engine Overhaul (TBO) for the accident engine is 1,500 hours, or 
every 12 years.
The fracture of an engine connecting rod during cruise flight, which resulted in a forced 
landing on a beach, a collapsed nose landing gear, and substantial damage to the fuselage.
On July 1, 2006, about 1040 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Beech P35 airplane, 
N8690M, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing on a remote beach following a 
loss of engine power during cruise, about 63 miles west of Gustavus, Alaska.  The airplane was 
being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight under Title 14, CFR 
Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was operated by the pilot.  The private 
certificated pilot and the sole passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was filed. The flight originated at the Juneau International 
Airport, Juneau, Alaska, about 0945, and was en route to Yakutat, Alaska.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on July 1, the pilot reported that his airplane was the lead airplane 
in a group of five airplanes that were traveling through Alaska.  He said he was in cruise flight 
about 2,000 feet above the ground (agl) when he began to smell, and then see, what appeared 
to be smoke emanating from the engine. The engine subsequently lost power, and the pilot said 
he lowered the flaps and landing gear and performed an emergency landing on a beach area 
near Lituya Bay.  During the landing roll, the nose gear collapsed.  Other airplanes in the group 
reported the accident, and the pilot and passenger were transported to Sitka, Alaska, by a U.S. 
Coast Guard helicopter.
The pilot reported that while waiting for rescue, he discovered that the number four cylinder 
connecting rod had fractured, and was protruding through the top of the engine case.  The 
airplane was recovered and transported to Juneau, Alaska.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on July 6, a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector from the Juneau Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), 
reported that his examination of the airplane confirmed the engine damage, and also revealed 
structural damage to the fuselage in the area of the collapsed nose gear.
Following recovery of the airplane to Juneau, the engine was examined on July 1, 2006, by an 
FAA inspector, and an air safety investigator from the manufacturer.  The examination 
revealed a protruding hole in the engine case above the number 4 cylinder.  Disassembly of the 
engine revealed that the number 4 connecting rod was fractured at the base of the rod beam.  
Fragments of the rod cap, the rod bearing, and the connecting rod bolts had thermal and 
mechanical damage.  The rod cap bolts were necked down at the point of fracture.  Fragments 
of the rod bearing were located in the engine oil sump.
According to the information contained in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB 
Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, the engine had accrued a total time of 2,552 hours since it 
was manufactured in 1963.  The engine had accrued 1,482 hours since its last overhaul, and 9 
hours since its last annual inspection on June, 24, 2006.  The manufacturer's investigator 
reported that the last overhaul occurred in 1970.
The engine manufacturer issued Service Letter SIL98-9A in 1998, and revised it on March 28, 
2003, which listed recommended Time Between Engine Overhaul (TBO) for their engine 
models.  The recommended TBO for the accident engine is 1,500 hours, or every 12 years.
