Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bluffton, IN
Accident Number:
CEN16LA300
Date & Time:
08/02/2016, 2045 EDT 
Registration:
N430WT
Aircraft:
WINGS AN THINGS INC AVID FLYER
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The student pilot was operating a personal, local flight in the nonregistered, experimental 
amateur-built airplane with one passenger onboard. The student stated that, while the airplane 
was climbing through 500 ft above ground level after takeoff, there was an uncommanded left 
roll. He reported that the airspeed was 60 knots (which is above the stall speed of 40 mph 
listed in the airplane's specifications). He applied right control input to the control stick, which 
did not counter the left roll. The airplane entered a left spiral descent, and the pilot pulled back 
on the control stick and applied right rudder until the airplane impacted terrain. He reported 
that the airplane's engine was at full throttle during the flight and that it did not experience a 
loss of engine power. 
A postaccident examination of the airframe, including the flight controls, revealed no evidence 
of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. The 
investigation could not determine the reason for the loss of roll control.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of roll control during climb for reasons that could not be determined because 
postaccident examination of the airframe revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or 
failures that would have precluded normal operation.
Page 2 of 6CEN16LA300
Findings
Aircraft
Lateral/bank control - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Scheduled maint checks - Not inspected
Personnel issues
Qualification/certification - Student pilot
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN16LA300
Factual Information
On August 2, 2016, about 2045 eastern daylight time, an experimental, amateur-built Wings 
An Things Avid Flyer airplane, N430WT, sustained substantial damage when it impacted a 
cornfield after takeoff from Miller Airport (C40), Bluffton, Indiana. The student pilot and 
passenger received serious injuries. The student pilot owned and operated the non-registered 
airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the personal flight, which was not on a flight plan. The flight departed 
from C40 about 1945 on a local flight. 
The student pilot reported that he had flown for about an hour and then returned to land at 
C40. He decided to make one more takeoff and landing before completing the flight. He 
departed to the west and at approximately 500 ft, the left wing "dipped on its own without 
input from the stick." He countered with opposite right stick but without effect. The left wing 
continued to dip further to the left. He reported the airspeed was 60 kts (which is above the 
stall speed of 40 mph listed in the Avid Flyer specifications). He attempted to put in right 
rudder and right stick, but again without effect. He then tried turning into the left dip, but the 
airplane continued losing altitude. Before impact, he pulled back on the stick with hard right 
rudder, and the nose came up "some" before the airplane hit the tall corn. After ground impact, 
he exited the airplane, and then immediately worked to get the passenger unbuckled and 
evacuated out of the airplane. He reported that the airplane's engine was at full throttle during 
the flight and it did not experience a loss of engine power. He reported the loss of airplane 
control was due to a separated left aileron. 
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane wreckage and 
reported that there was no preexisting anomaly in the flight controls. He reported that there 
was flight control continuity from the cockpit controls to the flight control surfaces. The 
examination revealed that the damage to the four broken left wing flaperon attach points was 
consistent with impact damage. 
The 42-year-old pilot held a student pilot certificate and was authorized to fly solo in a Cessna 
172, but there was no endorsement in his logbook to fly the accident airplane. The pilot's 
logbook indicated he had a total of 46 hours of flight time. There was no record in his logbook 
concerning any flights in the accident airplane. He held a third class medical certificate issued 
on December 17, 2015.
The airplane was manufactured in 1985. The airplane's maintenance logbook indicated that the 
last conditional maintenance inspection was conducted on January 23, 1995. At the time of the 
inspection, the airframe had a total time of 249.7 hours and the engine had 107.9 hours. On 
May 15, 2015, the FAA cancelled the airplane's registration and the airplane was considered as 
a non-registered aircraft. 
Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR) 61.89 (a) states that "A student pilot may not act as a pilot 
in command of an aircraft: (1) That is carrying a passenger." 
Page 4 of 6CEN16LA300
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/17/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
46 hours (Total, all aircraft), 31 hours (Total, this make and model), 32 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 31 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
WINGS AN THINGS INC
Registration:
N430WT
Model/Series:
AVID FLYER 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1984
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
145
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/23/1995, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
850 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
249.7 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
BOMBARDIER
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
532 UL
Registered Owner:
Thomas Zuber
Rated Power:
64 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN16LA300
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FWA, 814 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
15 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2054 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 6000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.05 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Bluffton, IN (C40)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Bluffton, IN (C40)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1945 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Miller Airport (C40)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
845 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2600 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
40.716667, -85.250000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
James P Silliman
Adopted Date:
05/01/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Louis Soto; FAA Indianapolis FSDO; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
05/01/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93751
Page 6 of 6CEN16LA300
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
