Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
The Dalles, OR
Accident Number:
WPR16FA154
Date & Time:
08/01/2016, 1100 PDT 
Registration:
N528HZ
Aircraft:
SPERLING RICHARD G LANCAIR 360
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot was landing the airplane on runway 31 in visual meteorological conditions 
when witnesses observed the airplane in a nose-low, steep-left-bank attitude west of the 
runway over grassy terrain. A second later, the airplane impacted the terrain. An examination 
of the accident site revealed propeller slash marks about 1,800 ft from the approach end of 
runway 31. The initial point of a 200-foot-long debris path was located 385 ft from the slash 
marks on a 235° magnetic heading, and the airplane came to rest upright at the end of the 
debris path with its nose oriented northeast.
During the wreckage recovery, both main and the nose landing gear were found in a retracted 
position. During the postaccident examination, the throttle, mixture and propeller control 
levers were observed positioned full forward. The left and right main landing gear doors and 
the fuselage bottom skin exhibited numerous scratches and paint transfer consistent with the 
airplane's lower surface contacting the runway with the landing gear retracted. Both propeller 
blade tips were bent and curled aft, and the blades displayed numerous span-wise scratches 
from about mid span to the blade tips consistent with the propeller blades contacting the 
runway. The examination revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical failures or 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. 
It is likely that, during the landing sequence, the pilot realized that the landing gear was 
retracted and aborted the landing by adding full power. During the aborted landing, the pilot 
did not maintain control of the airplane, which rolled to the left and impacted terrain. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 7WPR16FA154
The pilot's loss of control during an aborted landing. Contributing to the accident was the 
pilot's failure to extend the landing gear before touchdown. 
Findings
Aircraft
Lateral/bank control - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Main landing gear - Not used/operated (Factor)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Forgotten action/omission - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 7WPR16FA154
Factual Information
History of Flight
Landing
Landing gear not configured
Approach-VFR go-around
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
On August 1, 2016, about 1100 Pacific daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Lancair 
360, N528HZ, impacted terrain while landing on runway 31 at Columbia Gorge Regional/The 
Dalles Municipal Airport (DLS), The Dalles, Oregon. The pilot was fatally injured, and the 
airplane was destroyed. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the 
provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The local flight originated from DLS about 1030.
Two witnesses, located on the ramp adjacent to the refueling area, observed the airplane west 
of the runway in a nose-low, steep-left-bank attitude with the left wing pointed directly towards 
the ground. A second later, the airplane impacted the terrain. One witness reported that, 
following the impact, the airplane cartwheeled and slid on its belly before it came to rest.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
70, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/28/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1860 hours (Total, all aircraft)
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with airplane single-engine and multi-engine land 
ratings. He held a third-class airman medical certificate issued on April 28, 2014, with the 
limitation that he must have available glasses for near vision. At the time of his last medical 
exam, the pilot reported flight experience that included 1,860 total hours and 104 hours in the 
last 6 months.
Page 4 of 7WPR16FA154
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
SPERLING RICHARD G
Registration:
N528HZ
Model/Series:
LANCAIR 360 NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2014
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
553-320-300
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-C1C
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
240 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The two-seat, single-engine, low-wing, retractable landing gear airplane was manufactured by 
the pilot in 2014. It was powered by an experimental Textron Lycoming IO-360-C1C engine, 
rated at 240 horsepower. The airplane was equipped with a Hartzell two-bladed variable-pitch 
propeller, model HC-E2YR-1BF/F7068-2. A review of available maintenance records showed 
that the engine was disassembled and inspected on March 4, 2014, due to low oil pressure. The 
engine was subsequently rebuilt and installed on the accident airplane at an undetermined 
date. The airframe records were not available to investigators during the investigation.
Page 5 of 7WPR16FA154
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KDLS, 210 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
105°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.02 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
The Dalles, OR (DLS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
The Dalles, OR (DLS)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1030 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
At 0953, the weather conditions at DLS included wind from 340° at 10 knots, 10 miles 
visibility, temperature of 21°C, dew point temperature of 11°C, and an altimeter setting of 
30.02 inches of mercury.
Airport Information
Airport:
COLUMBIA GORGE RGNL/THE 
DALLES (DLS)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
246 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
31
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5097 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
45.619444, -121.168333 (est)
Page 6 of 7WPR16FA154
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the accident site and the 
surrounding area. The examination revealed 6 equally-spaced propeller slash marks on runway 
31 about 1,800 ft from the approach end. A ground scar and a part of the left-wing tip were 
observed in a grassy area located 385 ft from the propeller marks on a heading of about 296
o
 
magnetic. The airplane wreckage debris path was about 200 ft in length on a heading of about 
235
o
 magnetic. The airplane came to rest upright with its nose oriented northeast.
The left wing and its respective carry-through structure had separated from the fuselage, and 
parts were dispersed along the debris path. All airframe components were found with the main 
wreckage along with all flight control surfaces, which had remained attached to their respective 
hinges. Flight control continuity was established from the cockpit controls to all primary flight 
control surfaces. Multiple separations were observed in various control cables, consistent with 
impact.
During the wreckage recovery, the FAA inspector observed that both main and the nose 
landing gear were in a retracted position. The left and right main landing gear doors and the 
fuselage bottom skin exhibited numerous scratches and paint transfer consistent with the 
airplane's lower surface contacting the runway with the landing gear retracted. No evidence of 
pre-impact anomalies was found with the landing gear system.
The two-bladed propeller assembly remained attached to the crankshaft's propeller flange. 
Both blade tips were bent and curled aft, and the blades displayed numerous span-wise 
scratches from about mid span to the blade tips consistent with the propeller blades contacting 
the runway.
The engine remained attached to the airframe, and the engine mounts were intact. All engine 
accessories remained attached to the engine. The air filter remained attached to its bracket and 
exhibited signs of impact damage. The fuel pump and the fuel lines remained attached to the 
engine and to their respective cylinders. The fuel selector handle was found in the "RIGHT" 
tank position. Fuel was present in the airplane; however, the fuel quantity was not determined. 
The needle on the fuel gauge indicated 1/2.
The top sparkplugs were removed from their respective cylinders and exhibited signatures 
consistent with normal operation. The electrode areas displayed no mechanical deformation. A 
compression test was conducted and cylinder Nos.1, 3 and, 4 produced compression and 
suction during the propeller rotation. The No. 2 cylinder did not produce any compression or 
suction due to impact damage. The throttle and mixture controls remained attached to their 
respective cockpit controls and their control levers. The throttle, mixture, and propeller control 
levers were positioned full forward.
The examination revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction that would have 
precluded normal operations.
The complete accident site summary and the examination report are available in the public 
docket for this accident.
Page 7 of 7WPR16FA154
Medical And Pathological Information
Klickitat County Coroner's Office, Goldendale, Washington, completed an autopsy on the pilot 
and concluded that the cause of death was blunt force injuries. The FAA's Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed toxicology on 
specimens from the pilot. No ethanol was present in urine; ketamine was detected in urine and 
blood. Ketamine is an injectable, rapidly acting general anesthetic agent that was administered 
during the pilot's postaccident transport to the hospital.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Maja Smith
Adopted Date:
01/09/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Ken Bradshaw; FSDO; Hillsboro, OR
Publish Date:
01/09/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93727
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
