Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Hilo, HI
Accident Number:
LAX07LA002
Date & Time:
10/02/2006, 0930 HST 
Registration:
N142MK
Aircraft:
McDonnell Douglas 369E
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor, 3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Sightseeing
Analysis 
The lateral cyclic friction was on prior to departure, and the helicopter landed hard shortly 
after takeoff.   After the pilot's first flight, the helicopter underwent a hot refueling and the 
passengers were loaded onboard for the pilot's second flight.  The pilot performed her 
pretakeoff checklist items, which included releasing the control frictions and performing a 
freedom of control check.  The pilot then demonstrated to the front seat passengers where to 
position their feet by bringing her right foot aft.  She then obtained tower clearance and began 
the takeoff.  During the takeoff, the cyclic was locked and she could not move it.  She attempted 
to control the helicopter using trim but shortly thereafter, the helicopter impacted the ground.  
Upon impact, the pilot reached down and released the lateral cyclic friction.  The Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the lateral cyclic friction system 
installation and operation and noted no mechanical anomalies.  The FAA inspector did note 
that if he brought one foot farther aft than is done in normal operation, an inadvertent 
application of the lateral cyclic friction might result.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Inadvertent application of the lateral cyclic friction, which resulted in a loss of control and 
subsequent hard landing.
Page 2 of 6LAX07LA002
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) CONTROL FRICTION - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6LAX07LA002
Factual Information
On October 2, 2006, at 0930 Hawaiian standard time, an MD Helicopters, Inc., (MDHI) 369E, 
N142MK, experienced cyclic control difficulty during takeoff and landed hard at Hilo 
International Airport, Hilo, Hawaii.  During the accident sequence, the tailboom was bent and 
the right skid collapsed.  K and S Helicopters, Inc., was operating the helicopter as an on-
demand air taxi tour flight under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.  
The commercial pilot and two passengers were uninjured; two passengers sustained minor 
injuries.  The helicopter sustained substantial damage.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a company flight plan was in effect.  The 45-minute local tour flight was 
originating at the time of the accident with a planned return to Hilo.
The pilot submitted a written statement regarding the accident.  On the second flight of the 
day, she had the helicopter refueled without shutting down.  Once the helicopter was refueled, 
the four passengers were loaded onboard.  After the passenger briefing, she removed the 
friction locks and conducted a gauge check.  Then, the pilot showed the front passengers where 
to comfortably rest their feet during the flight so as not to conflict with her access to the radio 
stack.  To do this, the pilot brought her right foot aft, demonstrating to the passengers how to 
position their feet.  After receiving a tower clearance, she entered her squawk code into the 
transponder and applied flight controls to lift the helicopter off the ground.  The cyclic felt 
heavy to the right, so she applied left cyclic trim to even out the flight control forces.  The pilot 
felt the inputs to the cyclic control were normal and began to transition to forward flight.  As 
the helicopter accelerated, more left trim was necessary to maintain coordinated flight.  At this 
point, the pilot indicated that she ran out of left trim.  The helicopter began rolling to the right 
and the pilot attempted to increase left cyclic input to counter the roll.  The helicopter was 
about 5 to 10 feet above ground level when she aborted the takeoff and applied aft cyclic to slow 
the helicopter, but it continued to roll to the right.  The helicopter impacted the ground, and 
the right skid collapsed as the helicopter slid to a stop.  The pilot stated that she reached down 
and released the cyclic friction after impact.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector from the Honolulu Flight Standards District 
Office examined the helicopter on October 11, 2006.  The inspector indicated that the cyclic 
lateral and longitudinal frictions were off and that the cyclic was in a neutral position.  Control 
continuity was obtained through the flight control systems and the trim system functioned 
optimally.  In addition, the one-way lock valve function operated normally.  The inspector 
attempted to simulate bumping the cyclic lateral lock lever to transition it from an unlocked 
position to a locked position.  The inspector noted that when he brought one of his feet aft 
farther than normal, the lever might be inadvertently applied.  According to the inspector, the 
installation of the lateral cyclic lock was in compliance with the Supplemental Type Certificate 
(STC) requirements, and the rotorcraft flight manual supplement required by the STC was 
onboard the helicopter.
Page 4 of 6LAX07LA002
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2006
Flight Time:
1439 hours (Total, all aircraft), 7 hours (Total, this make and model), 1257 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 155 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
McDonnell Douglas
Registration:
N142MK
Model/Series:
369E 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0187E
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/2006, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
21 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
9860 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls Royce
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
C206
Registered Owner:
K and S Helicopters, Inc.
Rated Power:
475 hp
Operator:
K and S Helicopters, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
16SG
Page 5 of 6LAX07LA002
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ITO, 38 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 HST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4100 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.02 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 20°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hilo, HI (ITO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
 (ITO)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0930 HST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Hilo International Airport (ITO)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
38 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Minor, 2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor, 3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
19.720278, -155.048333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Kristi Dunks
Adopted Date:
04/25/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Dave Lusk; Federal Aviation Administration; Honolulu, HI
Adrian Booth; MDHI; Mesa, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX07LA002
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
