Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SOUTH CARVER, MA
Accident Number:
NYC96LA135
Date & Time:
07/01/1996, 0600 EDT 
Registration:
N444JB
Aircraft:
Bell 206B III
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The pilot was doing aerial spraying of a cranberry bog, and had completed four passes before 
he executed a right turn to the north to begin the next run.  After completing the turn,  the 
helicopter began to spin to the right.  After about three to four turns it stopped in a level hover, 
but then started spinning again to the right.  After another three to four spins, it again stopped, 
and began a final spin to the right when it collided with the bog.  Bell Helicopter Textron (BHT) 
published an Operations Safety Notice, in 1983, which dealt with unanticipated right yaw of the 
Bell 206 series.  It stated that unanticipated right yaw could occur when maneuvering between 
hover and 30 MPH, and that a tail wind could reduce relative wind speed if a down wind 
translation occurred.  It also stated that a loss of translational lift could result in a high power 
demand and an additional anti-torque requirements, which included high power demand 
situations such as low speed downwind turns.  A local automated weather report indicated that 
the winds from were from 210 degrees at 6 knots.  The pilot stated that the uncontrolled event 
initiated when he had completed a right hand application turn, and did not report a lateral 
cyclic displacement during the last application run. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the helicopter during an aerial application maneuver.  
This put the helicopter in a low slow down wind, high power demand turn,  where it 
encountered a loss of tail rotor effectiveness, and the subsequent collision with the marsh. 
Page 2 of 6NYC96LA135
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. LOSS OF TAIL ROTOR EFFECTIVENESS - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - SWAMPY
Page 3 of 6NYC96LA135
Factual Information
 On July 1, 1996, at 0600 eastern daylight time, a Bell 206B III,  a helicopter, N444JB, was 
substantially damaged during an uncontrolled descent to a marsh near South Carver, 
Massachusetts.  The certificated commercial pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the agriculture application flight that originated at the South Carver 
cranberry bog, about 0530.  No flight plan had been filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR 
Part 137. 
    In the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot stated:
"...departed a cranberry bog in South Carver with the first load of fertilizer of the day.  After 4 
passes over the bog, I began a 5th pass running south to north, which brought the aircraft over 
the pond on the north side of the bog.  At the top of the turn I turned the aircraft to the right 
and at that point was unable to level or turn the aircraft to the left.  At that point the aircraft 
banked and dove to the right and I attempted to relieve the right tank of the excess fertilizer 
and weight.  I was unable to correct the situation and the aircraft continued to lose altitude and 
fly on it's right side.  After several right hand turns the aircraft impacted the water.  After 
impact I exited the aircraft and checked the right hopper and found approximately 300# 
[pounds] of fertilizer and only approximately 50# in the left hopper..."
    Another helicopter pilot stated:
"...While being loaded...I saw...444JB spinning to the right with a slight nose low attitude with 
a moderate rate of turn.  It made approximately three to four full turns before it stopped in 
which appeared to be a level hover.  After approximately 2-3 seconds, the helicopter began a 
spin to the right with a nose low attitude once again.  Again, after approximately 3-4 full turns 
to the right, [the pilot] stopped the spin in a somewhat level attitude only for 2-3 seconds 
before it began spinning again to the right.  By this point, [the pilot's] altitude was getting low.  
From my vantage point, I could not see 44JB when it landed in the water..."
    The helicopter was equipped with a lower mirror for the pilot to observe the chemical 
product as it was being dispensed.   
    A review of the operating limitations for the application system revealed that the maximum  
weight in each tank was limited to 400 pounds, and a single tank was limited to a maximum of 
200 pounds lateral differential.  Each chemical tank was equipped with a sensor connected to a 
warning light in the helicopter's cockpit.  The warning lights were independent, and would 
illuminate when either tank was empty or not dispensing the product. 
    Bell Helicopter Textron (BHT) published an Operations Safety Notice, in 1983, which dealt 
with unanticipated right yaw of the Bell 206 series.  It stated:
"...unanticipated right yaw may occur under certain conditions not related to a mechanical 
malfunction.  These conditions may include high power demand situations while hovering, 
and/or when relative wind affects airspeed versus ground speed..."
    It further stated:
"...When maneuvering between hover and 30 MPH: Be aware that a tail wind will reduce 
relative wind speed if a down wind translation occurs.  If loss of translational lift occurs it can 
result in a high power demand and an additional anti-torque requirements.  Be alert during 
Page 4 of 6NYC96LA135
hover (especially OGE) and high power demand situations such as low speed downwind turns.
    The pilot stated that a local AWOS indicated that the winds from were from 210 degrees at 6 
knots.  The pilot also stated that the uncontrolled event initiated when he had completed a 
right hand application turn.  The pilot did not report a requirement for a lateral cyclic 
displacement during the last application run.
    In the Federal Aviation Administration Inspector's statement he said:
"...The helicopter was at the end of a swath run and turning to the right with a left quartering 
tail wind and low indicated airspeed prior to entering the uncontrollable turns which led to the 
crash.  This is a situation that could possible have lead to the loss of tail rotor effectiveness.  
The helicopter remained submerged in 5 feet of water for 8 hours prior to being inspected by 
[the FAA].  Any fertilizer that had been in the dispensing units had dissolved...
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/10/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3300 hours (Total, all aircraft), 450 hours (Total, this make and model), 2410 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6NYC96LA135
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N444JB
Model/Series:
206B III 206B III
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
3258
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/10/1996, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
44 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20
Registered Owner:
GROUP IV TRANSPORT
Rated Power:
420 hp
Operator:
JOE BRIGHAM INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
FTYG
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
210°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
15°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0600 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     L PEARCE
Adopted Date:
02/01/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
WILLIAM D WICKS; BEDFORD, MA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
