Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
ALEXANDRIA, MN
Accident Number:
CHI96LA226
Date & Time:
07/01/1996, 1000 CDT 
Registration:
N838MM
Aircraft:
Bellanca 17-30 VIKING
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The airplane's owner hired the flight instructor to give him instruction so he could qualify as 
pilot-in-command. After about 1 hour of flight an owner-devised fuel tank change alarm 
sounded.  The instructor said he thought the owner had switched the fuel tanks.  The instructor 
was flying the airplane as it entered a base leg for landing when the engine stopped.  The 
instructor selected another fuel tank and the engine would not start.  The airplane landed gear 
up near the runway.  The on-scene investigation revealed empty main fuel tanks.  The flight 
had started with an empty left and full right main tank.  The fuel tank selector was on the left 
main tank.  The auxiliary fuel tanks were full.  The instructor said he gave the owner 6 to 10 
minutes of ground instruction regarding flight maneuvers to be performed.  He said he did not 
observe the owner's preflight inspection. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the flight instructor's failure to assure a proper fuel tank selector position.  Factors associated 
with the accident were improper preflight preparation and complacency by the flight 
instructor. 
Page 2 of 6CHI96LA226
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - BASE TURN
Findings
1. (F) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
2. (F) COMPLACENCY - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
3. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
4. (C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: WHEELS UP LANDING
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Page 3 of 6CHI96LA226
Factual Information
 On July 1, 1996, at 1000 central daylight (cdt) a Bellanca 17-30 Viking, N838MM, was 
substantially damaged during a gear up landing following a total loss of power while on base 
leg for landing.  The airplane landed on the clearway area next to runway 22 (4,800' X 75' dry 
asphalt) at Chandler Field, Alexandria, Minnesota.  The airplane was piloted by a commercially 
certificated flight instructor who was giving a checkout in the airplane to a private pilot.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 dual 
instructional flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The private pilot reported serious 
injuries and the flight instructor reported no injuries.  The flight departed Alexandria, 
Minnesota, at 0900 cdt.
The airplane's owner said he was receiving dual instruction to act as pilot-in-command in the 
Bellanca 17-30.  He said the instructor was flying the airplane as it turned onto base leg for 
runway 22 when the engine stopped running.  The owner said the instructor landed "...within 
the airport perimeter, making wheels up landing."  He said the instructor checked "...one of the 
right wing tanks, and indicated that he had plenty of gas."  
The instructor's written statement said they had flown "...around for approximately an hour..." 
before returning to the airport.  During an interview with the instructor it was revealed he had 
allowed the owner to do an unsupervised preflight inspection.  He said a mechanic reviewed 
the fuel system with the owner for about 45 minutes.  When asked if he gave the owner any 
preflight ground instruction the instructor said he had spent about 6 to 10 minutes covering 
the flight maneuvers for the flight.  
The instructor said the owner had a timer that sounded an alarm when the fuel tanks needed to 
be switched.  He said the alarm sounded during the flight and that he believed the owner had 
switched the fuel tank selector.  He said he didn't check the owner's response to the alarm.  
N838MM's engine quit when the airplane was maneuvering to make its first landing.  He said 
the owner became frustrated and that he helped him with the emergency procedures.  The 
instructor said he switched the fuel selector from the right to left main fuel tank.  
The on-scene investigation revealed empty main fuel tanks.  The right and left auxiliary fuel 
tanks were full.  The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Principal Maintenance Inspector 
(PMI) stated the mechanic who gave the airplane its annual inspection said the left main tank 
was empty.  There was no record of any fuel being added to the airplane before the accident 
flight.  According to the PMI, each main tank holds 15.5 gallons of usable fuel.  The airplane 
consumes about 14 gallons per hour according to the PMI.  The PMI said it was estimated that 
the airplane had about 19 gallons of fuel in its right tank before departing on the accident 
flight.
Page 4 of 6CHI96LA226
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/31/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1594 hours (Total, all aircraft), 176 hours (Total, this make and model), 1516 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bellanca
Registration:
N838MM
Model/Series:
17-30 VIKING 17-30 VIKI
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
30014
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/28/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3500 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-D
Registered Owner:
RICHARD W. NICHOLSON
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
RICHARD W. NICHOLSON
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI96LA226
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
AUX, 1259 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0954 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
1°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 4700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (AEL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (AEL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0000 
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
CHANDLER FIELD (AEL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1259 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
22
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
4099 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
FRANK      S GATTOLIN
Adopted Date:
09/19/1996
Additional Participating Persons:
EDWARD   LOOMIS; MINNEAPOLIS, MN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI96LA226
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
