Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Palm Springs, CA
Accident Number:
WPR16LA078
Date & Time:
03/02/2016, 1300 PST 
Registration:
N63555
Aircraft:
BOEING A75N1(PT17)
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airline transport pilot reported that, shortly after takeoff on the local sightseeing flight, the 
engine experienced a partial loss of power about 400 ft above ground level. The pilot initiated a 
turn back to the airport and subsequently landed hard on the runway, substantially damaging 
the airplane. 
During the postaccident engine examination, an obstruction was found in one end of the fuel 
hose between the gascolator to the carburetor. The firesleeve on the hose was removed, which 
revealed that the hose entered the fitting at a slight angle that was not visible with the 
firesleeve in place. To facilitate further examination, the hose was cut close to the obstruction. 
The inner surface of the hose appeared cut and curled into the hose near the fitting, consistent 
with the improper assembly of the hose and fitting. It is likely that the curled piece of hose 
acted as a flapper valve that either restricted or cut off fuel flow to the carburetor. The high 
demand for fuel during takeoff depleted the supply of fuel in the carburetor and resulted in the 
loss of power. Although maintenance log entries indicated that the last replacement of the fuel 
hoses occurred 49 years before the accident, given the condition of the hoses, it is likely that a 
subsequent replacement was performed but not documented. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Improper assembly of a fuel hose, which restricted the fuel supply to the carburetor and 
resulted in a loss of engine power during the initial climb after takeoff. 
Page 2 of 6WPR16LA078
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel distribution - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Page 3 of 6WPR16LA078
Factual Information
On March 2, 2016, about 1300 Pacific standard time, a Boeing A75N1 (PT17), N63555, touched 
down hard during a forced landing following a loss of engine power during the initial climb at 
Palm Springs International Airport, Palm Springs, California. The airline transport pilot 
sustained minor injuries and the passenger was seriously injured. The airplane was 
substantially damaged. Palm Springs Air Museum Inc. was operating the airplane under the 
provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91. The local sightseeing flight was 
originating at the time. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
The pilot reported that the engine lost power passing through 400 ft after takeoff from runway 
31L. He saw houses and other obstacles straight ahead and decided to turn around to land on 
runway 13R. The airplane landed hard on the runway centerline but came to rest aligned about 
30째 left of the runway heading.
During the initial examination, the forward end of the fuselage sustained crush damage around 
the front cockpit. The throttle lever in the cockpit would not move due to the damage; all 
linkages were connected from the cockpit to the carburetor. The mixture lever in the cockpit 
would not move due to the damage; all linkages were connected from the cockpit to the 
carburetor. Examination of the wreckage established flight control continuity for all flight 
controls. Portions of the bottom cylinders, numbers four and five, fractured and separated. A 
clear blue fluid, consistent with the smell of Avgas, was drained from the gascolator, and a 
water paste test had no reaction indicating that water contamination was not present. All 
fittings that could be reached were tight. A black fluid consistent with motor oil was evident on 
the dipstick. There was no external evidence of catastrophic mechanical malfunction.
A follow-up examination revealed that the exhaust tube coloration was light brown in color.
The air filter was clean. There was no discoloration in the intake tube at the filter.
The crankshaft was rotated using the propeller; there were no metallic sounds or binding. All 
valves except for the damaged bottom two cylinders moved approximately the same amount of 
lift in firing order. The gears in the accessory case turned freely. Thumb compression was 
obtained on all cylinders in firing order except for the two damaged bottom cylinders.
The carburetor was removed and disassembled. The floats were metal; the bowl contained no 
fluid. The accelerator pump operated without resistance. The throttle lever would not move; 
the housing was crushed; the butterfly valve was almost vertical (fully open). The mixture lever 
moved freely from stop to stop.
The carburetor heat arm was crushed at the box, and the rod end at the bellcrank fractured and 
separated along a jagged and angular plane. The fuel line was removed from the gascolator to 
the carburetor and nothing drained out from the line. The line was connected back to the 
gascolator and the fuel selector valve was turned on; blue fluid came out of the line. The line 
was removed again and an obstruction was seen near one end of the line. The firesleeve was 
Page 4 of 6WPR16LA078
removed on the hose. The hose went into the fitting at a slight angle that was not visible with 
the firesleeve in place. The line was cut close to the obstruction. The inner surface of the hose 
appeared cut and curled into the hose at the fitting.
An entry in the maintenance logbooks dated October 20, 1967, recorded that all new gas lines 
were made. There were no entries after that to indicate any work was performed on the gas line 
hoses.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Loss of engine power (partial)
Landing-flare/touchdown
Hard landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial; Flight 
Engineer
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider; Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Helicopter; 
Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/08/2016
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/14/2014
Flight Time:
14388 hours (Total, all aircraft), 35 hours (Total, this make and model), 10000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 6 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6WPR16LA078
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BOEING
Registration:
N63555
Model/Series:
A75N1(PT17) 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1946
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
75-8014
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/30/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
9021 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental Motors Inc
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
WR-670-6N
Registered Owner:
PALM SPRINGS AIR MUSEUM 
INC
Rated Power:
220 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PSP, 477 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
0째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 20000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29째C / -1째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Palm Springs, CA (PSP)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Palm Springs, CA (PSP)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1300 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Palm Springs International (PSP)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
477 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
31L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
10000 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6WPR16LA078
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
33.824444, -116.506667 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard D Plagens
Adopted Date:
12/18/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Ricardo Hernandez; FAA-FSDO; Riverside, CA
Publish Date:
12/18/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92799
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
