Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Simmesport, LA
Accident Number:
CEN16LA118
Date & Time:
03/02/2016, 1500 CST 
Registration:
N3339J
Aircraft:
CESSNA 150G
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
During the cross-country flight, the engine experienced a total loss of power and the student 
pilot performed a forced landing to a field. The airplane nosed over during the landing and 
came to rest inverted. An examination of the engine revealed that the incorrect bearing and 
thrust washer had been used during the engine reassembly about 90 flight hours before the 
accident, resulting in the seizure and failure of the #1 and #2 connecting rods and the 
subsequent loss of engine power. The mechanic who performed the overhaul and reassembly 
used an outdated parts manual and installed the improper bearing and thrust washer 
assembly.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The installation of an improper bearing and thrust washer during engine overhaul, which 
resulted in failure of the connecting rods and a subsequent total loss of engine power.
Findings
Aircraft
Recip engine power section - Failure (Cause)
Recip engine power section - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Environmental issues
Rough terrain - Contributed to outcome
Page 2 of 5CEN16LA118
Factual Information
On March 2, 2016, about 1500 central standard time, a Cessna 150G airplane, N3339J, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing to a field near Simmesport, Louisiana. The 
student pilot was not injured. The instructional flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) flight plan had been filed for the flight. The cross country flight 
departed Hammond Northshore Regional Airport (HDC), LA, about 1400 and was en route to 
Alexandria International Airport (AEX), Alexandria, Louisiana.
According to the student pilot, while in cruise flight at 4,500 feet mean sea level the engine lost 
power and deposited engine oil all over the front windscreen. During the forced landing to a 
plowed field the airplane nosed over resulting in substantial damage to the fuselage.
The Federal Aviation Administration inspector who responded to the accident noted a hole in 
the crank case directly aft of the #1 cylinder. The engine was secured and shipped to a 
laboratory for further examination. The examination was conducted under the auspices of the 
National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge and with the assistance of 
Continental Motors investigators.
The crank case was cracked in multiple locations and the hole in the crank case was 
approximately 2.5 inches by 2.5 inches. Oily reside was noted along the entire outer case and 
engine. Pieces of piston, piston rings, lifter, rod bolt, connecting rod, and a thrust washer were 
recovered from the engine oil sump. The #1 piston and rod assembly were jammed, wedged, 
and frozen in the cylinder and could not be disassembled. The rod assembly was fragmented 
and partially separated at the rod cap. The rod bolt broke at the split line of the rod and the rod 
cap.
The #2 piston and rod assembly were also jammed, wedged, and frozen in the cylinder and 
could not be disassembled. A second thrust washer fell from the assembly after the #3 and #4 
cylinders were removed. One thrust washer near the propeller flange on the crank shaft 
exhibited fretting.
The front main crankshaft bearing (part #633398) with the separate thrust washer was 
removed from the engine. According to the most recent revision of the Continental Motors 
Overhaul Manual and Illustrated Parts catalogs (both dated 2011) the front main bearing (part 
#627246) with the thrust washer as part of the assembly should have been used (a one-piece 
assembly as opposed to three separate pieces).
The engine had been disassembled and stored in that condition for about 2 years before being 
reassembled in May of 2015. In a telephone conversation with the mechanic who reassembled 
the engine, he stated many of the original components were not there for his reference. He 
utilized a parts catalog, dated March 1977, to reassemble the engine. He understood from these 
resources that all engines required the same bearing and thrust washer (three separate pieces 
and not one assembly). He stated further that while ordering kits for this reassembly the first 
Page 3 of 5CEN16LA118
three came incomplete. It was the fourth bearing kit that he received that came complete and 
included the main bearing with the separate thrust washer.
The mechanic encountered difficulty while reassembling the engine Œ specifically with the 
thrust washer staying in place during the reassembly. He stated that the instructions in the 
manual to use grease to keep the thrust washer in place were ineffective. He called Continental 
Motors customer service and was instructed to torque the case down and then install the 
cylinders to ensure the thrust washer remained in place. He followed these instructions and 
installed the #3 cylinder last to ensure that the bearing and thrust washer stayed in place. 
There was no question from the customer service representative to ensure that the correct part 
was being used during the reassembly.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing-landing roll
Nose over/nose down
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
19, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/07/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
57.3 hours (Total, all aircraft), 44.5 hours (Total, this make and model), 35.9 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 7.8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5CEN16LA118
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N3339J
Model/Series:
150G 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1966
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15066039
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1499 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6328 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
0-200-A
Registered Owner:
DYLAN AVIATION LLC
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KHZR
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1455 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
90°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.12 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hammond, LA (HDC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Alexandria, LA (AEX)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1400 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
30.983611, -91.812500 (est)
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jennifer Rodi
Adopted Date:
01/26/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Shawn C Crump; Federal Aviation Administration; Baton Rouge, LA
Mike Council; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
01/26/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92804
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
