The experimental-category amateur-built airplane suffered a broken weld in the right main 
landing gear during landing, resulting in a separation of the right main gear tire.  The pilot 
reported that he landed to the north (runway 32) on a 4,529- by 100-foot hard-surface runway.  
He reported that he touched down with a light bounce.  He stated that while rolling, there was 
suddenly a violent pull to the right after hearing a "crunch."  The pilot reported that he applied 
left brake but that the plane left the runway to the right, went into the dirt and up onto its nose 
and upper left wingtip.  He reported that the aircraft, including the failed part, had 17.4 hours 
total time.  The pilot, who had built the aircraft, listed "better construction [technique] by 
builder" as an owner/operator safety recommendation on his NTSB accident report.
An improper weld in the landing gear, resulting in separation of the right main landing gear 
wheel during a normal landing.
On November 2, 2001, approximately 1400 mountain standard time, a Fetherolf Hatz CB-1 
experimental-category amateur-built airplane, N26WF, suffered a broken weld in the right 
main landing gear during landing at Ontario, Oregon, resulting in a separation of the right 
main gear tire.  The airplane subsequently departed the side of the landing runway and nosed 
down, receiving substantial damage.  The private pilot-in-command of the aircraft, who owned 
and had built the airplane and was its sole occupant, was not injured in the accident.  Visual 
meteorological conditions with light and variable winds prevailed and no flight plan had been 
filed for the 14 CFR 91 personal flight from Nampa, Idaho.
The pilot reported that he landed to the north (runway 32) on a 4,529- by 100-foot hard-
surface runway.  He reported that he touched down with a light bounce.  He stated that while 
rolling, there was suddenly a violent pull to the right after hearing a "crunch."  The pilot 
reported that he applied left brake but that the plane left the runway to the right, went into the 
dirt and up onto its nose and upper left wingtip.  He reported that the airplane, including the 
part that suffered the broken weld, had 17.4 hours total time.  The pilot listed "better 
construction [technique] by builder" as an owner/operator safety recommendation on his 
NTSB accident report.
The pilot, who also held a repairman/experimental aircraft builder certificate for the accident 
aircraft, indicated on his NTSB accident report that the aircraft's last inspection was a 
continuous airworthiness inspection performed on August 3, 1995, 17.4 flight hours before the 
accident.  A copy of the aircraft's engine log furnished by the pilot contained an entry dated 
September 15, 2001, for a "conditional inspection" signed by the pilot.  The pilot did not 
furnish a copy of the aircraft log.  According to the FAA aircraft registry, the accident aircraft 
received an experimental/amateur-built airworthiness certificate on April 22, 1999.
