The pilot-rated student receiving instruction stated that the objective of the flight lesson was to 
work on confined area and pinnacle landings.  The student stated that he had practiced a 
number of confined area landings in the local area and along a river.  The student added that 
following his last landing/takeoff, the flight instructor took over flying to give him a break.  The 
flight instructor flew the helicopter north of the last few landing areas to review their lesson.  
The flight instructor turned the helicopter south and flew along the river instructing the 
student and commenting on the various landing areas.  The student stated that he was looking 
over his right shoulder at one of the previous landing areas, and looked forward to see wires in 
front of the helicopter.  The student exclaimed, "wires!" and saw the instructor pull up on the 
collective and left on the cyclic.  The helicopter pitched up and rolled to the left; subsequently 
impacting trees and terrain along the left side of the river.  Examination of the accident site 
revealed that there was a set of three unmarked wires; one which remained hanging across the 
river, and two others that were laying on the west bank of the river.  The helicopter came to rest 
on its left side among trees approximately 100 yards from the wires.  The wire that remained 
hanging across the river was approximately 40 feet above the river, and was below the tops of 
the trees along the banks.  Examination of the helicopter revealed that the mast cowling 
displayed two marks and tears perpendicular to the mast. 
the flight instructor's failure to maintain clearance with wires while maneuvering along a river.
On November 3, 2001, approximately 1230 central standard time, a Robinson R22 helicopter, 
N127RB, was substantially damaged when it impacted wires, trees, and terrain while 
maneuvering near Seagoville, Texas.  The helicopter was registered to and operated by Sky 
Helicopters Inc., of Garland, Texas.  The flight instructor sustained fatal injuries, and the pilot-
rated student sustained serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a 
flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight.  The 
local flight departed Garland, Texas, approximately 1130.  
According to the student, the objective of the flight lesson was to work on confined area and 
pinnacle landings.  The student stated that he had practiced a number of confined area 
landings in the local area and along the Trinity River.  The student added that following his last 
landing/takeoff, the flight instructor took over flying to give him a break.  The flight instructor 
flew the helicopter north of the last few landing areas to review their lesson.  The flight 
instructor turned the helicopter south and flew along the river instructing the student and 
commenting on the various landing areas.  The student stated that he was looking over his 
right shoulder at one of the previous landing areas, and looked forward to see wires in front of 
the helicopter.  The student exclaimed, "wires!" and saw the instructor pull up on the collective 
and left on the cyclic.  The helicopter pitched up and rolled to the left; subsequently impacting 
trees and terrain along the left side of the river.  The student reported that the visibility at the 
time of the accident was approximately 10 miles.
Examination of the accident site, by the NTSB investigator-in-charge and an FAA inspector, 
revealed a set of three unmarked wires, one which remained hanging across the river, and two 
others that were laying on the west bank of the river.  The helicopter came to rest on its left side 
among trees approximately 100 yards from the wires.  The wire that remained hanging across 
the river was approximately 40 feet above the river, and was below the tops of the trees along 
the banks.  One of the tail rotor blades was found separated from the tail rotor hub, and the 
vertical and horizontal stabilizers were separated from the tail boom.  The aforementioned 
items came to rest on the ground and in a tree, respectively, approximately 40 yards prior to 
the main wreckage.  Examination of the helicopter revealed that the mast cowling displayed 
two marks and tears perpendicular to the mast. 
The flight instructor had accumulated a total of 7,171 flight hours, of which 6,976 hours were in 
rotorcraft and 3,800 hours were in the same make and model as the accident helicopter.  
The flight instructor was transported to the hospital, where he died at 1405.  An autopsy 
conducted by the Southwestern Institute of Forensic Sciences, Dallas, Texas, determined the 
cause of death was "multiple blunt force injuries."  A toxicological test performed by the Civil 
Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, detected atropine in the instructor's blood 
and liver.  Atropine is typically administered as part of resuscitative efforts.  
