The first officer landed the airplane upon completion of a night ILS approach.  Just after 
touchdown, the airplane struck a deer in the vicinity of the left engine.  The deer had been 
crossing the runway from left to right.  The captain shut down the engine and taxied to the 
gate.  Post-accident examination of the airplane revealed that the engine firewall was cracked, 
one propeller blade was bent, and another blade had separated near the hub.  The separated 
portion of the blade was found about 300 feet from where the collision occurred.  Weather at 
the time included a 600-foot overcast layer.
A deer, which had been crossing the runway as the airplane touched down.  A factor was the 
dark night conditions.
On November 1, 2001, at 2145 eastern standard time, a Beech 1900C, N210CJ, operating as 
U.S Airways Express flight 5955, was substantially damaged when it collided with a deer while 
landing at Hancock County-Bar Harbor Airport (BHB), Bar Harbor, Maine.  The certificated 
airline transport pilot, the first officer, and the 11 passengers were uninjured.  Night 
instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The flight was 
operating on an instrument flight rules flight plan between General Edward Lawrence Logan 
International Airport (BOS), Boston, Massachusetts, and Bar Harbor.  The scheduled 
passenger flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
The flight was operated by Colgan Air, Inc.  According to the Director of Safety, the first officer 
had just completed an ILS RWY 22 approach.  She landed the airplane, and just after 
touchdown, it struck a deer that was crossing from left to right.  The captain took control of the 
airplane and stopped it on the runway.  As the airplane slowed to a stop, the left engine began 
to vibrate.  The captain secured the engine, and after shutdown, noted that one of the 
composite propeller blades was missing.  After assessing the damage, the captain taxied the 
airplane to the ramp, where the passengers deplaned uneventfully.
Post-accident examination of the airplane revealed that the engine firewall was cracked, one 
propeller blade was bent, and another blade had separated near the hub.  The separated 
portion of the blade was found about 300 feet from where the collision occurred.  
Weather at the time included a 600-foot overcast layer.
