The airplane sustained substantial damage on impact with terrain and an object following a 
gear collapse during landing roll.  The pilot was uninjured.  A mechanic stated, "When lifted 
the Right wing the gear fell down and locked.  I jacked the left wing to engage the lock, the left 
gear was down but, was not locked.  The nose gear would not fall down due to the gear doors 
were bent, so I used the hydraulic pump to push it down and it locked."  FAA inspectors found 
that the airplane landed long and touched down on the left side of the centerline.  An inspector 
stated, "Photographs indicate that the aircraft immediately began a hard right turn.  Shortly 
before exiting the runway, skid marks show that the right main landing gear started to fold up.  
The aircraft came to rest on the east side of the runway with the nose and right main gear 
retracted.  One runway light was broken off after it was struck with the left wing.  The pilot 
reported, "As I turned from base to final, I again ordered a pre-landing checklist noting that the 
gear was showing 3 green lights on the panel.  The initial phase of the landing and touch down 
seemed normal but after a short period (I cannot define how need) as the aircraft proceeded 
down the centerline, I noticed the right side of the aircraft descending as though the right gear 
was collapsing and the right wing descending toward the pavement."
The gear collapse for undetermined reasons during the landing roll.  A factor was the pilot not 
using a proper touchdown point by landing long.
On November 2, 2001, about 1756 central standard time, a Piper PA-28R-201T, N5984V, 
piloted by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage on impact with terrain and an 
object following a gear collapse during landing roll on runway 35 (3,600 feet by 60 feet, 
dry/asphalt) at Mount Hawley Auxiliary Airport (3MY), near Peoria, Illinois.  The airplane 
exited the runway, impacted a runway light, and came to rest off the runway's right side.  The 
personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the time of the accident.  The pilot was uninjured.  The flight had filed and had activated an 
IFR flight plan.  The flight had departed from Naper Aero Club Airport, near Naperville, 
Illinois, about 1710, had cancelled the IFR flight plan while approaching 3MY, and was landing 
at 3MY at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported:
 As I turned from base to final, I again ordered a 
pre-landing checklist noting that the gear was showing 
3 green lights on the panel.  The initial phase of the 
landing and touch down seemed normal but after a 
short period (I cannot define how need) as the aircraft 
proceeded down the centerline, I noticed the right side 
of the aircraft descending as though the right gear was 
collapsing and the right wing descending toward the 
pavement.  I cannot say with certainty what corrective 
action I took but the aircraft's right wing continued to 
descend.  Before the wing came in contact with the 
ground, I was unable to steer the aircraft.  The 
aircraft began dropping from the nose as the aircraft 
turned to the right.  The propeller struck the asphalt 
just prior to the aircraft departure from the runway.  
After exiting the runway the aircraft continued to turn 
approximately 120 degrees from the initial landing 
direction and come to a stop between the runway and 
taxiway.
A mechanic at 3MY stated:
...  The aircraft was in the grass between runway 35 and 
the taxiway.  It was about 2700 feet from the approach end 
and about 50 feet to the east in the grass.  Peoria Approach 
was notified.
On Saturday morning (11/3/01) we removed the aircraft from the 
grass.  When lifted the Right wing the gear fell down and locked.  I 
jacked the left wing to engage the lock, the left gear was down but, 
was not locked.  The nose gear would not fall down due to the gear 
doors were bent, so I used the hydraulic pump to push it down and it 
locked.  We hooked our tug to the aircraft and put it in a tie down.
Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors examined the airplane.  The inspectors found that 
the airplane landed long on runway 35 and touched down on the left side of the centerline. (See 
appended photographs)  An inspector stated:
Photographs indicate that the aircraft immediately began a hard right 
turn.  Shortly before exiting the runway, skid marks show that the 
right main landing gear started to fold up.  The aircraft came to rest 
on the east side of the runway with the nose and right main gear 
retracted.  One runway light was broken off after it was struck with 
the left wing.
