The aircraft executed a high-powered pass approximately 25 feet above ground level down 
runway 07, then performed an abrupt pull-up into steep climbing loop maneuver. About 200 to 
300 feet above the ground, the aircraft was inverted at the top of the loop, then it rolled upright 
and entered what appeared to be a stall, followed by a spin, and collided with the ground. Two 
witnesses reported the engine "burped," while other witnesses reported the engine sounded as 
if it were running smoothly. Examination of the wreckage revealed the nose section was 
separated, and the wings displayed extensive perpendicular crush damage. Continuity was 
established from the cockpit controls to the flight control surfaces. Engine continuity was 
established and both cylinders exhibited compression when the engine was turned by hand.
The pilot's failure to maintain airspeed during a low-altitude aerobatic maneuver, which 
resulted in an inadvertent stall/spin and subsequent uncontrolled descent into terrain.
On November 3, 2001, at 1310 eastern standard time, a James E. Bass, Moni Motor Glider, 
N117JB, collided with the ground while maneuvering at Mallard's Landing, a private airstrip, in 
Locust Grove, Georgia. The aircraft was owned and operated by the pilot, and the personal 
flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed. 
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage, and the airline transport pilot received fatal injuries. The local flight 
departed Locust Grove, Georgia, at an undetermined time.
The aircraft and several others were participating in a fly-in at Mallard's Landing. According to 
witnesses, the aircraft executed a high-powered pass approximately 25 feet above ground level 
down runway 07, then performed an abrupt pull-up into steep climbing loop maneuver. About 
200 to 300 feet above the ground, the aircraft was inverted at the top of the loop, then it rolled 
upright and entered what appeared to be a stall, followed by a spin, and collided with the 
ground in an 80-degree nose-low attitude. Two witnesses reported the engine "burped," while 
other witnesses reported the engine sounded as if it were running smoothly.
Examination of the accident site revealed wreckage debris was scattered over an area 
approximately 40 feet square in the back yard of a residence adjacent to the sod runway. 
Debris from the propeller spinner and cowling was embedded in the ground, and the propeller 
assembly was separated and found 30 feet from the main wreckage. The nose section was 
separated, and the wings displayed extensive perpendicular crush damage from the leading 
edge aft. Continuity was established from the cockpit controls to the flight control surfaces. 
Engine continuity was established and both cylinders exhibited compression when the engine 
was turned by hand. The carburetor was destroyed.
engine at locations, airspeeds, altitudes, or other circumstances from which a successful no-
power landing cannot be made after sudden engine stoppage."
The postmortem examination of the pilot was performed on November 4, 2001, by Dr. John B. 
Parker at the Henry County Medical Center Morgue in Stockbridge, Georgia.  Blount force 
trauma The Forensic toxicology was performed by the FAA Toxicology and Accident 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The tests were negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, 
drugs and alcohol.
The aircraft maintenance logbooks were not recovered for examination. 
