The pilot had spent most of the day waxing his airplane and decided to fly it once around the 
pattern.  The engine start-up, taxi, and engine run-up "indications were normal."  While 
climbing out at 600 feet agl, the engine lost power.  The pilot attempted, unsuccessfully, to 
restart the engine.  During a forced landing to a field, the airplane impacted small trees and 
vegetation.  Examination of the engine revealed it was "seized" and contained no oil.  No 
evidence of an oil leak was found.  The mechanic, who had been servicing the airplane, 
reported to the FAA inspector that he had drained the oil from the airplane's engine, left the 
airplane unattended, and had not replenished the oil prior to the accident flight.
the pilot's failure to perform a preflight inspection, which resulted in a loss of total engine 
power due to oil starvation.  A  contributing factor was the lack of suitable training for the 
forced landing.
On November 3, 2001, approximately 1500 central standard time, a Landoll Vans RV 3-A 
single-engine homebuilt experimental airplane, N96LS, was substantially damaged when it 
struck trees and terrain during a forced landing following a loss of engine power during takeoff 
from the Denton Municipal Airport, Denton, Texas.  The airplane was owned by N96LS Club 
LTD of Wilmington, Delaware.  The commercial pilot, operator and sole occupant of the 
airplane, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not 
filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The local flight was 
originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) that 
he had spent most of the day waxing his airplane and decided to fly it once around the pattern.  
The engine start-up, taxi, and engine run-up "indications were normal."  During climb out after 
takeoff from runway 17, he had turned crosswind and had climbed to 600 feet when the engine 
lost power.  The pilot turned downwind, switched fuel tanks, and attempted, unsuccessfully, to 
restart the engine.  The pilot determined that he could not make it back to the runway and 
initiated a forced landing, without flaps, to a field.  During the approach, the airplane impacted 
small trees and vegetation.  Subsequently, the airplane impacted the ground and came to rest 
upright.
An examination of the airplane, by the FAA inspector who responded to the accident site, 
revealed that both wing fuel tanks were full of fuel.  Both the left and right wings sustained 
substantial damage, and the left main landing gear was found separated.  The engine was 
found "seized," and it contained no oil.  No evidence of an oil leak was found.
The mechanic, who had been servicing the airplane, reported to the FAA inspector that he had 
drained the oil from the airplane's engine, left the airplane unattended, and had not 
replenished the oil before the accident flight.
