The pilot's original destination was Clarksville, Tennessee. However, because of adverse  
weather conditions  in Clarksville, the pilot diverted to Waverly, Tennessee.  The pilot 
contacted the Nashville automated Flight Service Station at about 2200 and again at about  
0100 for a weather brief. The pilot limited the brief by only asking what Ft. Campbell, was 
reporting for visibility.  At both times Ft. Campbell, Kentucky was reporting less then three 
miles visibility and fog. Shortly after  0130,  the non-instrument rated private pilot, initiated 
VFR flight into IMC conditions. The airplane was last seen on radar at about 0155 in the 
vicinity of the accident site, circling, at about 1600 feet mean sea level.  Examination of the 
wreckage found that the airplane had cartwheeled left wing first, then the nose, followed by the 
right wing,  until it came to rest against a tree line. Further examination did not reveal evidence 
of mechanical malfunction, and there was no evidence of pilot impairment or incapacitation.
The pilot initiated a VFR flight into known IMC conditions which resulted in a loss of control of 
the airplane due to spatial disorientation. Factors were the low ceilings.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 3, 2001, at 0155 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-181, N43334, collided with 
the ground in McEwen, Tennessee, shortly after takeoff from the Humphreys County Airport in 
Waverly, Tennessee. The airplane was operated by Pilot's Choice Aviation and flown by the 
private pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. Instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight. The 
pilot and two passengers received fatal injuries and the airplane was destroyed. The flight 
originated in Georgetown, Texas, at 1530 the previous day. 
The pilot's original destination was Clarksville, Tennessee. However, because of adverse  
weather conditions  in Clarksville, the pilot diverted to Waverly, Tennessee.  According to 
security tapes at Waverly, the pilot fueled the airplane after landing and then pushed it back 
out of the view of the security camera. The pilot contacted the Nashville automated Flight 
Service Station about 2200 and again about  0100 for a weather briefing. The pilot limited the 
briefing by only asking what Ft. Campbell was reporting for visibility.  At both times, Ft. 
Campbell, Kentucky, was reporting less than three miles visibility and fog. At 0130, the flight 
departed Waverly for Clarksville. The airplane was last seen on radar about 0155, at 1600 feet 
mean sea level. The airplane was found in a pasture by a local farmer at daybreak that 
morning, in McEwen, Tennessee.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a private certificate with privileges for airplane single engine land. The pilot was 
not instrument rated, and his private pilot certificate was issued on August 8, 2001, and at the 
time of the accident he had accumulated about 64 hours of total flight time. The pilot's most 
recent third class medical certificate was issued on June 14, 2001, with no waivers or 
limitations. According to records on file at Fort Hood, Texas, the pilot was designated as an 
Army Helicopter pilot and had accumulated about 1,537 total flight hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Piper PA-28-181, S/N 28-8490035, was manufactured and certificated in 1984. It was a 
four seat, single engine airplane, with tricycle fixed landing gear.  The Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) records showed that the airplane was registered to the current owners 
on April 22, 1997. The airplane's maintenance records showed that the most recent inspection 
was a phase inspection, completed on November 1, 2001. The airplane had accumulated a total 
time of 9,220 hours at the time of the accident, including seven hours since its last inspection. 
A review of the airplanes maintenance logbooks revealed no discrepancies.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Weather at the time of the accident was reported by witnesses as foggy. One witness who found 
the airplane stated that visibility was near zero due to fog. Weather reported at Fort Campbell, 
Kentucky at 1255, was wind variable at 2 knots, visibility 2.5 statute miles, light rain, scattered 
clouds at 300 feet, broken clouds at 4000 feet, broken clouds at 9000 feet, temperature and 
dew point were 15 degrees Celsius and the altimeter was 30.31 millimeters of mercury. At 0153, 
Nashville, Tennessee was reporting, overcast at 940 feet, visibility 5 statute miles, temperature 
17 degrees Celsius, and dew point at 16 degrees Celsius and wind light and variable.
WRECKAGE EXAMINATION
Examination of the wreckage on-scene found that the airplane  rested next to a tree line 
bordering a cow pasture, about 5 miles southeast of the Waverly Airport. The left wing, aileron 
and flap had separated at the wing root. The outboard section of the wing spar was bent aft. 
The outboard leading edge of the wing had impact damage and was compressed aft and 
upward. The fuel cap was in-place and intact. The left  main landing gear was found separated 
from the wing.
The left aileron was separated into two sections, including a missing outboard tip. The aileron 
was attached to the middle hinge only. The bell crank was attached to its attachment points, 
and the stops were in-place and intact. The push pull tube from the bell crank to the aileron 
was damage and separated from its attachment point. Both aileron cables were attached to the 
bell crank and separated near the wing root. The primary cable was found cut. The balance 
cable was frayed and unwound. The flap was separated into two sections. The inboard section 
was attached to the inboard hinge. The outboard section was separated from its attachments.
The right wing was separated at the wing root. The outboard leading edge was buckled aft to 
the main spar, and the outboard tip was destroyed. Fuel, blue in color, was found in the 
breached fuel tank. The fuel cap was in-place and intact. The right main gear had impact 
damage.
The right aileron remained attached to all three of its attachment points. The bell crank was 
separated from its attachment points. The push pull rod from the bell crank to the aileron was 
separated. The aileron cables were attached to the bell crank and separated near the wing root. 
The cable separation was frayed and unwound. The flap was attached to the inboard hinge 
only, and the flap was separated into two sections.
The vertical stabilizer and rudder sustained impact damage. The leading edge of the vertical 
stabilizer had impact damage. The rudder was attached to the middle attachment point and to 
the rudder horn. The stops were in-place and intact. The rudder cables were attached to the 
rudder horn and separated near the baggage area where the fuselage had separated. The 
rudder cables were attached to the rudder bar and separated near the cabin area. The cable 
separation was frayed and unwound.
The horizontal tabulator was damaged. The left side of the tabulator had leading edge circular 
impact damage. Approximately 18 inches of the left outboard tabulator was separated and 
destroyed. The trim tab mechanism measured 3/4 of an inch and displayed 4 threads, which 
positions the tab in the neutral position. The tabulator stops were in-place and intact. The 
tabulator cables were attached to the balance weight and separated at the aft baggage 
compartment. The cable separations were strayed and unwound. The tabulator cables were 
attached to the "T" Bar and separated near the cabin area. The fuselage had separated near the 
aft baggage compartment. 
The flap handle was separated from its attachment point. The fuel selector was separated from 
its attachment points and was selected to the right tank position. The fuel selector was field 
tested by blowing air through the valves with no obstructions noted.
Examination of the engine revealed that it was separated from the airframe structure and all 
the tubular mounts were broken. Then engine controls were destroyed. Initial visual 
examination of the engine revealed no outward anomalies. Detail examination of the engine 
including partial disassembly found the spark plugs, valve covers, oil filter, and oil suction 
screen unremarkable. Rotation of the crankshaft established internal gear and valve train 
continuity. All four cylinders developed thumb compression during crankshaft rotation. Bore 
scope examination of the engine revealed no primacy anomalies.  The carburetor and fuel 
pump were damaged, separated. Several fuel hoses were broken. The carburetor was opened 
for examination, the bowl was clean, the nozzle was clear, one float was partly collapsed. No 
fuel was found within the engine components. Both fuel tanks were ruptured. A residual 
quantity of aviation fuel was found remaining in the right wing fuel tank area. The instrument 
vacuum system pump was found impact damaged but the drive coupling was intact, inspection 
of the internal vanes revealed no anomalies.
The propeller assembly was attached to the crankshaft flange. The #1 blade was heavily 
damaged, the outboard section was twisted, and approximately ten inches of blade material 
was torn off, and not located or recovered. The #2 blade exhibited tensional bending, and 
heavy leading edge nicks at the tip section was noted. Both blades had heavy scoring and 
abrasions.
MEDICAL/PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy examination of the pilot and passengers was conducted by the Department of the 
Army, 31st Military Police Detachment (CID) (Air Assault) 3D Military Police Group Criminal 
Investigation Division (CID) USACIDC, Fort Campbell, Kentucky. The autopsy examination 
established the manner of death for the pilot and passenger as, accidental, and the cause of 
death as multiple blunt force trauma.
A post accident toxicological examination was performed by the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) Civil Aero medical Institute, in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The 
toxicology report on the pilot revealed no ethanol was detected in the muscle, 25(mg/do, 
mg/hg) ethanol detected in kidney and 10(mg/do, mg/hg) acetaldehyde detected in kidney. No  
drugs were detected in the kidney. The low levels of ethanol and acetaldehyde detected in the 
kidney is likely a result of  post-mortem production.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Radar data was recovered from Memphis Air Traffic Control Center in Memphis, Tennessee. A 
review of the data and a controllers statement found that the airplane was between 1,600 feet 
and 1,700 feet, and according to the controller the airplane was "circling, disoriented, or 
returning to Waverly, Tennessee."
The wreckage was released to the owners representative on August 28, 2002, US Aviation 
Underwriters.
