The pilot stated that after flying for 2.5 hours, he decided to land at an airport near Champaign, 
Illinois, and missed the airport due to the wind.  The pilot stated that he then diverted to 
Paxton, Illinois, and after six attempts was unable to locate the airport.  The pilot stated that 
the airplane ran out of fuel and he declared an emergency.  An off airport landing was made 
into a plowed farm field 2.5 miles west of the Paxton Airport. The forced landing was made on 
a heading of 020 degrees.  A weather report for a reporting station located 27 nautical miles 
and 190 degrees from the accident site reported winds from 180 degrees at 20 knots gusting to 
26 knots.  The left wing fuel tank contained no fuel and the right wing fuel tank contained less 
than one cupful of fuel.  Examination of the airplane revealed no other anomalies. 
the inadequate preflight planning by the pilot in command and the exhaustion of usable fuel.  
Factors were the tailwind landing condition and the rough terrain at the landing site. 
 On February 3, 1999, at 1031 central standard time (cst), a Cessna 150M, N704BF, piloted by a 
private pilot, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing near Paxton, Illinois, after a 
loss of engine power during cruise flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident.  The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The 
pilot reported minor injuries.  The flight originated at Tevis Field, near Chanute, Kansas, at 
0710 cst, and was en route to Detroit, Michigan.  
In his written statement, the pilot stated that after flying for 2.5 hours, he decided to land at an 
airport near Champaign, Illinois, and missed the airport due to the wind.  The pilot stated that 
he then diverted to Paxton, Illinois, and after six attempts was unable to locate the airport.  The 
pilot stated that the airplane ran out of fuel and he declared an emergency.  An off airport 
landing was made into a plowed farm field 2.5 miles west of the Paxton airport. The pilot 
reported losing consciousness for an unknown amount of time following the accident. 
Post accident investigation showed substantial damage to the left wing and vertical stabilizer.  
The forced landing was made on a heading of 020 degrees.  A weather report for a reporting 
station located 27 nautical miles and 190 degrees from the accident site reported winds from 
180 degrees at 20 knots gusting to 26 knots.  The left wing fuel tank contained no fuel and the 
right wing fuel tank contained less than one cupful of fuel.  Examination of the airplane 
revealed no other anomalies.
