The pilot said that while he was taxiing out for takeoff on runway 22, he was monitoring the 
airport's Automatic Weather Observation Station (AWOS), and winds were reported to be 
gusting 34 to 36 knots.  While turning from northwest to northeast on the taxiways, the 
airplane's left wing lifted up and the airplane nosed down.  The AWOS wind report 
approximately 3 minutes after the accident was 250 degrees at 27 knots, gusting to 43 knots.  
The manufacturer's Information Manual for this airplane states that the maximum 
demonstrated crosswind velocity is 20 knots (not a limitation). 
The pilot's inability to maintain aircraft control due to unfavorable winds conditions. 
 On February 2, 1999, at 1711 mountain standard time, a Cessna 208B, N980FE, was 
substantially damaged when the airplane nosed down during taxi for takeoff at Yellowstone 
Regional Airport, Cody, Wyoming.  The airline transport rated pilot, the sole occupant in the 
airplane, was not injured.  The airplane was being operated by Corporate Air of Billings, 
Montana, dba Federal Express Corporation under Title 14 CFR Part 135.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the cross-country cargo flight which was taxiing for departure at the 
time of the accident.  A company VFR flight plan had been filed with the destination of 
Riverton, Wyoming.  
FAA records indicated that the pilot got a weather briefing at 1521, and the winds were 250 
degrees at 21 knots, gusting to 38 knots.  The pilot reported that taxied out for a departure on 
runway 22 at approximately 1708.  The pilot said that as he was taxiing out, he was monitoring 
the airport's Automatic Weather Observation Station (AWOS), and it was reporting the 
maximum wind velocity of 34 to 36 knots.  The pilot reported that as he turned the airplane 
from northwest to northeast, the wind lifted the airplane's left wing.  The airplane nosed down 
with its left main landing gear off the ground and the engine's propeller in the ground.  The 
right wing spar was bent.
The AWOS wind report at 1714 (approximately 3 minutes after the accident), was 250 degrees, 
at 27 knots gusting to 43 knots.  The manufacturer's Information Manual for this airplane 
states that the maximum demonstrated crosswind velocity is 20 knots (not a limitation).
