The certificated airline transport pilot was returning to a maintenance vendor's hangar after 
completing a maintenance operational check flight.  He said that while taxiing on an ice 
covered parking area, he applied power to taxi up a small incline.  He said that as the airplane's 
skis went over the top of the incline, he closed the throttle, and reached for the mixture control 
cut off.  He noted that his sleeve caught on the throttle control, advancing it to the open 
position.  He said that he was unable to stop the airplane, and the left wing struck a parked 
maintenance tug. The left wing sustained substantial damage.  The pilot noted that there were 
no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane. 
The pilot's use of excessive taxispeed.  Factors associated with the accident were an icy taxi 
area, and the inadvertent activation of the throttle. 
 On February 3, 1999, about 1030 Alaska standard time, a ski equipped Piper PA-18-150 
airplane, N7875D, sustained substantial damage while taxiing at Lake Hood, Anchorage, 
Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area flight when 
the accident occurred.  The airplane was operated by the U.S. Department of Interior, on a 
public use mission.  The solo airline transport pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.  
In his written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board, the pilot reported that he 
was returning to a maintenance vendor's hangar after completing a maintenance operational 
check flight.  He said that while taxiing on an ice covered parking area, he applied power to taxi 
up a small incline.  He said that as the airplane's skis went over the top of the incline, he closed 
the throttle, and reached for the mixture control cut off.  He noted that his sleeve caught on the 
throttle control, advancing it to the open position.  He said that he was unable to stop the 
airplane, and the left wing struck a parked maintenance tug. 
The left wing sustained substantial damage.     
The pilot noted that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
