The 1946 model airplane impacted trees following a loss of control.  The pilot stated that the 
airplane was in cruise flight at 2,100 feet MSL, when he heard a 'loud pop.'  The airplane 
spiraled to the left about 2.5 times before impacting trees.  An aircraft mechanic and FAA 
inspector found the left wing cross brace wires loose, but could not determine if the loose wires 
were a pre-impact condition.  They also found an aileron bolt installed upside down, 'causing it 
to rub against the wing.'  The pilot could not remember if the aileron movement was restricted; 
he could only remember using full right rudder in attempt to keep the airplane level.  
Photographs of the airplane in the tree reveal that the ailerons were positioned for a right turn. 
An undetermined airframe malfunction which rendered the aircraft uncontrollable. 
 On February 2, 1999, at 1615 central standard time, a Taylorcraft BC12-D1 tail-wheel equipped 
airplane, N44174, was substantially damaged when it impacted trees following a loss of control 
during cruise flight near Daingerfield, Texas.  The airline transport pilot, who was the sole 
occupant, sustained minor injuries.  The airplane was registered to and operated by C&B 
Aircraft of Powderly, Texas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR 
Part 91 ferry flight and no flight plan was filed.  The flight originated from the Shreveport 
Regional Airport, Shreveport, Louisiana, at 1507, and was destined for Paris, Texas.
According to the pilot, the airplane was in cruise flight at 2,100 feet MSL, when he heard a 
"loud pop."  Subsequently, the airplane entered a "flat spiral to the left."  The airplane spiraled 
2.5 times before it impacted 75-foot trees and came to rest suspended in tree limbs 25 feet 
above the ground.  The pilot exited the airplane and climbed down the tree unassisted.
An FAA inspector examined the airplane and reported that a wing spar was damaged and the 
propeller was destroyed.  The fuselage, aft of the cockpit, was structurally damaged.  In the 
enclosed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot stated that 
"the cause of the accident was structural failure."
According to an aircraft mechanic, who examined the airplane in the presence of the FAA 
inspector, the left wing cross brace wires were found loose and intact, but he could not say with 
certainty if the loose wires were a pre-impact condition.  The mechanic also stated that a bolt in 
the right aileron had been installed upside down, "causing it to rub against the wing."  He could 
not determine if the bolt had restricted the pilot's ability to move the ailerons.  The pilot could 
not remember if the aileron movement was restricted; he could only remember applying full 
right rudder in an attempt to keep the airplane from rolling left inverted.  Photographs of the 
airplane in the tree show the ailerons positioned for a turn to the right (right aileron full up and 
left aileron full down).
According to the airplane's maintenance records, the last annual inspection on the engine and 
airframe was completed on November 15, 1998.  Total time on the 1946 model airplane was 
reported at 1,632 hours.  No other pertinent maintenance entries were noted.
