National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Mitchellville, MD
Accident Number: MIA07CA115
Date & Time: 07/01/2007, 1730 EDT
Registration: N321MD
Aircraft: Mooney M20R
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the airplane was on the glide path and approach speed was approximately 85 knots.
Several minutes prior, the manifold pressure gauge became erratic and was unable to be used as an accurate indication.
He pushed the manifold control full forward for the remainder of the approach.
The landing touchdown was 1/3 down the runway and seemed to be a "tad fast".
Halfway down the runway, he realized the engine wasn't going completely to idle.
At about 2/3 down the runway, knowing that the airplane was too fast, he looked at the option of going around and ruled it out because of the slow speed and the height needed to clear the tree line.
He attempted to slow the airplane by applying full brakes; however, was unable to slow down before running off the runway.
The pilot stated to the NTSB investigator that there were no mechanical issues with the airplane and he should have initiated a go- around.
The published length of runway 18/36 at the Freeway Airport, Mitchellville, Maryland, is 2,420 feet by 40 feet.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to attain the proper touchdown point for landing and his failure to initiate a go-around when he realized the airplane would touchdown past the intended point.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) GO-AROUND - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 3.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
