National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Battle Creek, MI
Accident Number: CHI07CA189
Date & Time: 07/02/2007, 2045 EDT
Registration: N4021M
Aircraft: Cameron Balloons Z-77
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The balloon caught fire after landing during the Battle Creek Field of Flight Hot Air Balloon Festival.
The pilot stated that after approximately one hour in the air, the balloon landed safely in a yard.
When the pilot looked up inside the top of the balloon envelope, the "parachute top did not reseat."
He attempted to reseat the top by using a "blast of heat" from the burners but it did not work.
The pilot "knew the balloon would quickly sink down on top of the basket" so he turned the burners to their horizontal position and prepared to push the envelope fabric away.
When the balloon envelope began to descend towards the ground the pilot reported that "we suddenly had a fire in the basket."
Both the pilot and passenger were able to exit the basket.
The pilot "determined the fire was coming from the burners" so he returned to the basket and turned off the fuel tanks.
The fire was subsequently extinguished by the passenger and bystanders.
An examination of the balloon after the accident revealed the fuel valve for the whisper burners was in the "on" position.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The whisper burner's fuel valve opening for undetermined reasons, which resulted in a fire after landing.
A factor in the accident was the balloon envelope's parachute top not reseating.
Findings Occurrence #1: FIRE Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) BALLOON EQUIPMENT,BURNER SYSTEM - OTHER 2.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED 3.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
