National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Marion, IN
Accident Number: CHI07LA198
Date & Time: 07/02/2007, 1456 EDT
Registration: N3088K
Aircraft: Ayres Corporation S2R-T15
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot performed a forced landing on a soybean and impacted a creek bed following a total loss of engine power during an aerial application.
The pilot reported the presence of smoke from the engine exhaust which was reported by witnesses as white smoke prior to the loss of power.
Examination of the airplane revealed the chemical bay was empty, the right fuel tank was damaged and contained no fuel and the left tank was intact and contained fuel.
The fuel selector was on the right tank.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons during an aerial application.
A contributing factor was the creek bed.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND 3.
The pilot reported a loss of engine power.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 137 aerial application flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot was uninjured.
The local flight originated from Marion, Indiana, about 1426.
The pilot stated that the airplane experienced a loss of engine power during a spray run approximately 30 minutes after departure.
He then performed a forced landing on a soybean field during which the airplane contacted a creek bed.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration, the pilot reported that the engine began to smoke from the exhaust.
Witnesses reported seeing white smoke from the airplane.
Examination of the airplane revealed the chemical bay was empty, the right fuel tank was damaged and contained no fuel, and the left tank was intact and contained fuel.
The fuel selector was on the right tank.
There was no airworthiness certificate on board the airplane.
: 6000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time: 8638.8 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Pratt & Whitney Canada ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: PT6-36 Registered Owner: Sammie N. Farrow, Jr.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
