Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
LAKE JACKSON, TX
Accident Number:
FTW97LA209
Date & Time:
06/01/1997, 0830 CDT 
Registration:
N1200M
Aircraft:
Giertz VMAX PROBE
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
Analysis 
The pilot designed, and built the aircraft.  He was conducting the aircraft's initial test flight and 
was not wearing a helmet.  Witnesses reported that immediately after takeoff it appeared that 
the 'aircraft was being over controlled until it was halfway down the runway.'  Downwind the 
pilot reported by radio he had 'good control,' the engine's temperature was 230 degrees 
Fahrenheit, and he was returning to land.  Witnesses observed the aircraft turn final approach 
to runway 35 in a stable attitude and in a descent.  Approximately 5 to 20 feet above the 
runway, the 'aircraft lost directional stability in yaw mode then pitched abruptly toward the 
ground.'  The aircraft impacted the runway, 'bounced up and went knife edge to the ground.'  
The aircraft impacted the runway about 625 feet from the initial impact point, and slid 625 feet 
to a stop inverted.  Examination of the flight controls revealed no discontinuity that may have 
existed prior to the aircraft impacting the ground.  The 63 year old pilot became qualified as a 
private pilot on January 9, 1982.  According to his pilot log book he had a total flight time of 
261.0 hours, and he had logged 8 hours within the last 90 days. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during an approach to landing.  A related factor 
was the pilot's lack of experience in make and model of aircraft. 
Page 2 of 6FTW97LA209
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 6FTW97LA209
Factual Information
 On June 1, 1997, approximately 0830 central daylight time, a Giertz Vmax Probe experimental 
aircraft, N1200M, owned and operated by the pilot as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 test flight, was 
substantially damaged during landing at the Brazoria County Airport, near Lake Jackson, 
Texas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the local 
flight.  The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was fatally injured.  The flight originated 
from the Brazoria County Airport, about 5 minutes before the accident.
The 63 year old pilot became qualified as a private pilot on January 9, 1982.  According to his 
pilot log book he had a total flight time of 261.0 hours, and he had logged 8 hours within the 
last 90 days in a Glasair airplane.  There were no biennial flight review entries in the pilot's log 
book.
The pilot was the owner of Western Composite, where he designed, and built the aircraft.  He 
was conducting the prototype aircraft's initial test flight at the time of the accident and was not 
wearing a helmet. 
The Vmax Probe aircraft is a single place, low wing airplane, with an airframe constructed 
primarily of composite materials.  It was powered by a 808cc, 2-stroke, liquid cooled, 100 HP 
engine.  The canopy and nose exterior skin of the aircraft had to be removed for the pilot to 
enter or exit.
Witnesses reported to the FAA inspector that the pilot did not complete any high speed taxi 
tests prior to the accident flight; however, he did do "rudimentary" low speed taxi tests.  
Witnesses further reported that "immediately" after takeoff from runway 35, it appeared that 
the "aircraft was being over controlled until it was halfway down the runway."  Downwind the 
pilot reported by radio he had "good control."  He also reported that the engine's temperature 
was 230 degrees Fahrenheit, and he was returning to land.
Witnesses observed the aircraft turning final approach to runway 35 in a "stable" attitude and 
in a descent.  Approximately 5 to 20 feet above the runway, the "aircraft lost directional 
stability in yaw mode then pitched abruptly toward the ground."  The aircraft impacted the 
runway, "bounced up and went knife edge to the ground."  Subsequently, the aircraft impacted 
the runway about 625 feet from the initial impact point, and slid 625 feet to a stop.  The aircraft 
came to rest inverted approximately 2,535 feet beyond the approach end of the runway and 15 
feet left of the centerline.
Examination of the aircraft wreckage by the FAA inspector revealed that the lower vertical 
fin/rudder and landing gear were separated from the fuselage.  The wooden propeller was 
shattered.  The right wing's outboard leading edge was damaged.  Further examination of the 
flight controls revealed "no discontinuity that may have existed prior to the aircraft impacting 
the ground."  A visual examination of the engine did not disclose any mechanical problems that 
would account for the high operating temperature reported by the pilot.
The pilot restraint system separated at the right hand lap belt attachment point.  During the 
process of preparation for flight tests, the builder/pilot determined that an unacceptable 
amount of lost motion existed in the flight control system.  In order to gain access to the 
components to be altered, a large section of the structural console on the right hand side of the 
cockpit was removed.  It is through this structure that the right hand lap portion of the pilot 
restraint system was attached.  The original structure was purported to have been calculated as 
Page 4 of 6FTW97LA209
sufficient to meet industry standards for the installation of the restraint system.  Subsequent to 
completion of the alteration of the flight controls a replacement section of console was 
fabricated to provide closure of the access that was created.  That closure consisted of a panel 
of lesser thickness and markedly different finish than that of the original structure.  In 
addition, this thinner, structural panel was bonded into position over an irregular painted 
surface of the original console.  The right hand lap portion of the pilot restraint system was 
attached to this replacement panel.
An autopsy was performed at the University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas.  
According to Dr. Soper, Civil Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, the Atropine 
and Lidocaine detected in blood and urine were most likely administered during life-saving 
efforts.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
63, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/04/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
261 hours (Total, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Giertz
Registration:
N1200M
Model/Series:
VMAX PROBE VMAX PROBE
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
2
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
AMW
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
808
Registered Owner:
LARS M. GIERTZ
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
LARS M. GIERTZ
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
WESTERN COMPOSITE
Operator Designator Code:
Page 5 of 6FTW97LA209
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GLS, 7 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
33 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0852 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
30°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (LBX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0825 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
BRAZORIA COUNTY (LBX)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
25 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
35
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
7000 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DOUGLAS    D WIGINGTON
Adopted Date:
06/26/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
FRED H MAUPIN; HOUSTON, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW97LA209
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
