National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: Peoria, IL
Incident Number: CEN09IA618
Date & Time: 07/01/2009, 1815 CDT
Registration: N880SF
Aircraft: BELL 230
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event: Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Air Medical (Unspecified)
 Analysis The helicopter pilot observed a caution light for the number one hydraulic system and a corresponding complete loss of hydraulic system pressure for that system.
The pilot declared an emergency and performed a run-on landing.
A postincident examination of the system's hydraulic pump revealed that two of its cover attachment bolts had separated.
The bolt heads fractured in tension from their shanks via intergranular cracks which initiated at the filet radius between the bead and the shank.
The bolt fractures exhibited intergranular fracture features over 90 percent of the surface.
The operator™s incident report safety recommendation stated that the pump's cover bolts should be replaced at overhaul; however, it is not required.
The helicopter had accumulated 269 hours since overhaul.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be: The loss of the number one hydraulic system fluid and hydraulic pressure during cruise due to the failure of the bolts that secure the hydraulic pump's cover.
The commercial helicopter pilot, two emergency medical services (EMS) crewmembers, and the patient were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The local non-scheduled domestic 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 EMS transport flight departed PIA at time unknown.
According to the operator™s incident report, the pilot observed a caution light for the number one hydraulic system and a corresponding complete loss of hydraulic system pressure for that system.
The pilot declared an emergency and performed a run-on landing.
Examination of the system's hydraulic pump revealed that two of its cover attachment bolts had separated.
The separated bolt heads were retained by safety wire.
This hydraulic pump manufacturer™s part number was 65132-1.
The Bell Helicopter part number is 222-380-009-105, which is also usable on the Bell 222 series and 430 model helicopters.
The bolts that sustained the separation were part number MS24678-17.
According to the helicopter manufacturer, these hydraulic pumps do not have a scheduled overhaul cycle and the pumps are replaced on-condition.
The manufacturer does not track the service times of these pumps.
Reportedly, this was the first failure of the hydraulic pump cover attachment bolts.
The pump manufacturer had the failed bolts examined.
The bolt heads fractured in tension from their shanks via intergranular cracks initiating at the filet radius between the bead and the shank.
The bolt fractures exhibited intergranular fracture features over 90 percent of the surface.
According to the operator, the incident pump accumulated 269 hours of time prior to the bolt failures.
