While on approach to Chicago-O'Hare International Airport, American Airlines flight 879 (AAL 
879) was being radar-vectored to the final approach course for runway 28 and American 
Airlines flight 93 (AAL 93) was on a straight-in approach to runway 27L. Both aircraft were 
under control of Chicago Terminal Radar Approach Control. Because of an air traffic control 
oversight, AAL 879 overshot the final approach course for runway 28 and continued 
northbound, conflicting with AAL 93 on the runway 27L final. According to preliminary 
Federal Aviation Administration data, lateral separation decreased to 0.35 nautical mile and 
vertical separation was 0 feet before the conflict was resolved. There were no injuries or 
damage reported as a result of the incident, which occurred in visual meteorological 
conditions, with 10 statute miles of visibility and a 5500-foot ceiling.
The Chicago TRACON West Arrival controller's omission of a required clearance, resulting in 
AAL 879 overshooting the final for runway 28 and losing separation with AAL 93.
On June 1, 2009, at 1216 central daylight time, an operational error occurred at Chicago 
Terminal Radar Approach Control when American Airlines flight 879 (AAL879), a Boeing MD-
82, and American Airlines flight 93 (AAL93), a Boeing 767, passed within 0.35 nautical miles at 
3400 feet while on approach to O'Hare International Airport (ORD), Chicago, Illinois.  AAL93 
was a scheduled passenger flight from Dublin, Ireland, to ORD, carrying 12 crew and 202 
passengers.  AAL879 was a scheduled passenger flight between St. Louis and ORD, carrying 5 
crew and 105 passengers.  There was no damage reported to either aircraft, and no injuries to 
any of the occupants.  Following the incident, both aircraft continued to ORD and landed 
normally. There was no investigation of the event until the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) received a complaint from the pilot of AAL93 two days after it occurred.  The FAA's 
investigation revealed that the incident was an operational error by air traffic control that 
resulted in loss of separation between the two aircraft.
AAL93 was in communication with the Center Arrivals controller, on an extended straight-in 
approach to runway 27L at ORD.  The aircraft was initially cleared for an Instrument Landing 
System (ILS) approach, but was eventually cleared for a visual approach following this 
incident.  AAL879 was in communication with the West Arrivals controller, and was being 
vectored from a left downwind to the final approach course for runway 28 at ORD.   At 1713:36, 
the West controller advised AAL879 of preceding traffic at 10 o'clock and three miles turning 
toward the airport, and instructed the crew to fly heading 350.  The crew reported the traffic in 
sight and acknowledged the heading.  At 1715:35, the West controller instructed an uninvolved 
aircraft to descend to 4000 feet, and a pilot responded, "blocked."  The controller repeated the 
instruction, and the pilot acknowledged.  At 1715:47, the crew of AAL879 asked. "AAL cleared 
[for] the visual?"  The West controller responded, "AAL879 is cleared for the visual approach to 
28, and the tower's– uh 120– are you turning uh left to 250 and descend to 2500."  At 
1716:00, AAL879 responded, "uh 250 and down to 25."  At 1716:30, the West controller again 
cleared AAL879 for a visual approach to 28 and instructed the crew to contact the tower.
Meanwhile, the Center Arrival controller was handling arrival aircraft inbound to runway 27L, 
including AAL93.  At 1715:44, the pilot of AAL93 transmitted, "American we're going to be 
reacting to a super 80."  The Center controller did not understand the transmission and asked, 
"Who was that again?"  AAL93 transmitted, "American uh 93 we got a super 88 crossing our 
flight path right now on 27L.  The Center controller responded, "American 93 heavy roger he's 
doing a visual to 28.  Maintain visual separation with him, but if you need to turn right you 
can."  At 1716:03, the pilot responded, "We're going to have to Œ he's uh on our centerline."  At 
1716:13, the controller asked, "AAL93 heavy do you see the airport?"  The pilot replied, "yeah Œ 
airport in sight Œ he's uh clear."  The Center controller issued a visual approach clearance for 
runway 27L.  At 1716:39, the controller instructed AAL93 to contact the tower.  There was no 
further discussion of the incident on the frequency.
In a written statement provided to the Safety Board by American Airlines, the captain of 
AAL93 reported, "–[the first officer] sighted traffic at 10 o™clock slightly low who was headed 
northbound and appeared at the time to be on base leg in closed traffic for runway 28. Not 
being on the same frequency and not given a traffic alert from our controller we continued our 
approach to 27L. [The first officer] (FO) called traffic in sight and I then queried our controller 
regarding the intentions of the S-80, who appeared to have overshot runway 28. From the 
Captain™s perspective, with wings level on a northerly heading, I felt the S-80 might be lining 
up on our runway instead. With the S-80™s nose still bore sighted at us, at approximately 3500 
ft I instructed the FO to turn away to the right to give us some breathing room. About this time 
we received an [resolution alert] (RA) from [the] traffic collision avoidance system] to climb. 
The FO stated he felt very uncomfortable to go belly up to the S-80 but stopped his descent 
while jinking to the right. Roughly co-altitude and a half mile away the S-80 commenced a 
hard descending turn back to the south complex. Once separation was attained and the S-80 
well below and behind us, we maneuvered back onto runway 27L centerline, dirtied up and 
continued approach and landing. My main concern obviously was the potential midair due to 
lack of separation while maneuvering to an RA. However other concerns from our end, include 
the possible missed communication from ATC or lack thereof, and/or confusion on whether 
the S-80 was cleared to the wrong runway or might have mistaken our runway for his. Thank 
God for all concerned that the ASAP program is back so we can put this incident in the proper 
forum to have it resolved and the equipment on board these days is capable of saving lives 
when an irregularity like this, although seldom, can happen!!"
The captain of AAL879 reported, "We were being vectored for the LOC/Visual approach to 
runway 28 at ORD in clear weather. Our last clearance was to fly heading 330 degrees at 4,000 
feet, 180 knots. We were not given an intercept heading, nor were we cleared for a visual 
approach. As we approached the localizer I directed the FO to ask for an intercept turn and/or 
approach clearance. He was unable to do so immediately as there was a good deal of congestion 
on the frequency. He was able to query Approach as we were passing through the localizer on 
the previously assigned 330 degree heading. Approach responded with an immediate turn to 
250 degrees and descent to 2,500 feet. As I began the turn and descent we received an RA 
requiring an increased descent rate. I increased both the descent rate and bank angle and the 
RA ceased. As we re-intercepted the localizer from the north approach cleared us for the visual 
approach and handed us off to tower. The rest of the flight was uneventful.
When interviewed, the West Arrival controller stated that he had been on position for 
approximately 45 minutes. The airport was in a west configuration, using visual approaches to 
runways 28, 27L, and 27R. In that configuration, the West Arrival controller was required to 
clear successive arrival traffic to visually follow preceding traffic to runway 28. When AAL879 
was on left base for the runway, the WA controller pointed out the traffic for AAL879 to follow 
and the pilot reported the aircraft in sight. Normal practice would have been to clear AAL879 
for the visual approach at that time, but the WA controller did not do so. He could not recall 
any specific distractions that may have caused him to omit the required clearance. He first 
realized that something may have gone wrong when AAL879 asked if they were cleared for the 
visual approach. The WA controller thought that the pilot was simply confirming a previously 
issued visual approach clearance. He cleared AAL879 for the visual approach, but then realized 
that something was wrong as he noticed that the aircraft was continuing north past the runway 
28 final approach course. He instructed the pilot to turn to heading 250 and descend to 2500 
feet to get away from AAL93. 
The Center Arrival controller was responsible for AAL93.  He stated that he did not hear the 
first transmission from AAL93 asking about the traffic. He responded to the transmission by 
asking who called, and was looking for a strip on AAL93 when he noticed the conflicting 
aircraft. The pilot of AAL93 stated that there was an MD80 on his [approach] centerline. The 
Center Arrival controller told AAL93 that the other aircraft was on a visual for the parallel 
runway and that he (AAL93) could turn right as necessary to avoid AAL879.
After that instruction, the Center Arrival controller stated that it looked like AAL93 deviated a 
little to the right. Because the aircraft was then off the ILS and there was no conflicting traffic 
on the 27R final, the Center Arrival controller cleared AAL93 for a visual approach to 27L.
When asked whether he thought a safety alert was necessary, the Center Arrival controller 
stated that AAL93 had reported the other aircraft in sight and that a safety alert was not 
necessary.
When asked why he did not report the event, the Center Arrival controller stated that he 
assumed the event was being handled. He stated that "–everybody saw it" and thought that the 
supervisor would handle it.  However, he did not directly observe the supervisor™s actions 
during the event.
When the incident occurred, the front line manager was monitoring the operation from the 
supervisory radar position. She noticed AAL879 was not turning toward the airport. The field 
of the data block indicated that AAL879 had been cleared for a visual approach, so she 
assumed that the aircraft had crossed through the final approach course. She went to the West 
Arrival approach controller's position.  When she got there, she heard the controller turning 
AAL879 on a 250 heading back toward the airport and reissuing the visual approach clearance. 
AAL879 was diverging from AAL93. At that point, she assumed everything was okay and 
returned to the supervisory scope. Her assessment was that the incident resulted from an 
overshoot by an aircraft previously cleared for a visual approach.  She took no further action.
