Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fort Pierce, FL
Accident Number:
MIA02LA165
Date & Time:
09/01/2002, 1253 EDT 
Registration:
N33N
Aircraft:
Cessna T337D
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that he estimated that at takeoff the airplane had about 35 gallons of fuel on 
board, and after about 45 minutes, while in cruise flight, at an altitude of 4500 feet, the front 
engine suddenly ceased operating. He stated that he had experienced problems in the past with 
water in the fuel tanks, so he did not declare an emergency, even after unsuccessful attempts to 
restart the engine. He said the airplane was maintaining 120 knots, and fully controllable while 
being only powered by the rear engine. He said that in his mind,  it was only water in the left 
tank, and his destination,  Fort Pierce, Florida,  was only 10 miles away, so he continued to his 
destination.  After contacting FAA Fort Pierce Air traffic Control Tower, the pilot said that he 
then entered a right base, turned on to the final approach course for an approach to land on 
runway 09, lowered his landing gear, set 10 degrees of flaps, and was on final at about 600 feet 
altitude, when all of a sudden the rear engine ceased operating. He said the only area to land 
was a small field on the right, so he turned 90 degrees, and entered a dive to prevent the 
airplane from stalling. The aircraft impacted in an orange grove, rebounded once,  and then 
stopped in a canal. The pilot stated the engines failed due to fuel "starvation", and added that 
"the airplane had not been loaded with enough fuel..."   Prior to the accident, the pilot said that 
there were no mechanical failures or malfunctions to the airplane or to any of its systems.The 
FAA Inspector who responded to the accident scene stated that during his examination he 
discovered no fuel in the fuel tanks, and mimimal fuel at the scene. 
Page 2 of 7MIA02LA165
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's misjudgment of the fuel supply, and subsequent fuel exhaustion.
Page 3 of 7MIA02LA165
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. (C) FUEL SUPPLY - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH
Page 4 of 7MIA02LA165
Factual Information
On September 1, 2002, about 1253 eastern daylight time, a Cessna T337D, N33N, registered to 
K.R. Aviation Inc., and operated by a private individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal 
flight, made a forced landing in an orange grove in Fort Pierce, Florida. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The commercial-rated pilot received serious 
injuries, and the commercial-rated passenger received minor injuries. The airplane incurred 
substantial damage. The flight departed from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, the same day, about 
1130.
The pilot stated that he estimated that at takeoff the airplane had about 35 gallons of fuel on 
board, and after about 45 minutes, while in cruise flight, at an altitude of 4,500 feet, the front 
engine suddenly ceased operating. He stated that he had experienced problems in the past with 
water in the fuel tanks, so he did not declare an emergency, even after unsuccessful attempts to 
restart the engine. He said the airplane was maintaining 120 knots, and fully controllable while 
being only powered by the rear engine. He said that in his mind,  it was only water in the left 
tank, and his destination,  Fort Pierce, Florida,  was only 10 miles away, so he continued to his 
destination.  After contacting FAA Fort Pierce Air Traffic Control Tower, the pilot said that he 
then entered a right base, turned on to the final approach course for an approach to land on 
runway 09, lowered his landing gear, set 10 degrees of flaps, and was on final at about 600 feet 
altitude, when all of a sudden the rear engine ceased operating. He said the only area to land 
was a small field on the right, so he turned 90 degrees, and entered a dive to prevent the 
airplane from stalling. The aircraft impacted in an orange grove, rebounded once,  and then 
stopped in a canal. The pilot stated the engines failed due to fuel "starvation", and added that 
"the airplane had not been loaded with enough fuel..."   Prior to the accident, the pilot said that 
there were no mechanical failures or malfunctions to the airplane or to any of its systems.
The FAA Inspector who responded to the accident scene stated that during his examination he 
discovered no fuel in the fuel tanks, and mimimal fuel at the scene. 
Page 5 of 7MIA02LA165
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
28, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/18/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1600 hours (Total, all aircraft), 30 hours (Total, this make and model), 1300 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N33N
Model/Series:
T337D 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
337-1122
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-360-A3
Registered Owner:
K. R. Aviation Inc.
Rated Power:
210 hp
Operator:
K. R. Aviation Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7MIA02LA165
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FPR, 25 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1253 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 1900 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.01 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 26°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Fort Lauderdale, FL (FXE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Fort Pierce, FL (FPR)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Fort Pierce (FPR)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
20 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
Unknown
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Traffic 
Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
27.495000, -80.368333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John W Lovell
Adopted Date:
03/30/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Joe Radosky; FAA FSDO; Orlando, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7MIA02LA165
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
