Just prior to the flight, the pilot, who was five hours into a ten hour experimental aircraft flight 
test regimen, readjusted the valve lash in the Subaru engine that powered the subject aircraft. 
At the beginning of the flight, he took off and climbed to about 1,000 feet above ground level 
(agl). After he rolled out on downwind, his ground crew contacted him on the aircraft radio to 
advise him that the aircraft's engine appeared to have been missing and running rough during 
the takeoff and initial climbout. About the time that the pilot received the radio transmission, 
the aircraft's engine quit producing power, and he decided to continue on around the pattern in 
order to execute a forced landing on the runway from which he had departed. As he turned 
from base to final, the pilot realized that he might not be able to stretch the glide to the end of 
the runway, but he elected to attempt to do so. When the aircraft descended to about 25 feet 
agl, its airspeed slowed to the point where it stall/mushed into the terrain about one-quarter of 
a mile off the end of the runway. In a post accident inspection, it was determined that the valve 
clearance in the engine had been set with a gap so small that when the internal engine 
temperature began to increase the exhaust valves in each cylinder did not completely close. 
Without the closure of the valves, sufficient compression was not created in the cylinders, and 
the engine stopped producing power.  
The pilot/owner's improper setting of the engine's valve clearance, leading to the failure of the 
exhaust valves to fully close and a total loss of power while on a VFR downwind, and the 
pilot/owner's failure to maintain sufficient airspeed as he tried to extend his power-off glide to 
the approach end of the runway.
On September 1, 2005, approximately 2030 mountain daylight time, an experimental 
Ballhagen/Shyrock Q-2, N12QJ, impacted the terrain during a no-power forced landing off the 
end of the runway at Flathead Skyranch, which is located about five miles southwest of 
Kalispell, Montana. The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured, but the 
aircraft, which is owned and operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage. The 14 CFR 
Part 91 personal pleasure flight, which originated at the same airport less than five minutes 
prior to the accident, was being operated in visual meteorological conditions. No flight plan 
had been filed. There was no report of an ELT activation.
According to the pilot, who was five hours into a ten hour experimental aircraft flight test 
regimen, just prior to this flight he had readjusted the valve lash in the Subaru engine that 
powered the subject aircraft. At the beginning of the flight, he took off on runway 16, and 
climbed to about 1,000 feet above ground level (agl). After he rolled out on downwind, his 
ground crew contacted him on the aircraft radio to advise him that the aircraft's engine 
appeared to have been missing and running rough during the takeoff and initial climbout. 
About the time that the pilot received the radio transmission, the aircraft's engine quit 
producing power, and he decided to continue on around the pattern in order to execute a 
forced landing on the runway from which he had departed. As he turned from base to final, the 
pilot realized that he might not be able to stretch the glide to the end of the runway, but he 
elected to attempt to do so. When the aircraft descended to about 25 feet agl, its airspeed 
slowed to the point where it stall/mushed into the terrain about one-quarter of a mile off the 
end of the runway. After impacting the terrain, the aircraft slid for about 75 feet before coming 
to a stop. During the impact with the ground, the front wing (canard) sustained substantial 
damage. 
In a post accident inspection, both the pilot/owner and an FAA Airworthiness Inspector who 
responded to the scene determined that the valve clearance in the engine had been set with a 
gap so small that when the internal engine temperature began to increase, the exhaust valves in 
each cylinder did not completely close. Without the closure of the valves, sufficient 
compression would not be created in the cylinders, and the engine would stop producing 
power.  
