The private pilot was flying three passengers for hire along the Mississippi River, to inspect and 
look for missing barges following Hurricane Katrina, when he experienced a loss of tail rotor 
control.  At an altitude about 200 feet above ground level (agl), the helicopter took a sudden 
right turn and climbed approximately 100 feet before it started spinning in a clockwise 
direction and descended.  The helicopter continued to spin until it impacted a barge and fell 
into the river about 300 feet from the riverbank.  The pilot and passengers were able to egress 
the sinking helicopter and swam to shore unassisted.  A review of Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) airman records revealed the pilot held a private pilot certificate with 
ratings for airplane single-engine land and helicopter.  Multiple attempts to obtain a completed 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) from the pilot were 
unsuccessful.  As of January 23, 2006, the helicopter had not been located or recovered.
The pilot's loss of control in flight for undetermined reasons.
On September 1, 2005, about 1100 central daylight time, a single-engine Bell 206B helicopter, 
N59539, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while maneuvering near Myrtle 
Grove, Louisiana.  The private pilot and his three passengers sustained minor injuries.  The 
helicopter was registered to Altar Helicopters LLC and was operated by the pilot.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 business flight.  The local flight originated from MYU Heliport (LS97), near 
Luling, Louisiana, about 1000.
A passenger, who was on board the helicopter when the mishap occurred, reported the 
accident to a representative of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) on September 
29, 2005.  An inquiry to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), by the NTSB investigator-
in-charge (IIC), revealed that the pilot had not reported the accident. 
The passenger reported that a verbal agreement was made between an employee of Memco 
Barge Line of St. Louis, Missouri, and MYU Helicopters of Luling, Louisiana.  The agreement 
was that a helicopter and pilot would be provided, at an hourly rate of $2,400, to fly three 
Memco Barge Line employees along the Mississippi River to inspect and search for missing 
barges following Hurricane Katrina.
The passenger further reported that while maneuvering at an altitude about 200 feet above 
ground level (agl) the helicopter took a sudden right turn and climbed approximately 100 feet 
before it started spinning in a clockwise direction and descending.  The helicopter continued to 
spin until it impacted a barge and fell into the river about 300 feet from the riverbank.  The 
pilot and passengers were able to egress the sinking helicopter and swim to shore unassisted.
In a telephone conversation with the IIC, the pilot reported that he was unable to control the 
helicopter after he lost tail rotor control.  He added that he held a commercial pilot certificate, 
but that it was at the bottom of the river in his flight bag.  Multiple attempts to obtain a 
completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) from the pilot were 
unsuccessful.
A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman records revealed the pilot held a 
private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land and helicopter.  
The pilot held a second-class medical certificate that was issued on May 13, 2004 with the 
limitation, "MUST WEAR CORRECTIVE LENSES." 
As of January 23, 2006, the helicopter had not been located or recovered. 
