The airline transport certificated pilot, with four passengers, fishing equipment, and a dog 
aboard, were departing on a personal flight from a remote gravel airstrip that was 1,100 feet 
long and 10 feet wide.  The FAA's Airport/Facility Directory, Alaska Supplement listing for the 
airstrip includes "...dips and humps 8 to 12 inches entire length.  Rocks on surface to 3 inches.  
Runway used as a road."  The pilot told the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) that during the 
takeoff roll, the airplane became airborne in ground effect, but the engine power rapidly 
decreased, and the airplane settled into about 12 inches of water in a tidal zone.  The pilot 
indicated that the airplane had flown through heavy rain in the previous four days, but he had 
not encountered any problems until the accident takeoff.  The airplane received structural 
damage to the right wingtip and right wing root.  An FAA inspector interviewed the pilot and 
passengers, and reported that the pilot told him the airplane became airborne after hitting 
some bumps about 2/3 of the way down the runway.  The pilot said he attempted to keep the 
airplane airborne in ground effect, but it settled to the soft ground beyond the end of the 
runway in high grass and water.  Based on his interviews, the inspector estimated that the 
airplane was within 100 pounds of its gross weight limit.  The inspector indicated that air taxi 
operators in the local area only use the airstrip while carrying a reduced load due to the 
condition of the airstrip surface.  Sufficient structural and propeller repairs were made to the 
airplane at the accident scene allowing it to be flown out by recovery personnel, and they did 
not report any engine problems.
The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for takeoff, and his failure to maintain adequate 
airspeed during takeoff initial climb from a remote airstrip, which resulted in the airplane 
descending to the ground and colliding with soft terrain beyond the end of the airstrip.  Factors 
contributing to the accident were the rough/uneven airstrip surface consisting of humps and 
rocks, and an inadvertent stall/mush.
On September 1, 2005, about 1700 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Cessna 206 
airplane, N4991F, sustained substantial damage when it collided with soft terrain in a tidal 
area during takeoff initial climb from a remote airstrip, about 45 miles east of Yakutat, Alaska.  
The airplane was being operated by the pilot as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal 
flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The airline transport 
certificated pilot and the four passengers were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  The flight originated at the East Alsek River airstrip, and was en route to the Tanis 
Mesa airstrip.  No flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on September 2, the pilot reported that he was departing on 
runway 20 from the gravel surfaced East Alsek River airstrip, which is 1,100 feet long, and 10 
feet wide. The pilot said that during the takeoff roll, the airplane became airborne in ground 
effect, but the engine power rapidly decreased, and the airplane settled into about 12 inches of 
water in the tidal zone of the East Alsek River.  During the touchdown, the right main landing 
gear dug into the soft sand, spinning the airplane to the right.  The propeller and right wingtip 
struck the ground.  The pilot indicated that the airplane had flown through heavy rain in the 
previous four days, but he had not encountered any problems until the accident takeoff.  The 
airplane received structural damage to the right wingtip and right wing root.
The FAA's Airport/Facility Directory, Alaska Supplement listing for the airstrip states, in part:  
"Unattended.  Runway 02-20 [has] dips and humps 8 to 12 inches entire length.  Rocks on 
surface to 3 inches.  Runway used as a road."
On September 12, recovery personnel reported via telephone that sufficient airframe and 
propeller repairs were made to the airplane at the accident site, and it was flown to Anchorage, 
Alaska.  On January 11, 2006, recovery personnel stated that no engine problems were 
encountered during the recovery process.
The pilot was sent a Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB form 6120.1) on 
September 7, but the form was not received at the NTSB's Alaska Regional Office, Anchorage.  
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on December 13, the pilot reported that he 
mailed the form.  A second NTSB Form 6120.1 was sent to the pilot on December 13, but was 
not received at the NTSB's Alaska Regional Office.
An FAA Air Safety Inspector, Juneau Flight Standards District Office, Juneau, Alaska, 
interviewed the pilot and passengers.  The inspector reported that the pilot told him the 
airplane became airborne after hitting some bumps about 2/3 of the way down the runway.  
The pilot said he attempted to keep the airplane airborne in ground effect, but it settled to the 
ground beyond the end of the runway in high grass and water.  Based on his interviews, the 
inspector estimated that the airplane was within 100 pounds of its gross weight limit with the 
pilot and passengers, fishing equipment, and a dog aboard.  The airplane was not equipped 
with oversize tires.  The inspector indicated that air taxi operators in the local area only use the 
airstrip while carrying a reduced amount of load due to the condition of the airstrip surface.
