The pilot said that, before departure, he cleared ﬁminor snow accumulationﬂ from the bottom 
of the engine compartment. The pilot performed the preflight inspection, engine start, taxi, 
run-up, and before takeoff checks in accordance with the applicable checklists. The engine 
accelerated normally during the takeoff roll with a ﬁslight hesitationﬂ at 2,200 to 2,300 rpm as 
the takeoff continued. When the airplane was at 70 knots and over the departure end of the 
runway, the engine experienced a partial loss of power. Rather than attempt to return to the 
runway or land straight ahead to wooded terrain, the pilot chose to perform a forced landing to 
the airport perimeter road. The airplane™s left wing struck a tree and a fence and then 
separated from the airplane, and the airplane then impacted the road and came to rest 
inverted. Examination of the airplane revealed no preimpact mechanical anomalies, and, 
during a test run, the engine started immediately, accelerated smoothly, and ran without 
interruption through several rpm changes. The magnetos were tested and functioned as 
designed. 
A partial loss of engine power at takeoff for reasons that could not be determined during a 
postaccident examination or engine test run.
On March 4, 2014, at 1650 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N1449H, operated by the 
FAA Flying Club, INC, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain and a fence 
during a forced landing following a partial loss of engine power after takeoff from Atlantic City 
International Airport (ACY), Atlantic City, New Jersey. The airline transport pilot received 
minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed, and no flight plan was filed 
for the personal flight, which was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. 
In a written statement, the pilot stated the purpose of the flight was to travel in order to give a 
presentation on cold weather survival and civilian air intercept procedures. He said he 
specifically checked to see if the airplane was "clear of snow and ice" prior to departure, and 
determined that it was, but then later described clearing the "minor snow accumulation" at the 
bottom of the engine compartment. The pilot described his preflight inspection, engine start, 
taxi, run-up, and before takeoff checks as performed in accordance with the checklist. 
He then described a "normal" acceleration of the engine during the takeoff roll, with a "slight 
hesitation" at 2,200-2,300 rpm, as he continued the takeoff. At 70 knots and over the 
departure end of the runway, the engine "lost significant power." Rather than attempt a return 
to the runway, or land straight ahead to wooded terrain, the pilot elected to perform a forced 
landing to the airport perimeter road. Just prior to ground contact, the airplane's left wing 
struck a tree and a fence, and the airplane impacted the road and came to rest inverted.
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land and 
instrument airplane. He also held an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating for 
rotorcraft-helicopter. His most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class 
medical certificate was issued on October 21, 2013. He reported 3,245 total hours of flight 
experience, of which 318 hours were in single-engine airplanes.
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 1977. Its most recent annual 
inspection was completed September 12, 2013, at 5,038.1 aircraft hours. The airplane accrued 
37.1 hours of flight time after the inspection.
At 1654, the weather conditions reported at ACY included calm winds, clear skies, and 10 miles 
of visibility. The temperature was -4 degrees C, the dew point was -9 degrees C, and the 
altimeter setting was 30.28 inches of mercury.
Examination of photographs revealed the airplane came to rest inverted on the airport 
perimeter road, entangled in a fence. The left wing was separated from the airplane at the wing 
root. Photographs taken at the original point of touchdown, revealed slash and paint transfer 
marks in the pavement that were consistent with the color and dimension of the propeller 
blades. The airplane was removed from the site, and recovered to the operator's ramp space at 
ACY. Later, it was moved to an aircraft recovery facility in Clayton, Delaware for a detailed 
inspection which was performed by the FAA on May 14, 2014. 
The airplane was secured to a flatbed trailer, with the left wing separated by impact, and the 
right wing removed by recovery personnel. A substitute propeller and aircraft battery were 
installed, and an auxiliary fuel supply was plumbed into the fuel system to attempt an engine 
run.
The engine started immediately, accelerated smoothly, and ran without interruption. The 
magnetos were tested, and found to be functioning as designed. Several rpm changes, through 
rapid accelerations and decelerations, were accomplished with smooth operation throughout.
