The pilot had been receiving vectors for spacing around traffic.  When he was finally cleared to 
land, he was higher than traffic pattern altitude, and he slipped the airplane to dissipate excess 
altitude.  When he advanced the throttle, the engine did not respond.  An off-airport forced 
landing ensued.  The airplane collided with a curb, stop sign, bus sign, and fence.  The engine 
was later functionally tested and operated satisfactorily.  It was the opinion of an FAA aviation 
safety inspector that the power loss may have been due to the engine 'loading up.'  At the time 
of the accident, the airport temperature and dew point were 33 degrees C. (91.4 degrees F.) and 
9 degrees C. (48.2 degrees F.), respectively.  According to the Carburetor Icing Probability 
Curve, light icing at glide and cruise power settings are possible under these conditions. 
A total loss of engine power (nonmechanical) for reasons undetermined.  Factors were the 
existence of conditions conducive to carburetor icing, and unsuitable terrain on which to make 
a forced landing. 
 On July 1, 1999, at 1606 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 182A, N6165B, owned and operated 
by McCullough Engineering, was substantially damaged during a forced landing in Salt Lake 
City, Utah.  The private pilot, the only occupant aboard, was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight being conducted 
under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight originated in Loa, Utah, approximately 1430.
According to the pilot's accident report, he had been receiving vectors for spacing around 
traffic.  When he was finally cleared to land, he was higher than traffic pattern altitude.  He 
decided to slip the airplane to dissipate some of the excess altitude.  At a point where he felt he 
was in the proper position to complete a  normal landing, he ended the slip and advanced the 
throttle.  The engine lost power and steps to restore power were unsuccessful.  The pilot made 
an off-airport forced landing.  The airplane struck the street curb which knocked off the nose 
landing gear, then collided with a stop sign, bus stop sign, and a fence, incurring extensive 
damage to the wings.  The airplane then skidded to a halt.
On July 20, 1999, the engine was functionally tested under the direction of an FAA aviation 
safety inspector-maintenance.  No discrepancies were noted.  The inspector opined that the 
power loss may have been due to the engine "loading up" when power was applied after a 
prolonged period of idle power.
Shortly after the accident, at 1620, the temperature and dew point at Salt Lake City 
International Airport were 33 degrees C. (91.4 degrees F.) and 9 degrees C. (48.2 degrees F.), 
respectively.
According to the Carburetor Icing Curve, light icing at glide and cruise power settings are 
possible.
