The pilot failed to maintain the proper descent rate during a VFR approach, in dusk light 
conditions, following a complete loss of engine power, and the airplane undershot the runway.  
The airplane was on the downwind leg at 1,100 feet agl and was abeam the runway numbers 
when the pilot extended the landing gear.  Simultaneously, she heard a loud bang and noticed a 
loss of engine power.  The pilot advanced the throttle and realized that the engine had lost total 
power.  The pilot stated that she trimmed the airplane to attain the best glide speed, but did 
not verify the airspeed during the ensuing forced landing.  She added that the airplane was 
descending 'too fast,' and she needed 'more trim to relieve back pressure, but decided to 
muscle it as best [she] could and try not to stall the airplane.'  Subsequently, the airplane's nose 
wheel contacted a cement drainage ditch at the approach end of the runway.  Following the 
accident, the engine was test run in the airframe and found to operate within the 
manufacturer's specifications. 
The pilot's failure to maintain the proper descent rate during a forced landing, which resulted 
in a runway undershoot.  Factors were the total loss of engine power for an undetermined 
reason and the dusk light conditions. 
 On July 1, 1999, at 2040 central daylight time, a Piper PA-24-260 airplane, N5788, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted terrain following a complete loss of engine power 
while executing a VFR approach to the West Houston Airport near Houston, Texas.  The 
commercial pilot, who was one of four partners who owned the airplane, and her three 
passengers were not injured.  Dusk visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight and a flight plan was not filed.  The flight 
originated from the New Braunfels Municipal Airport, New Braunfels, Texas, at 1950.
According to the pilot and a fuel receipt, the airplane was "topped off" with 18 gallons of 100LL 
aviation fuel at New Braunfels.  Subsequently, the airplane departed New Braunfels for 
Houston.  
The 357-hour pilot reported that the airplane was on a VFR approach to runway 15 at the West 
Houston Airport.  The airplane was on a left downwind leg, level at 1,100 feet agl, and abeam 
the runway numbers when she extended the landing gear.  Simultaneously she heard a "loud 
bang" and noticed a loss of engine power.  The instrument panel lights "flickered," and the 
illumination in the cockpit failed.  The pilot then advanced the throttle and realized that the 
engine had lost total power.  The pilot stated that she trimmed the airplane to attain the best 
glide speed, but did not verify the airspeed during the ensuing forced landing.  She added that 
the airplane was descending "too fast," and she needed "more trim to relieve back pressure, but 
decided to muscle it as best [she] could and try not to stall the airplane."  Subsequently, the 
airplane's nose wheel contacted a cement drainage area at the approach end of the runway and 
collapsed.  The left main landing gear penetrated the wing structure, and the airplane slid 
approximately 250 feet down the runway, coming to a stop upright.
The pilot reported that the following light and weather conditions existed at the time of the 
accident: dusk light, visibility greater than 10 miles, clear skies, and wind from 150 degrees at 
15 knots. 
The airplane was equipped with a 260-horsepower Lycoming IO-540-D engine, which was 
examined and test run at Caulkins Aero, Houston, Texas, under the supervision of an FAA 
inspector.  The spark plugs, magnetos, oil filter, and air filter were examined before the test run 
and no anomalies were noted.  The fuel selector valve "worked free and correct through all of 
its ranges," and fuel was present in each of the four fuel tanks.  The engine was run in the 
airframe for a total of 28 minutes at various rpm and manifold pressure settings, including the 
maximum power setting.  The engine operated within manufacturer's specifications.  For 
further details reference the enclosed FAA inspector's statement.
