The pilot reported that upon touchdown the aircraft began to drift left, and right rudder was 
applied to correct with no effect.  As the drift continued, the pilot applied right brake, 
increasing brake pressure until he 'was pushing against the seat.'  The aircraft continued to 
veer left, tightening its turn radius until it had rotated more than 180 degrees counter-
clockwise.  During the rotation, the aircraft settled to the left in line with the runway lights and 
came to a stop.  Post-crash examination by a certified mechanic revealed that the left main 
landing gear shock strut tube had separated at its attach point to the left main wheel assembly.  
This would have allowed the release of the left main landing gear, permitting it to pivot into a 
flat (collapsed) position. 
The separation of the left main landing gear shock strut for undetermined reasons. 
 On July 1, 1999, approximately 1445 mountain daylight time, a tailwheel equipped Piper PA-
22, N3513A, registered to and being flown by a private pilot, was substantially damaged during 
the collapse of the left main landing gear on landing rollout at the Billings International 
Airport, Billings, Montana.  The pilot and passenger were uninjured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions existed, and no flight plan had been filed.  The flight, which was personal, was to 
have been operated under 14CFR91, and originated from Helena, Montana, at 1234.
The pilot reported that upon touchdown on runway 28R the aircraft began to drift left, and 
right rudder was applied to correct with no effect.  As the drift continued, the pilot applied 
right brake, increasing brake pressure until he "was pushing against the seat."  The aircraft 
continued to veer left, tightening its turn radius until it had rotated more than 180 degrees 
counter-clockwise.  During the rotation, the aircraft settled to the left in line with the runway 
lights and came to a stop.  The pilot and passenger exited and noted the left main landing gear 
separated from its bungee (shock strut,) but still attached to the airframe.
Post-crash examination by an IA certified mechanic revealed that the left main landing gear 
shock strut tube had separated at its attach point to the left main wheel assembly (refer to 
DIAGRAM I).  This would have allowed the release of the left main landing gear, permitting it 
to pivot into a flat (collapsed) position.
