The private pilot departed in the experimental amateur-built airplane for the local flight during 
daytime visual meteorological conditions. A pilot reported that he had spoken to the accident 
pilot before the accident and that he had told him that he had been having problems priming 
the carburetor because the accident airplane's fuel tanks were below the engine. The accident 
pilot further told him that he had installed an electric boost pump to prime the carburetor and 
hoped that the engine-driven fuel pump would maintain engine operation. The accident pilot 
added that, during engine ground runs with the electric boost pump on, the engine was 
running too "rich" and "rough" and that he planned to turn the electric boost pump off to see if 
it would work. The pilot assumed that the accident pilot intended to do this on the ground, but 
it was unclear.
One witness, who was a rated pilot, reported that, after takeoff and while the airplane was 
upwind, he heard the engine "sputtering." The airplane then turned left and remained within 
the airport traffic pattern. Another witness, who was in an airplane in the airport traffic 
pattern, reported that he observed the accident airplane "enter a spin" and descend toward the 
ground "on the base leg near final." No distress calls were heard on the airport's common 
traffic advisory frequency.
Wreckage and impact signatures were consistent with an upright spin impact with terrain. 
Postaccident examination of the airplane and engine revealed that the upper spark plugs 
exhibited signatures consistent with a rich fuel/air mixture. No additional evidence of any 
preexisting anomalies that would have precluded normal operation were observed. Based on 
the available evidence, it could not be determined if the pilot had the electric fuel boost pump 
turned on during takeoff or at any time during the flight.
Review of the pilot's personal logbooks revealed that, over the past 38 years, he had only 
accumulated 71 hours of flight time, 5.3 hours of which were in the 90 days before the accident. 
In addition, no record of any flight time in the accident make/model airplane was found. Given 
the evidence, it is likely that the engine was running roughly and that this diverted the pilot's 
Page 2 of 9WPR16FA001
attention and led to his failure to maintain adequate airspeed and to exceed the airplane's 
critical angle of attack, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall and subsequent spin while 
maneuvering from the base leg to final. Given the known preexisting engine problems, the pilot 
should not have conducted the flight in the airplane in which he had little experience flying.
The pilot's failure to maintain sufficient airspeed and his exceedance of the airplane's critical 
angle of attack, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall and subsequent spin. Contributing to 
the accident was the pilot's diverted attention due to the rough running engine, which resulted 
from a rich fuel/air mixture, and the pilot's decision to conduct the flight in the airplane in 
which he had little experience flying despite knowing the airplane had preexisting engine 
problems.
