A mechanic who worked for the fixed-based operator (FBO) at the airport reported that, on the 
day of the accident, the private pilot taxied the airplane to the maintenance hangar where he 
inflated the nose tire. The pilot told the mechanic he was flying the airplane to a nearby airport 
because someone there was interested in purchasing the airplane. No known witnesses saw the 
airplane take off. The air traffic control tower at the nearby airport did not have a record of the 
airplane landing there. The pilot was reported missing, and the wreckage was located later that 
evening on property adjacent to the departure airport.
The airplane came to rest inverted in a small clearing in a wooded area. The fuel selector was 
found in the "off" position. The left-wing fuel tank contained 2 cups of fuel, and the right-wing 
fuel tank contained about 4 gallons of fuel. A small amount of fuel was dripping from the right 
fuel cap before the airplane was righted. No evidence of fuel drainage from the left fuel tank 
was found. The airplane was not equipped with an ELT which likely contributed to the delay in 
locating the airplane. An examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any anomalies 
that would have prevented normal operation. Damage to the starter housing from impact with 
the ring gear was consistent with slow rotation/no power at the time of impact. Based on the 
evidence, it is likely the engine lost power due to fuel starvation, which resulted from the pilot 
shutting off the fuel supply to the engine.
Although the autopsy and medical records showed that the pilot had arteriosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and kidney stones, there was no evidence to suggest the pilot 
suffered an acute cardiac event or other medical incapacitation during the accident flight. A 
low therapeutic level of diphenhydramine, a sedating common over-the-counter antihistamine 
used to treat the common cold and hay fever, was detected in the pilot's heart and urine; 
however, it could not be determined whether the pilot was impaired by the effects of the drug 
at the time of the accident.
Page 2 of 8CEN16FA001
The pilot's mismanagement off the fuel supply to the engine, which resulted in fuel starvation.
