Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Granite Shoals, TX
Accident Number:
FTW02LA110
Date & Time:
04/02/2002, 1120 CST 
Registration:
N248JT
Aircraft:
Thornley Thornley 2000
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot took off to the north in the gyrocopter to practice takeoffs and landings, with winds 
light and variable.  After takeoff and reaching an altitude of 90 feet agl, the aircraft stopped 
climbing.  As the aircraft was now near the departure end of the runway, the pilot elected not to 
try landing on the runway, feeling he would overshoot the runway into a wooded field.  The 
pilot proceeded northward and initiated a gentle turn to the right, intending to land on the 
runway to the south; however, the aircraft continued to lose altitude.  When the pilot was 90 
degrees into his turn, he felt he was getting too far east of the runway, at which time he decided 
to land to the east on an east-west roadway which bordered the north boundary of the runway.  
As the pilot "straightened out," the aircraft stopped losing altitude, but was now barely above 
treetop level.  Preparing to land, the pilot's attention was diverted as he was looking for cars, 
overhanging trees, power lines, and TV lines, resulting in the aircraft's wheels impacting the 
top strand of a power line. The aircraft broke through the power lines, impacted terrain, and 
came to rest on its left side.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's failure to maintain clearance with a power line while maneuvering.  Contributing 
factors were the pilot's diverted attention and the power lines.
Page 2 of 6FTW02LA110
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - OPEN FIELD
Page 3 of 6FTW02LA110
Factual Information
On April 2, 2002, approximately 1120 central standard time, a Thornley 2000 
experimental/homebuilt gyrocopter, N248JT, was substantially damaged when it impacted 
power lines and terrain while maneuvering near Granite Shoals, Texas.  The student pilot, sole 
occupant, received serious injuries.  The Subaru powered gyrocopter was owned by a private 
individual and operated under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The personal flight 
originated from Granite Shoals at 1100.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot reported that 
he took off to the north to practice takeoffs and landings, with winds light and variable, "and 
everything seemed to be functioning properly."  After takeoff and reaching an altitude of 90 
feet agl, the aircraft stopped climbing.  The pilot stated "by the time it became clear to me that I 
should be concerned, I was so close to the departure end of the runway, that I was afraid to 
attempt a runway landing for fear of overshooting into the wooded field at the north end of the 
runway."  He proceeded northward and initiated a gentle turn to the right, intending to land on 
the runway to the south; however, the aircraft continued to lose altitude.  Ninety degrees into 
his turn, the pilot reported "I was venturing too far east of the runway to make a safe return to 
the airport.  At this point I made the decision to land to the east on an east-west roadway which 
bordered the north boundary of the runway".  As the pilot "straightened out," the aircraft 
stopped losing altitude, but was now barely above treetop level.  Preparing to land, the pilot 
said his attention was diverted, as he was looking for cars, overhanging trees, power lines, and 
TV lines.  The pilot further stated that this resulted in the aircraft's wheels impacting the top 
strand of a power line.  The aircraft broke through the power lines and impacted terrain, 
coming to rest on its left side.
The pilot reported his total time in this make and model aircraft was 162 hours, with 121 hours 
as pilot in command.  He also reported that in the last 90 days, 30 days, and 24 hours 
respectively, he had accumulated 1 hour of flight time.
According to an FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, the gyrocopter's cockpit 
area was intact, all rotor blades were bent, and the remaining structure was bent and twisted.
At 1053, the reported weather conditions at the Austin-Bergstrom International Airport, 
located approximately 40 miles southeast of the accident site, were wind from 150 degrees at 7 
knots, visibility 10 statute miles, scattered clouds at 4,500 feet, temperature 28 degrees C, dew 
point 19 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.96 inches of mercury.
Page 4 of 6FTW02LA110
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
66, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/12/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
162 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Thornley
Registration:
N248JT
Model/Series:
Thornley 2000 
Aircraft Category:
Gyroplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
H2-00-11-461
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/18/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1330 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
52 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
202 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Subaru
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
ALL MDLS A/B
Registered Owner:
Johnny Thornley
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
Johnny Thornley
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW02LA110
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Granite Shoals, TX (32TE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1100 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Granite Shoals Muni Airport (32TE)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
860 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
02
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2000 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
30.578333, -98.340278
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Thomas  M Little
Adopted Date:
04/01/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Billy R Richey; Federal Aivation Administration; San Antonio, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW02LA110
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
