Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Granbury, TX
Accident Number:
DFW05LA026
Date & Time:
12/01/2004, 1420 CST 
Registration:
N7706P
Aircraft:
Piper PA-24-250
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business
Analysis 
The 4,500-hour pilot reported that he during takeoff initial climb, the airplane experienced a 
loss of engine power at at an altitude of approximately 200 feet above ground level.  The pilot 
immediately initiated a forced landing to a field, while verifying the fuel pump was on and the 
mixture was rich.  The pilot stated that he "thought the left fuel tank was full" of fuel prior to 
departure.  Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector 
revealed there was no visible fuel was found in the left main fuel tank, but fuel was observed in 
the right main fuel tank, left and right auxiliary fuel tanks.  During the recovery process, the 
recovery crew drained approximately four tablespoons of fuel from the left wing.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.  Contributing factors were the pilot's 
inadequate preflight planning/preparation, and the lack of suitable terrain for the forced 
landing.
Page 2 of 6DFW05LA026
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
2. (F) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6DFW05LA026
Factual Information
On December 1, 2004, approximately 1420 central standard time, a Piper PA-24-250 single-
engine airplane, N7706P, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power during takeoff initial climb from the Pecan Plantation Airport (0TX1), near 
Granbury, Texas.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was seriously injured.  
The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 business 
flight.  The cross-country flight was originating at the time of the accident and was destined for 
the Grayson County Airport (GYI), near Sherman, Texas.
The 4,500-hour pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 
6120.1/2) that he departed from Runway 18 with the left main fuel tank selected.  At an altitude 
of approximately 200 feet above ground level, the engine "lost power."  The pilot immediately 
verified that the electric fuel pump was turned on and mixture was set to rich.  The pilot then 
switched to the right main fuel tank before switching back to the left main fuel tank.  The pilot 
initiated a forced landing to a field approximately 1/2 mile south of the airport within a 
residential area.  During the descent, the airplane struck trees approximately 35 feet in height 
before impacting terrain.  The airplane came to rest in the upright position approximately 180 
degrees from the original direction of travel.
The pilot further reported that earlier in the morning, he had requested that the local Fixed 
Base Operator (FBO) at GYI pull the airplane out of the hangar and top off with 100 Low Lead 
aviation fuel.  Upon arriving at GYI, the pilot had realized the airplane had not been refueled.  
The pilot stated that he was running late and elected to have the FBO only fill the left and right 
auxiliary fuel tanks.  After refueling, he noted that the right main fuel tank and left and right 
auxiliary fuel tanks were full and there were "only a few gallons" in the left wing fuel tank.  
After departure from GYI, the pilot stated he selected the right auxiliary fuel tank for the flight, 
and then selected the left main fuel tank prior to landing at 0TX1.  
The pilot added that this was the first time he had ever refueled the airplane without topping 
off both main wing tanks, and subconsciously thought the left main fuel tank was full prior to 
departure.  
Examination of the airplane by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
the outboard portion of the right wing was crushed upwards and aft.  The trailing edge of the 
left wing was wrinkled near the wing root.  The fuselage was wrinkled aft of the baggage 
compartment to the empennage.  The landing gear was observed in the retracted position.  The 
Lycoming O-540-A1D5 engine remained attached to its mounts, and the firewall was bent.  
Two of the three propeller blades were crushed aft.  One propeller blade was free of damage.  
No visible fuel was found in the left main fuel tank, but fuel was observed in the right main fuel 
tank and left and right auxiliary fuel tanks.  During the aircraft recovery, the recovery company 
reported they had drained approximately four tablespoons of fuel out of the left fuel tank.
Page 4 of 6DFW05LA026
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/28/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/14/2003
Flight Time:
4500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 720 hours (Total, this make and model), 4350 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N7706P
Model/Series:
PA-24-250 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
24-2918
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/14/2004, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
61.3 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3566.2 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-540-A1D5
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6DFW05LA026
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GDJ, 778 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
9 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1425 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
290°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 16 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.2 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
15°C / -3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Granbury, TX (0TX1)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Sherman, TX (GYI)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1420 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
Pecan Plantation Airport (0TX1)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
710 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3500 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
32.353889, -97.676389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Hector R Casanova
Adopted Date:
02/24/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Dale Johnson; Federal Aviation Adminsitration; Fort Worth, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DFW05LA026
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
