During the landing, the airplane encountered a strong, gusting right crosswind. The pilot 
attempted to perform a go-around; however, the airplane ground-looped. The prevailing wind 
resulted in a right quartering tailwind with a gusting crosswind component of 23 knots. The 
maximum crosswind velocity for the accident airplane was 15 miles per hour; therefore, the 
calculated crosswind component exceeded the capability of the airplane. The pilot should not 
have landed with a crosswind that exceeded the airplane's capabilities. The pilot reported no 
preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded 
normal operation.
The pilot's decision to land the airplane with a crosswind that exceeded the airplane's 
capabilities.
On June 1, 2013, about 1030 central daylight time, a Rockwell International S-2R airplane, 
N4946X, impacted terrain while landing at the Hamlin Municipal Airport (14F), Hamlin, 
Texas. The commercial pilot sustained minor injuries. The airplane sustained substantial 
damage. The airplane was registered to and operated by Tri-County Sprayers, Inc., under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 as an aerial application flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was operated without a flight plan. 
The flight originated from 14F at 0925.
According to the pilot, during the landing to runway 34 (3,200 feet by 50 feet, asphalt), the 
airplane encountered a "strong and gusty" crosswind from the right. The pilot attempted to 
perform a go around; however, the airplane groundlooped resulting in substantial damage to 
both wings, the empennage, and the firewall. The pilot reported that the wind was 090 degrees 
at 23 knots, gusting to 28 knots. The closest official weather station, located 28 miles to the 
southwest of 14F, recorded the wind as 100 degrees at 12 knots, gusting to 18 knots. The 
maximum crosswind was calculated to be 23 knots based upon the reported winds from the 
pilot. The pilot reported no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane 
that would have precluded normal operation.
