National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Basile, LA
Accident Number: FTW02LA194
Date & Time: 07/01/2002, 0750 CDT
Registration: N8917H
Aircraft: Grumman-Schweizer G-164A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot had just completed his fourth spray load of the morning and was returning for the next load when the engine began running rough and started to backfire.
He checked the magnetos, propeller, and throttle lever, and found everything to be "normal."
The engine continued to backfire, and not being able to maintain altitude, the pilot elected to make a forced landing in a rice field.
After touchdown, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.
An examination by a certified mechanic revealed no anomalies which would have prevented normal engine operation.
The reason for the partial loss of engine power was undetermined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the loss of engine power as a result of fuel starvation.
A contributing factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WET 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On July 1, 2002, approximately 0750 central daylight time, a Grumman-Schweizer G-164A agricultural airplane, N8917H, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing following a partial loss of engine power while maneuvering near Basile, Louisiana.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
The airplane was registered to B & S Flyers Inc. of Gueydan, Louisiana, and operated by Kib Aviation of Basile, Louisiana, under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the aerial application flight, and a flight plan was not filed.
The airplane departed from a private airstrip near Basile, at 0730.
In a telephone interview with the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the pilot reported that he had just completed his fourth spray load of the morning and was returning for the next load when the engine began running rough and started to backfire.
The pilot stated "I checked the mags, propeller, and throttle lever, and found everything to be normal, but the engine continued to backfire."
Not being able to maintain altitude, the pilot elected to make a forced landing in a rice field.
After touchdown, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.
The pilot reported damage to the airplane included the vertical stabilizer, horizontal stabilizer, and rudder were destroyed, both propeller blades were bent, and the empennage was twisted and bent.
During an engine examination by a certified mechanic, no mechanical failures or malfunctions were noted that would have prevented normal engine operation.
The reason for the partial loss of engine power was undetermined.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 22, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Single Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
