National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Moneta, VA
Accident Number: NYC02LA128
Date & Time: 07/01/2002, 1200 EDT
Registration: N5921H
Aircraft: Piper PA-16
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that during landing roll, the tailwheel-equipped airplane abruptly veered to the left and departed the runway.
The pilot regained directional control after the airplane had swerved about 60 degrees from the runway.
In the process of returning to the runway, the right main landing gear struck an earthen berm about 16 inches high, and the airplane nosed over.
Examination of the airplane revealed that the tail wheel side spring, between the rudder horn and tailwheel, on the right side of the tail wheel assembly, was disconnected, and the clip which held the spring in place was missing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of a clip and subsequent loss of the spring on the right side of the tail wheel assembly, for undetermined reasons, which led to a loss of directional control.
A factor was the berm.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,TAILWHEEL - DISCONNECTED ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - DIRT BANK/RISING EMBANKMENT Factual Information On July 1, 2002, about 1200 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-16, N5921H, was substantially damaged while landing at Smith Mountain Lake Airport (W91), Moneta, Virginia.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight, which originated at Culpeper Regional Airport (CJR), Culpeper, Virginia.
No flight plan had been filed for the flight that was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot stated: "...Approach to Smith Mountain Lake was normal.
On roll-out aircraft started left hand turn and exited hard surface.
Regained control, [airplane] pointed about 60 degrees from centerline.
Started turn back to runway when right wheel struck a mount of dirt about 16 inches high.
Aircraft went over onto it back.
Found right hand link from tailwheel to rudder horn missing."
In a follow-up telephone interview, the pilot described the left turn as abrupt, with no indication of a problem prior to the turn.
According to an inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), examination of the airplane revealed that the clip which held the tail wheel spring to the tail wheel on the right side of the tail wheel assembly, was missing, and the spring was disconnected.
A search of the runway failed to find the clip.
The FAA inspector also reported that the vertical stabilizer and rudder were bent.
The right wing was bent at the fuselage attach point, and the right wing strut was bent.
Runway 05 was 3,050 feet long, 50 feet wide, and had an asphalt surface.
The closest recorded weather was Roanoke Regional/Woodrum Field Airport (ROA), Roanoke, Virginia, located 23 nautical miles northwest of the accident site.
The reported winds at 1154, were variable at 3 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 65, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
