National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Battle Ground, WA
Accident Number: SEA02LA117
Date & Time: 07/01/2002, 1915 PDT
Registration: N37065
Aircraft: Cessna 172 E
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, the aircraft lost oil pressure shortly after takeoff.
During the landing attempt at a nearby airport, the aircraft overran the end of the runway and collided with a tree.
A post-accident engine run and wreckage examination revealed that the aircraft's engine developed an extensive engine oil leak during the accident flight, and during a post-accident engine run.
According to the FAA Inspector, and the operator of the aircraft, the leak originated from the engine accessory area where the oil temperature bulb attaches to the oil screen assembly.
The operator reported that the oil temperature bulb appeared to have been improperly installed during an oil change that occurred approximately 15 minutes prior to the accident flight.
The pilot of the accident aircraft, a certified mechanic, supervised the oil change that was performed by a non-certified mechanic who was employed by the pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Improper maintenance procedures by maintenance personnel, which resulted in an  engine oil leak while in flight.
A factor was the pilot's misjudgment of distance during the precautionary landing which led to a runway overrun.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) LUBRICATING SYSTEM - LEAK 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,SERVICE OF AIRCRAFT/EQUIPMENT - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
(F) DISTANCE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #4: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On July 1, 2002, approximately 1915 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 172E, N37065, collided with a tree while on the landing rollout at Cedars North Airport (W58), Battle Ground, Washington.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured; however, the aircraft received substantial damage to the right wing and its associated lift strut.
The airplane is owned by a private party and was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal/pleasure flight under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The flight departed from Grove Airport, Camas, Washington, approximately 15 minutes prior to the accident.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the local flight.
According to the pilot, the aircraft lost oil pressure shortly after takeoff from Grove Airport.
During his attempt to land at a nearby airport, the aircraft overran the end of the runway and collided with a tree.
A post-accident engine run and wreckage examination by personnel from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), Hillsboro, Oregon, revealed that the aircraft's engine developed an extensive engine oil leak during the accident flight, and during the post-accident engine run.
According to the FAA inspector, and the operator of the aircraft, the leak originated from the engine accessory area where the oil temperature bulb attaches to the oil screen assembly.
The operator reported that the oil temperature bulb appeared to have been improperly installed during an oil change that occurred approximately 15 minutes prior to the accident flight.
The pilot of the accident aircraft, a certified mechanic, supervised the oil change that was performed by a non-certified mechanic who was employed by the pilot.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 31, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
