National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Jackson, WY
Accident Number: DEN02LA067
Date & Time: 07/01/2002, 1650 MDT
Registration: N33515
Aircraft: Schreder RS-15
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The glider was observed circling the summit block of Grand Teton Mountain.
A witness reported seeing the glider proceed southeast to northwest.
The glider's left wing contacted the mountain approximately 150 feet below the summit.
The witness reported seeing the wing crumple and then hearing a loud noise.
The glider then disappeared behind the north side of the mountain.
The wreckage was located the following morning.
The glider wreckage was spread down the north face of Grand Teton Mountain beginning approximately 200 feet below the summit and extending down the mountain approximately 1,500 feet.
A wing was identified as resting approximately 700 feet below the summit in the wreckage path.
The reported weather in the area, about the time of the accident, was clear skies, visibility 10 statute miles, temperature 75 degrees F, winds 240 degrees at 19 knots with gusts to 28 knots, and an altimeter setting of 30.18 inches of Mercury.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain adequate clearance from the mountain summit.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH WIND 3.
The accident site was located 17 miles north of Jackson, Wyoming.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91without a flight plan.
The pilot sustained fatal injuries.
The local flight originated at Driggs, Idaho, approximately 1600.
A witness observed the glider circling the summit block of Grand Teton Mountain.
The witness reported seeing the glider proceed southeast to northwest.
The glider's left wing contacted the mountain approximately 150 feet below the summit.
The witness reported seeing the wing crumple and then hearing a loud noise.
The glider then disappeared behind the north side of the mountain.
Ground observers for the National Park Service reported locating the wreckage the following morning.
The glider wreckage was spread down the north face of Grand Teton Mountain beginning approximately 200 feet below the summit and extending down the mountain approximately 1,500 feet.
A wing was identified as resting approximately 700 feet below the summit in the wreckage path.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
