National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TALKEETNA, AK
Accident Number: ANC02LA067
Date & Time: 07/02/2002, 1400 AKD
Registration: N1129A
Aircraft: Piper PA-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private certificated pilot was searching for a lost hiker along a river drainage in a float- equipped airplane.
The pilot said he was maneuvering between 500 to 1,000 feet above the ground and had encountered turbulence that was being produced in the canyons along the river.
Just before the accident, the pilot said a strong gust of wind yawed the airplane sideways, and lifted the left wing.
The airplane descended toward the ground.
The pilot leveled the airplane just before the float assembly collided with alder bushes along the bank of the river.
The airplane then did a cartwheel and came to rest facing opposite the initial direction of travel.
The airplane received damage to the float assembly, fuselage, and wings.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate weather evaluation, which resulted in a turbulence encounter and subsequent collision with a river embankment during maneuvering flight.
A contributing factor was the presence of terrain induced turbulence.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TURBULENCE,TERRAIN INDUCED 2.
(C) WEATHER EVALUATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DIRT BANK/RISING EMBANKMENT Factual Information On July 2, 2002, about 1400 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Piper PA-18 airplane, N1129A, sustained substantial damage when it collided with an embankment after encountering turbulence while maneuvering along a river, about 15 miles northeast of Talkeetna, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR,) local-area personal flight, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the pilot.
The private certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The flight originated from Talkeetna about 1215.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on July 2, the pilot reported that he departed Christensen Lake, Talkeetna, and was searching for a lost hiker along the Sheep River, east of Talkeetna.
The pilot said he was flying between 500 to 1,000 feet above the ground, and was returning to Talkeetna.
During the flight, the pilot said he encountered moderate turbulence that was being produced in the canyons along the river.
Just before the accident, the pilot said a strong gust of wind yawed the airplane sideways, and lifted the left wing.
The airplane descended toward the ground.
The pilot leveled the airplane just before the float assembly collided with alder bushes along the bank of the river.
The airplane then did a cartwheel and came to rest facing opposite the initial direction of travel.
The airplane received damage to the float assembly, fuselage, and wings.
At 1353, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Talkeetna was reporting in part: Wind, 200 degrees (true) at 10 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, 2,300 feet broken, 2,800 feet overcast; temperature, 61 degrees F; dew point, 48 degrees F; altimeter, 30.03 inHg.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 48, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
