National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Nicolaus, CA
Accident Number: GAA16CA303
Date & Time: 06/01/2016, 1145 PDT
Registration: N5091N
Aircraft: AIR TRACTOR INC AT 502
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Low altitude operation/event
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot reported that while performing aerial application operations and flying under power lines, the airplane propeller struck a power line.
Subsequently, the airplane vibrated excessively and the pilot performed an off-airport landing at a farm field.
The pilot further reported that during the landing roll, he could not maintain directional control of the airplane on the rough terrain; the airplane veered sharply to the right and the left wing impacted the ground.
The left wing sustained substantial damage.
The pilot reported there were no preimpact mechanical failures or malfunctions with the airframe or engine that would have precluded normal operation.
Some collisions involved obstacles that the pilots did not see (even during survey flights), but others involved obstacles that were known to the pilot and/or had characteristics that would make them visibly conspicuous.
Agricultural pilots should do the following:  Maintain a quick-reference document (paper or electronic) at the operations base that contains field maps, charts, photographs, and details of all known obstacles.
Frequently review current aeronautical charts for information about obstacles.
Before leaving the ground, spend time becoming familiar with all available information about the target field and programming navigation equipment.
Such preflight action can help reduce the potential for confusion or distraction in flight.
Conduct aerial surveys of the target field but do not rely solely on an aerial survey to identify potential obstacles.
Conduct regular ground surveys of fields.
Some towers can be erected in hours, and obstacles can change since you last worked that field.
Speak with farmers and land owners to raise awareness about obstacle hazards.
When possible, use ground crews.
They may be in a better position to see certain obstacles and help you ensure that your aircraft remains clear of them.
Watch for shadows and irregularities in growth patterns to help identify obstacles.
Use GPS and other technology to maintain awareness of obstacle locations.
Be aware that workload, fatigue, sun glare, and distractions in the cockpit can adversely affect your ability to see, avoid, or remember obstacles.
Heavier loads and higher density altitudes can affect the performance of your aircraft.
The National Agricultural Aviation Association's Professional Aerial Applicators' Support System reminds pilots that, when ferrying an aircraft or transitioning between sites, flying above 500 feet reduces obstacle collision risks: 'Ferry Above Five and Stay Alive.'
See http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_035.pdf for additional resources.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents.
Note that this should not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations (FARs).
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Kathryn R Benhoff Adopted Date: 10/27/2016 Additional Participating Persons: Tim Janko; FAA; Sacramento, CA Publish Date: 10/27/2016 Note: This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93368
