National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Alamo, TX
Accident Number: CEN16LA207
Date & Time: 06/03/2016, 1030 CDT
Registration: N418DS
Aircraft: SMITH Capella FW2R
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Fuel exhaustion
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that the purpose of the flight was to use most of the fuel remaining in the fuel tanks so that he could store the airplane over the summer.
While returning to the airport, the engine experienced a total loss of power.
During the subsequent forced landing to a small field, the airplane hit a tree, resulting in substantial damage.
The pilot stated that when the airplane was recovered, both fuel tanks were empty.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion, which resulted in a forced landing and a collision with a tree.
Findings Aircraft Fuel - Fluid level (Cause) Personnel issues Fuel planning - Pilot (Cause) Environmental issues Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome Factual Information On June 3, 2016, about 1030 central daylight time, a Smith Capella Aircraft FW2R/XLS airplane, N418DS, was substantially damaged during a forced landing near Alamo, Texas.
The commercial pilot had minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The local flight departed McAllen Miller International Airport (MFE), McAllen, Texas, about 0900, and was returning to MFE at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot, the purpose of the flight was to use most of the fuel in the airplane, as he was going to park the airplane over the summer.
In the past the automotive gasoline had "gummed up" his system sitting in the heat over the summer.
The pilot flew to South Texas International Airport (EBG), Edinburg, Texas, landed, called his wife, departed and conducted a touch and go landing, and then returned to MFE.
EBG was 17 miles north of MFE.
The airplane was at 2,500 feet above ground level and about 8 miles from the airport when the engine lost power.
The pilot continued to fly the airplane towards the airport looking for a place to land while attempting to restore engine power.
As he approached the airport his options diminished and during the forced landing to a small field the airplane hit a tree resulting in substantial damage to the wings and fuselage of the airplane.
The pilot stated that when the airplane was recovered, both fuel tanks were empty.
He stated that he was confident that he just ran out of fuel resulting in the loss of engine power.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93314
