The pilot/mechanic/owner explained that he had purchased the airplane 1 month prior to the 
accident and had been flying it for 8 days since its reassembly.  The airplane had accrued about 
6 hours of flight time during that span, and was flown for about one hour earlier on the day of 
the accident, with no deficiencies noted.  The pilot started the engine and performed a ground 
run to bring the engine up to normal operating temperature.  The takeoff and initial climb at 
maximum power proceeded without incident.  When the airplane reached about 150 feet above 
ground level, the pilot adjusted the throttle for climb power, and the engine "completely cut 
off."  The airplane collided with trees and terrain during the subsequent forced landing.  
Following the accident, the engine ran on the airframe without interruption.  Examination of 
the fuel system revealed that the 90-degree fitting installed between the fuel tank and the fuel 
selector was completely occluded with rust, sediment, and debris.  Examination of the fuel tank 
revealed it was comprised of two compartments, separated by a baffle.  The area forward of the 
baffle contained a large quantity of "sludge," rust, and debris.  According to the pilot/owner, he 
examined the interior of the fuel tank with a bore scope prior to purchase, but he did not 
examine the tank forward of the baffle.
Fuel starvation due to a blocked fuel line, which resulted in a loss of engine power.
On June 2, 2005, at 1930 eastern daylight time, a 1934 Piper E2, N2122, was substantially 
damaged during a collision with trees following a forced landing after takeoff near, Hastings, 
New York.  The certificated private pilot/mechanic/owner was not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local personal flight that originated at the 
pilot/owner's private airstrip, at 1928.  No flight plan was filed for the flight conducted under 
14 CFR Part 91.
In a telephone interview, the pilot explained that he had purchased the airplane 1 month prior 
to the accident.  The airplane was partially disassembled for transport after its purchase, and 
had been flying for 8 days since its reassembly.  The airplane had accrued about 6 hours of 
flight time during that time span.
Earlier on the day of the accident, the pilot flew the airplane for about 1 hour with no 
deficiencies noted.  Later that evening, he decided to fly the airplane for 10 to 15 minutes 
before securing it for the evening.
The pilot started the engine and performed a ground run to bring the engine up to normal 
operating temperature.  He then taxied for departure from the north/south strip.  The takeoff 
and initial climb at maximum power proceeded without incident.  When the airplane reached 
about 150 feet above ground level, the pilot adjusted the throttle for climb power, and the 
engine "completely cut off."  He said there was no sputter or decrease in power before the 
complete power loss. 
The pilot maneuvered the airplane back toward the airport for a landing on the east/west 
runway.  During the turn, he determined that the trees in his path could not be cleared, and he 
leveled the wings prior to striking the trees.  The airplane remained suspended in the trees for 
a few moments, and then settled to the ground.
The airplane was examined at the scene by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation 
safety inspectors on the day of the accident, and on June 6, 2005.
Examination of the airplane revealed that all major components were accounted for at the 
scene.  Control continuity was established from the cockpit to all flight control surfaces.  The 
airplane was then moved from the site to the owner's hangar.
The engine was started, and it ran on the airframe.  The engine was stopped, and the fuel 
system was examined.  The carburetor was intact, and the gascolator contained fuel.  A fuel 
sample from the gascolator contained small amounts of sediment.  The fuel line from the fuel 
selector to the gascolator was absent of debris.
A 90-degree fitting was installed between the fuel tank and the fuel selector.  The fitting was 
removed, and examination revealed that the fitting was completely occluded with rust, 
sediment, and debris.
The fuel tank was removed, and the top was cut open to examine the contents.  Examination of 
the tank revealed it was comprised of two compartments, separated by a baffle.  The area 
forward of the baffle contained a large quantity of "sludge," rust, and debris.
According to the pilot owner, he examined the interior of the fuel tank with a bore scope prior 
to purchase, but he did not examine the tank forward of the baffle.
The airplane had accrued about 1,380 total hours of flight time.  The airplane was rebuilt in 
1989, and had accrued 84 total hours since then.  It's most recent annual inspection was 
completed in March 2005, just prior to the owner's purchase.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single engine land.  His most 
recent FAA third class medical certificate was issued in May 2002.  The pilot reported 700 total 
hours of flight experience.  He flew 25 hours in the 90 days prior to the accident, 6 hours of 
which were in the accident airplane.
At 1954, the weather reported at Syracuse International Airport (SYR), Syracuse, New York, 
about 20 miles north, included a broken ceiling at 8,500 feet with wind from 300 degrees at 5 
knots.
