Prior to departure, the 5,669-hour commercial pilot checked the flight instruments, magnetos 
and engine gauges.  All systems were normal.  The pilot then applied full power and proceeded 
to takeoff.  Shortly after the airplane became airborne, the engine stopped producing power 
and it descended and struck a fence near the end of the runway.  Examination of the fuel 
system revealed a blockage between the connector in the fuel tank to the engine driven fuel 
pump, which resulted in a loss of engine power.
A blocked fuel line in the fuel tank, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to fuel 
starvation.
On June 2, 2005, at 0750 central daylight time, a single-engine Parkwood Enterprises, Inc, 
Glasair Super II-S experimental airplane, N1UH, was substantially damaged during a forced 
landing following a loss of engine power during take off from a private airstrip near Los 
Fresnos, Texas.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured. The 
airplane was registered to, and operated by a private company.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  
In a written statement, the pilot stated that prior to departure, he checked all of the flight 
instruments, cycled the propeller, checked the magnetos and engine gauges.  All checks were 
normal.  The pilot then applied full power and proceeded to take-off from Runway 32.  He said 
that as soon as the airplane became airborne, the engine stopped producing power and it 
descended and struck a fence before coming to rest in the upright position.  The pilot reported 
that the wings, undercarriage, and right elevator sustained structural damage.  The landing 
gear and propeller were also damaged.
The airplane, which had accumulated a total of 552.8 hours since new, was powered by a 180-
horsepower Lycoming IO-360 engine.  Examination of the aircraft fuel system by an FAA 
certificated airframe and powerplant mechanic revealed the fuel injector screen was absent of 
debris.  When the fuel line between the fuel pump and fuel injection servo was removed, little 
to no fuel was found in the lines.  There was no fuel in the fuel injector or in the line between 
the fuel boost pump and the engine driven fuel pump.  In addition, there was no fuel in the 
hose between the flow divider and the fuel injector servo.  Further examination revealed a 
blockage between the connector in the fuel tank to the engine driven fuel pump. 
The pilot reported a total flight time of 5,669.5 hours, of which, 552.8 hours were in same make 
and model.  He also reported that at the time of the accident, the winds were calm.
