National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TROY, MI
Accident Number: CHI98LA090
Date & Time: 02/01/1998, 1215 EST
Registration: N6327K
Aircraft: Cessna 150M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot said that while landing on runway 27 at Oakland-Troy Airport, he experienced 'turbulence and crosswind.'
After touchdown, the airplane drifted to the left and departed the runway.
The nose wheel dug into mud, and the airplane nosed over.
Examination of the wreckage revealed no anomaly.
About 13 miles northwest at Oakland-Pontiac Municipal Airport, the 1145 est wind was reported to be from 200 degrees at 12 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the student pilot's failure to maintain direction control of the airplane.
Factors relating to this accident were: the crosswind, and wet/soft terrain (mud) beside the runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - WET 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT Factual Information On February 1, 1998, at 1215 eastern standard time (est), a Cessna 150M, N6327K, operated by a solo student pilot, sustained substantial damage when landing on runway 27 at Oakland-Troy Airport, Troy Michigan, the airplane departed the runway and subsequently nosed over.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The solo instructional flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
There was no flight plan on file.
The student pilot reported no injuries.
The local cross country flight originated at Romeo, Michigan, at 1200 est.
In his written statement, the student pilot said that on landing, he experienced "turbulence and crosswind."
On touchdown, the airplane drifted to the left.
The nose wheel got stuck in the mud, and the airplane flipped 180 degrees.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane at the accident site.
The airplane had departed the runway's left edge approximately halfway down from the approach end, and nosed over.
The airplane's right wing was broken at the second rib inboard from the wing tip.
The upper and lower skin of the right wing showed heavy wrinkling, especially in the area between the flap hinges.
Several wing skin rivets in the area of the right wing fuel tank had popped causing part of the wing skin to come off.
The nose gear was bent to the left and aft.
The vertical stabilizer and rudder were bent to the right and crushed downward.
The airplane's engine was bent downward at the mounts.
The upper engine cowling was bent downward and aft.
The spinner was crushed inward.
One propeller blade was bent aft approximately 30 degrees.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
Examination of the engine, engine controls, brakes and other airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
The aviation routine weather reporting (METAR) station at Oakland-Pontiac Municipal Airport [13 miles northwest of Oakland- Troy Airport] at 1145 est, reported winds 200 magnetic heading at 12 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 23, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
