National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SUGAR GROVE, IL
Accident Number: CHI98LA089
Date & Time: 02/01/1998, 1515 CST
Registration: N830JT
Aircraft: CHINESE A/F AERO IND DEV CTR
PL-1B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said the airplane's '...engine stopped...' during initial climbout from takeoff.
He said the fuel boost pump was 'ON' and that he checked the throttle and mixture for proper position.
The pilot said he turned to avoid colliding with power lines and a road.
He said the engine started and ran for about 3-seconds when the airplane was about 25 ft above the ground.
The pilot said he banked the airplane toward runway 09, and the engine stopped a second time.
He said he '...leveled the wings and let [the] plane settle in.'
On-scene investigation revealed no preaccident mechanical anomaly with the airframe or engine that would have prevented flight.
The spark plugs were black and sooty.
The pilot said moderate rain was falling, and the temperature and dew point were 36 and 34 deg Fahrenheit, respectively.
According to icing probability charts, the airplane was operating in conditions conducive to severe carburetor icing at cruise power.
The airplane did not have a conventional carburetor heat system.
Heat for the carburetor was obtained from the engine oil cooler that was about 14-inches forward and above the carburetor.
Air flowing through the oil cooler was used to prevent carburetor ice by heating the carburetor's exterior.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: inadequate design of the carburetor heat system by the manufacturer, and subsequent carburetor ice, which resulted in loss of engine power and a forced landing.
Factors relating to the accident were: carburetor icing (weather) conditions, and obstructions and uneven terrain in the emergency landing area.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 2.
(C) ANTI-ICE/DEICE SYSTEM,CARBURETOR/HEAT - INADEQUATE 3.
(C) ACFT/EQUIP,INADEQUATE DESIGN - MANUFACTURER 4.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - ICE ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH OBSTRUCTION(S) 6.
MANEUVER TO AVOID OBSTRUCTIONS - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 7.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN Factual Information On February 1, 1998, at 1515 central standard time (cst), a Chinese A/F Aero Industries Development PL-1B, N830JT, piloted by a commercial pilot, was substantially damaged during a collision with the ground while maneuvering for a forced landing.
The pilot reported a total loss of engine power during the airplane's departure climb following takeoff from runway 18 at the Aurora Municipal Airport, Sugar Grove, Illinois.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.
The flight departed Sugar Grove, Illinois, at 1512 cst.
The pilot said that he was doing touch and go landings with the accident occurring on his third or fourth time around.
He said that he took off on runway 18 and started to climb.
The pilot said that he was climbing out at 100-feet above the ground when the "... engine stopped...
."
He said the boost pump was "ON" and that he checked the throttle, mixture, and boost pump selectors after the engine stopped running.
The pilot said he "... turned west to avoid [a] road and wires."
According to the pilot, the engine started and ran for about 3-seconds when the airplane was about 25-feet above the ground.
The pilot said he "...thought [he] could make runway 9...," and banked the plane toward the runway.
During this maneuvering the engine stopped running a second time.
The pilot said he "...leveled the wings and let [the] plane settle in."
The airplane collidied with the ground and came to rest facing south.
The right main gear was folded under the airplane and the nose wheel was sheared off.
The fuselage had wrinkling at the firewall and behind the cockpit.
The outboard half of the left wing was bent upward about 45-degrees.
The right wing was bent upward about 15-degrees at the wing root.
It leading edge was crushed upward and aft.
The on-scene investigation revealed no pre-accident mechanical anomalies with the airframe, engine, magnetos or fuel system that would prevent flight.
The spark plug electrodes were black and sooty in appearance.
The propeller had one blade bent aft approximately 5-degrees at the midpoint.
The fuel smelled similar to autogas.
There was a tablespoon of fuel obtained from the carburetor float bowl.
The fuel line between the carburetor and fuel pump was cracked.
The PL-1B's design for the carburetor heat system is to use radiant heat from the oil cooler.
There is an air scoop for the carburetor at the front of the airplane's cowl that extends aft and is attached to the carburetor throat opening.
The oil cooler is located aft and above the air scoop inlet.
Air enters through the oil cooler's opening and passes over the oil cooler.
The warmed air from the radiant heat of the oil cooler then travels about 14-inches to the carburetor body.
This is the only means available to the pilot for prevention or elimination of carburetor ice.
On the day of the accident the temperature and dew point was 36 and 34-degrees Fahrenheit respectively.
There was also moderate rain at the time of the accident.
According to the FAA's carburetor icing probability chart, the airplane was operating in conditions conducive to serious icing at cruise power settings.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
