The airplane™s engine lost power during the descent to the destination airport, and the airplane 
struck trees during the ensuing forced landing attempt. A postaccident examination of the 
engine revealed that the idler gear pin was not in position and no retaining bolts were found. 
Additionally, the nuts from the forward left, lower through bolt on the crankcase half and the 
forward left engine mount bolt were missing. A logbook entry indicated that the engine had 
been reassembled and re-installed on the airplane about 1 week before the accident due to a 
previous propeller strike. Based on the available information, it is likely that the improper 
assembly of the engine, specifically the omission of the idler gear pin retaining bolts, resulted 
in the idler gear falling out of its position and a subsequent complete loss of engine power.
The incomplete maintenance performed by maintenance personnel, which resulted in a total 
loss of engine power.
On August 1, 2012, about 1120 central daylight time, a Beech H35 airplane, N4684D, sustained 
substantial damage when it struck trees following a loss of engine power near Holly Lake 
Ranch, Texas. The pilot received serious injuries. The aircraft was registered to an individual 
and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a 
business flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not 
operated on a flight plan. The flight originated from the Wood County Airport (JDD), Mineola, 
Texas, about 1100, and was destined for the Gilmer Municipal Airport (JXI), Gilmer, Texas.
The pilot reported that he performed a pre-flight run-up with no anomalies noted. He then 
departed JDD and climbed to 7,500 feet altitude en route to JXI. During the descent to JXI, at 
6,500 feet altitude, the engine experienced a total loss of engine power. The pilot reported that 
he turned the airplane toward the Holly Lake Ranch Airport (16TE), and attempted an engine 
restart to no avail. The airplane struck trees off the end of runway 27 at 16TE.
Examination of the airplane™s engine after recovery from the accident scene revealed that the 
idler gear pin was missing from the rear of the engine, and both nuts and washers were missing 
from the idler gear pin attachment studs. The idler gear pin was found in a plastic trash bag 
that contained smaller parts recovered from the wreckage site. The idler gear had fallen in to 
the rear crankshaft gear and damaged the rear crankshaft gear teeth. The nut was missing from 
the forward left side lower through bolt on the crankcase half. The nut was also missing from 
the forward left side engine mount bolt.
Examination of the maintenance records revealed a piece of paper attached to the log book 
indicating that the engine was disassembled and inspected after a propeller strike. The 
crankshaft was turned 0.010 inches undersize and the engine was re assembled. The entry was 
dated July 25, 2012 and was signed by the pilot, who also held a mechanic certificate with 
airframe and powerplant ratings issued by the Federal Aviation Administration.
According to manufacturer drawings, the aft crankshaft gear engaged the idler gear which in 
turn engaged both magneto drive gears. Without the idler gear in place the magnetos would 
cease to operate.
