The student and the instructor pilot were conducting a night local training flight. Upon return 
from the practice area, with the student at the controls, the airplane entered a right downwind 
for a full stop landing. The landing gear was confirmed down and locked verbally by the 
student and instructor. The final approach was uneventful, but the touchdown point was long, 
and the airspeed was fast. Because of the extra speed on landing, the instructor elected to 
continue to the next runway exit beyond the one he planned to use. The student had initially 
applied the brakes evenly for the planned runway exit, but the instructor told him to continue 
to the next exit and to release the brakes to continue without stopping on the active runway. As 
the student released the brakes, the airplane began to yaw abruptly to the right. The student 
said that he was not applying any right brake pressure and that the instructor was not on the 
brakes. Both the instructor and the student added left rudder and left brake pressure in an 
attempt to maintain directional control and to keep the airplane on the runway. They said that 
they did not have enough control authority to keep the airplane on the runway. The airplane 
continued to the right, turned into the grass, and the left main gear collapsed. Examination of 
the airplane™s flight controls, landing gear system, and brake system did not reveal any 
evidence of mechanical malfunction or preaccident abnormalities. A review of maintenance 
activity on the airplane revealed two work orders related to the brake system. On November 
28, 2011, both brake discs and linings were replaced. On December 13, 2011, the airplane was 
inspected because the right brake was reportedely sticking intermittently during takeoff roll 
and taxi. The student and instructor did not state that there was any crosswind while landing. 
The reason for the loss of control could not be determined.
The loss of directional control during landing roll, which resulted in a runway excursion. The 
reason for the loss of directional control could not be determined because postaccident 
examination did not reveal any malfunctions or anomalies that would have precluded normal 
operation.
On August 1, 2012, approximately 2345 central daylight time, a Piper PA44-180, N586ND, 
registered to the University of North Dakota, sustained substantial damage when it veered off 
the runway after landing on runway 17R at the Grand Forks International Airport (GFK), 
Grand Forks, North Dakota. Both occupants, the certified flight instructor and the pilot under 
instruction, were not injured. Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed for the local instructional flight. The flight was being conducted under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, and had originated from GFK at 2150.
The student and instructor pilot were conducting a night local training flight. Prior to flying to 
their practice area, after they conducted several successful landings and takeoffs in the pattern, 
they proceeded to conduct their planned in-flight training. Upon return from the flight, with 
the student at the controls, the crew entered a right downwind for runway 17R for a full stop 
landing. The wind was light on the surface, but stronger from the west at pattern altitude. 
Landing gear was confirmed down and locked verbally by the student and instructor. During 
the turn to final, and due to the west wind at altitude, there was a slight overshoot, but the crew 
was able to become established on final and stabilized. The final approach and touchdown were 
uneventful, other than the touchdown point was long and the airspeed was fast. The flight 
instructor had planned to exit the runway at the Bravo exit, but with the extra speed he elected 
to continue to the next exit. The student had initially applied the brakes evenly for an exit at 
Bravo, but the instructor told him to continue to the next exit, and release the brakes to 
continue without stopping on the active runway. As the student released the brakes the aircraft 
began to yaw abruptly to the right. The student said that he was not applying any right brake 
pressure and the instructor was not on the brakes. Both instructor and student added left 
rudder and left brake pressure in an attempt to maintain directional control and keep the 
airplane on the runway. They said that they did not have enough control authority to keep the 
aircraft on the runway. The aircraft continued to the right and turned into the grass until the 
left main gear collapsed. Both throttles were at idle and the gear was confirmed down and 
locked just prior to landing. After the airplane came to a stop the crew exited uninjured. 
Structural damage was incurred to the left wing and fuselage behind the cabin bulkhead.
Examination of the airplane™s flight controls, landing gear system, and brake system did not 
show any evidence of mechanical malfunction or preaccident abnormalities. A review of 
maintenance activity on the airplane revealed two work orders related to the brake system. On 
November 28, 2011, both brake discs and linings were replaced. On December 13, 2011, the 
airplane was inspected for reported right brake sticking intermittently during takeoff roll and 
taxi. A review of maintenance activity on the airplane revealed two work orders related to the 
brake system. The operator™s maintenance personnel performed a thorough inspection after 
the accident, but were not able to identify a problem. They inspected the right brake system, 
which included removal and disassembly of the pilot™s right master cylinder and brake hoses 
and inspection of the right wheel cylinder piston and linings for possible binding.  There was 
no indication of blockage found within the master cylinder or connecting hoses, and no 
evidence of scoring of the shaft.  The brake disc was true and showed no indication of 
overheating, and the linings were even with no indication of binding on the pins. The piston 
moved smoothly with no indication of binding.  The copilot™s right master cylinder was not 
removed for inspection because it had been replaced due to leaking seals since the previous 
reported occurrence of brake drag on December 13, 2011.
  
The student and instructor did not state that there was any crosswind while landing.
