The sport pilot had recently purchased the accident airplane and was working with a flight 
instructor for familiarization because he had not flown during the past 30 years. The flight 
instructor stated that he and the pilot had flown seven or eight flights together before the 
accident flight and that the pilot had previously flown about 5 hours with another flight 
instructor. During the accident flight, the pilots took off from a runway intersection. The flight 
instructor stated that the engine seemed to be producing full power until the airplane reached 
an altitude of about 100 feet above the ground. At that point, the flight instructor noted an 
audible loss of rpm that was confirmed by the tachometer. The airplane began to descend, the 
pilot applied carburetor heat, and the flight instructor assumed control of the airplane. With 
insufficient runway remaining on which to land and obstacles at the end of the runway that 
made a straight-ahead off-airport landing hazardous, the flight instructor attempted to 
maneuver toward the ramp area adjacent to the runway. The airplane subsequently stalled, 
impacted the runway in a nose-down attitude, and came to rest inverted. 
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical 
failures or anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. The flight instructor stated 
that the takeoff was initiated with the carburetor heat off, despite a placard in the airplane 
requiring the use of carburetor heat during takeoff and landing. Although the weather 
conditions at the time of takeoff were conducive to the formation of carburetor ice at glide and 
cruise power at the time of the accident, it was not possible to determine whether carburetor 
ice was a factor in the accident. Weight and balance calculations revealed that the airplane was 
loaded about 68 pounds over its maximum allowable gross weight, and calculated density 
altitude at the airport about the time of the accident was more than 2,000 feet. Despite these 
factors, both of which would have adversely affected both the distance required for takeoff and 
the airplane™s rate of climb once airborne, the pilots elected to conduct an intersection takeoff, 
which reduced the available runway takeoff distance by nearly 20% and also reduced the 
diversionary options available in the event of a loss of engine power.
The flight instructor™s and the pilot™s failure to maintain airspeed after a partial loss of engine 
power after takeoff for reasons that could not be determined during postaccident examination, 
which resulted in an aerodynamic stall and loss of airplane control. Contributing to the 
accident were the pilots™ decisions to operate the airplane above its maximum allowable gross 
weight and to perform an intersection takeoff.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On August 1, 2012, approximately 1400 eastern daylight time, a Luscombe 8A, N2761K, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted the ground when control was lost  during takeoff from 
Albert Whitted Airport (SPG), St. Petersburg, Florida. The private pilot/owner was fatally 
injured, and the flight instructor sustained serious injuries. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the flight, which was originating at the time of the 
accident. The instructional flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91. 
The flight instructor was interviewed following the accident, and also provided a written 
statement recounting the events of the accident flight. He stated that a preflight inspection of 
the airplane revealed no anomalies, and the engine start and pre-takeoff checks were 
performed with no discrepancies noted. The fuel tank was filled to capacity, containing 14 
gallons of fuel. The flight was cleared for takeoff from runway 25 at the intersection with 
taxiway B, with the owner conducting the takeoff. The flight instructor reported that the 
carburetor heat control was in the off position for "maximum takeoff power," and that the 
engine was producing full power during the takeoff roll until it reached an altitude around 100 
feet above ground level. Shortly thereafter, the flight instructor noted an audible loss of power 
that was confirmed by the tachometer, which varied from 1,800 to 2,100 rpm. He stated that 
the engine seemed to "roll back," and did not sputter or run rough. The airplane began to 
descend, the pilot/owner applied carburetor heat, and the flight instructor assumed control of 
the airplane. With insufficient runway remaining on which to land, and the presence of 
obstacles at the end of the runway straight ahead, the flight instructor attempted to maneuver 
the airplane towards the ramp to the south of the runway. The airplane subsequently impacted 
the runway in a nose-down attitude, and came to rest inverted. The flight instructor stated that 
he attempted to turn the fuel selector valve to the off position prior to egressing the airplane, 
but could not remember if he had successfully done so. The flight instructor then egressed, and 
assisted in extricating the pilot/owner from the wreckage.
Four witnesses observed the airplane as it was taking off. They all recounted that the airplane 
reached an altitude between 20-40 feet, before the engine began to "sputter" and "miss."  One 
witness described the airplane rocking from side to side, at a slow airspeed, prior to making a 
"sharp" left turn, descending nose-first, and impacting the runway. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The pilot/owner held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land and 
instrument airplane. The pilot's logbooks were not recovered, and no determination of the 
pilot's total or recent flight experience could be made. His most recent Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) third-class medical certificate was issued in June, 1978.
The flight instructor held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single- and 
multiengine land and sea, and instrument airplane; and a flight instructor certificate with 
ratings for airplane single- and multiengine, and instrument airplane. His most recent FAA 
second-class medical certificate was issued in December, 2011. Review of the flight instructor's 
logbooks indicated that he had accumulated approximately 940 hours of flight time at that 
date. 
The flight instructor stated that prior to purchasing the accident airplane, the pilot had not 
flown in over 30 years, and was in need of a flight review to obtain currency. He had completed 
"seven or eight" flights with the pilot in the weeks leading up to the accident. Prior to that, the 
pilot had flown around 5 hours with another flight instructor at SPG. 
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
According to FAA airworthiness records, the airplane was manufactured in 1947, and 
registered to the owner in April 2012. The airplane was powered by a Continental A-65-8, 65-
hp, reciprocating engine. Review of the airplane's maintenance logs revealed that its most 
recent annual inspection was completed on February 13, 2012, at a total time in service of 
1135.6 hours. At the time of the accident, the airplane had accumulated approximately 19 hours 
since the most recent inspection. 
Although the airplane held a standard airworthiness certificate, it met the definition of a Light 
Sport Aircraft as contained in Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 1.1, making it eligible 
for operation by a pilot holding a valid drivers' license in lieu of an FAA-issued medical 
certificate. 
According to weight and balance information contained in the airplane's maintenance logs, the 
airplane had an empty weight of 838 lbs, and a maximum allowable gross weight of 1,260 lbs. 
The autopsy report indicated that the pilot/owner's weight was 203 lbs. The weight of the flight 
instructor as reported on his most recent FAA medical certificate was also 203 lbs. The 
calculated total fuel weight was approximately 84 lbs at capacity, resulting in an estimated 
gross weight of 1,328 lbs at the time of the accident. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
The 1400 weather observation at SPG included winds from 260 degrees at 8 knots, 10 statute 
miles visibility, few clouds at 3,000 feet, temperature 30 degrees Celsius (C) dew point 25 
degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.98 inches of mercury.
The icing probability chart indicates there was potential for carburetor icing at glide and cruise 
power at the time of the accident.
AIRPORT INFORMATION 
Albert Whitted Airport was a tower-controlled, public-use airport equipped with two runways 
oriented in a 07/25 and 18/36 configuration. According to FAA records, runway 7/25 
measured 3,677 feet in length and 75 feet in width. From the intersection with taxiway B, the 
point at which the flight instructor stated the takeoff was initiated, approximately 3,000 feet of 
runway takeoff distance available remained from runway 25. Obstructions included a 12-foot 
blast fence at the runway end, a street 5 feet from the runway end, and a 24-foot building 100 
feet from the runway end. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The airplane came to rest inverted approximately 100 feet from the blast fence at the departure 
end of runway 25. The initial impact point was identified by a ground scar approximately one 
and a half feet in length, located in the grass about one foot from the right edge of the runway. 
About 16 feet past the ground scar, on a heading of approximately 187 degrees magnetic, a 
small crater was observed in the runway surface. Two abrasions, dimensionally consistent with 
the diameter and chord of the propeller, extended out from the crater.  The airplane came to 
rest about 20 feet past the crater. The engine was displaced aft into the firewall and the cockpit 
area exhibited significant crush damage. Fuel staining was observed on the runway 
surrounding the airplane. 
The propeller remained attached to the engine, and exhibited scratching and gouging along its 
leading edge. One blade exhibited slight s-bending approximately four inches from its tip. The 
engine spark plugs were removed and exhibited normal wear. The crankshaft was rotated by 
hand, and powertrain continuity was confirmed from the propeller to the rear accessory gears 
and to the valve train. The carburetor remained attached to the engine, but was impact 
damaged and void of fuel. The carburetor float bowl was absent of fuel, water, and debris. The 
float was undamaged, and the fuel intake screen was clear. 
Flight control continuity was established from all flight controls to the cockpit area. The 
instrument panel, engine controls, and flight controls exhibited significant impact damage. The 
fuel selector valve was found in the off position, and continuity of the fuel system was 
confirmed from the fuselage tank to the fuel selector valve. No fuel remained in the tank. The 
carburetor heat control was found extended aft approximately 1 inch. The mixture control was 
in the full rich position, and the throttle control was in the full power position. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Medical Examiner District Six, Largo, Florida. 
According to the autopsy report, the cause of death was "blunt trauma."
Toxicological testing was performed on the pilot/owner by the FAA Bioaeronautical Science 
Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  Review of the toxicological report revealed 
that Carvedilol was detected in the liver and blood, Citalopram was detected in the liver and 
blood, N-Desmethylcitalopram was detected in the liver and blood, and Tamsulosin was 
detected in the urine and blood. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Given the atmospheric conditions, the calculated density altitude at the time of the accident 
was approximately 2,070 feet. According to the airplane's Owner's Handbook of Operation, 
"Due to reduced air density at higher altitudes wing lift and engine power are reduced with 
resulting performance reduction. Take-off and landing distances are increased and the rate of 
climb reduced." 
Airworthiness Maintenance Bulletin No. 40, issued by the Civil Aeronautics Administration in 
February 1941, addressed the issue of engine failures on takeoff in Luscombe 8A airplanes. It 
stated:
"The cause of these failures is believed to be attributable to insufficient fuel pressure resulting 
from the backward surge in the fuel lines due to the forward acceleration of the airplane on 
takeoff. Tests have shown that the cutting-out tendency of the engine on takeoff can be 
eliminated by installing a revised fuel tank cap and following certain precautions during the 
takeoff operation."
As a result of this maintenance bulletin, the airplane was required to be equipped with a 
placard reading, "Full carburetor air heat required for takeoff and landing." This placard was 
installed on the accident airplane and found during postaccident examination to be in good 
condition. The TCDS also stated: 
"The reason for this placard is that, during takeoff acceleration and initial high-angle-of-attack 
climb, the fuel flow may not be adequate for proper operation. Application of full carburetor 
heat in this case helps overcome the possible deficiency of fuel flow during takeoff. Carburetor 
ice is not a basic consideration in requiring this placard."
According to the Luscombe Endowment, which maintains a technical resource library and 
provides support to Luscombe owners and operators, the use of carburetor heat on takeoff and 
landing is required in 8A airplanes equipped with 65 or 75-hp engines and a single fuselage 
fuel tank. It states that, in low fuel conditions, (one-half tank or less), and on a cool day, it is 
possible to achieve an angle of climb wherein the engine fuel inlet is higher than the fuel tank 
outlet, resulting in a disruption of fuel flow to the engine. The use of carburetor heat effectively 
reduced the power output of the engine, thus prohibiting the airplane from achieving such an 
angle of climb.
