National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Sandpoint, ID
Accident Number: SEA06CA023
Date & Time: 12/03/2005, 1600 PST
Registration: N543MD
Aircraft: Diamond Aircraft Industries HK 36
TTC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilot stated that he had been practicing short field approaches at the Sandpoint Airport with a flight instructor and then decided to go to his property where he had a private airstrip.
The pilot stated that the flight instructor was flying the glider, making a low approach over the airstrip when he unexpectedly decided to land.
The airspeed was too high to stop on the remaining runway which was covered with compacted snow.
After rolling about 300 feet, the flight instructor applied full throttle for the takeoff.
The pilot pointed out the power lines beyond the end of the runway, and the flight instructor stated that they would fly under them.
At this time the left wing struck a tractor that was positioned at the end of the airstrip.
The wing separated from the airframe and the glider spun around, coming to rest.
The pilot stated that there was no mechanical failure or malfunction with the glider at the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Excessive speed for the landing roll and inadequate remedial action for the initial takeoff.
An object near the end of the runway and snow covered surface were factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - VEHICLE 2.
(C) AIRSPEED - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED 4.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
