National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Rochester, NH
Accident Number: NYC06CA041
Date & Time: 12/03/2005, 1500 EST
Registration: N40CP
Aircraft: Robinson R-22B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The certificated flight instructor (CFI) and student pilot were practicing hovering over a grass area.
The CFI reported that the student pilot was flying the helicopter, while he "shadowed" the controls and performed corrective inputs.
While hovering, the helicopter's tail rotor contacted the ground and the helicopter rolled over onto it's right side.
Examination of the helicopter did not reveal any pre-impact malfunctions.
Winds reported at the airport, about the time of the accident were variable from 230 to 300 degrees, with the predominate wind from 280 degrees at 7 knots, gusting to 20 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The flight instructor's failure to maintain adequate clearance while providing hovering instruction, which resulted in tail rotor ground contact.
A factor in this accident was the gusty wind conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: HOVER Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
: 1370 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 1960 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: O-360-B2C Registered Owner: Four M Leasing Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
