The pilot and passenger were inbound to land and the pilot requested permission to perform 
an autorotation, which was approved.  The pilot reported that he did not think he was going to 
reach the runway during the autorotation so he added power.  The engine failed to respond and 
the tail stinger contacted the ground resulting in the separation of the tail boom.  The pilot 
pulled collective pitch; the helicopter briefly became airborne, and spun violently to the right.  
The pilot maintained a level attitude and the helicopter landed hard.  After the rotor stopped, 
they exited the helicopter.  The pilot stated that he should have used carburetor heat prior to 
the extended engine idle period of the autorotation.  The temperature and dew point were in 
the serious icing-glide power range. 
The pilot's failure to use carburetor heat, resulting in a loss of engine power, and, his 
misjudged autorotation approach that resulted in a collision with the ground during the 
landing flare.  Contributing to the accident was the conditions conducive to carburetor icing. 
 On February 2, 2000, at 1437 hours Pacific standard time, a Robinson R44, helicopter, 
N999EV, was substantially damaged during a practice autorotation at Palo Alto, California.  
Neither the commercial rated pilot nor the passenger was injured.  The personal flight was 
operated by the pilot under 14 CFR Part 91.  No flight plan was filed.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the operation that originated at San Carlos, California, at 1427. 
The pilot reported that during the autorotation the engine had been at idle for an extended 
period.  He said he did not think he was going to make the runway so he added power.  The 
engine failed to respond and the tail stinger contacted the ground, resulting in the separation 
of the tail boom.  The pilot pulled collective pitch; the helicopter briefly became airborne and 
spun violently to the right.  The pilot maintained the helicopter in a level attitude and the 
landed hard.  After the main rotor stopped rotating, the pilot and passenger exited the 
helicopter.  
The pilot told the Federal Aviation Administration inspector on scene that he did not use 
carburetor heat during the autorotation.  According to the Palo Alto METAR, the temperature 
was 64 degrees Fahrenheit and the dew point was 52 degrees Fahrenheit.  Reference to a 
carburetor icing probability chart revealed that this temperature and dew point were in an area 
of the graph annotated "moderate icing-cruise power or serious icing-glide power."
