The commercial pilot was on a local pleasure flight in his experimental airplane.  During the 
flight the left engine cylinder head temperature began to overheat, and he elected to shut that 
engine down.  The pilot stated that during landing, the winds were blowing and gusting from 
the right.  During landing roll, a wind gust lifted the right wing. The pilot added power to the 
operating (right) engine, the airplane departed the left side of the snow-covered runway, and 
struck a snow berm.  The pilot wrote in his NTSB Pilot/Operator report that he could have 
restarted the left engine for the landing. 
The pilot's improper compensation for wind conditions during the single-engine landing.  
Factors associated with this accident were the pilot's intentional shut down of the left engine, 
the right crosswind, the icy runway, and the snow berms on the edge of the runway. 
 On February 2, 2000, about 1500 Alaska standard time, an experimental Stirling Air Cam 
airplane, N6381V, sustained substantial damage during landing on runway 18 at the Chena 
Marina Airport, Fairbanks, Alaska.  The solo commercial pilot was not injured.  The local 
personal flight was operated under 14 CFR Part 91, and originated about 1430 from the Chena 
Marina Airport.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no 
flight plan was filed.  
According to an FAA inspector, the pilot stated in an interview on February 3, that during the 
flight the left engine cylinder head temperature began to overheat, so he elected to shut that 
engine down.  The pilot told the FAA inspector that during landing, the winds were blowing 
and gusting from the right.  During landing roll, a wind gust lifted the right wing.  The pilot 
added power to the operating (right) engine, and the airplane departed the left side of the 
4,700 feet long, snow-covered runway, and struck a snow berm.  The airplane sustained 
substantial damage to both landing gear, the landing gear attachment bulkhead, and two 
leading edge ribs (battons).
The pilot stated in his NTSB Pilot/Operator report that there were high winds above 1,000 feet 
agl.  He indicated that he intentionally shut down the left engine due to high cylinder head 
temperature.  He stated that during the landing flare, a wind gust combined with a slick 
runway pushed the airplane to the left.  He wrote that he added power on the operating (right) 
engine attempting to straighten the airplane, and struck the berm.  He added in his report that 
he could have restarted the left engine for the landing.
