The accident airplane impacted a snowbank during a landing at Starke County Airport.  The 
pilots were uninjured.  The instructor stated that the airplane taxied through slushy snow and 
departed Porter County Municipal Airport {VPZ}.  He said the student performed two go 
arounds.  On the third attempt, the aircraft settled onto the runway the aircraft and pulled to 
the right.  The instructor took the controls and added full power.  The instructor said that the 
'right tire went into snow bank along side of runway and pulled aircraft off of runway, skidding 
side ways and collapsing nose wheel.  After departing aircraft I checked runway and found a 
single skid tiremark on runway, about 20 feet long.  My assumption is that the slush during 
taxi at VPZ froze the tire up and caused us to be pulled off runway on landing at Stark County 
Airport.'  The student stated, 'Upon my flare I drifted slightly right of center line and sat the 
plane down.  It immediately pulled to the right.'  The airplane was moved prior to an on-scene 
examination.  The examination did not reveal any anomalies. 
the instructor pilot not performing remedial action on the student's right drift during the flare.  
Factors were the student not maintaining directional control, the student not maintaining 
proper centerline alignment, and the snowbank. 
 On February 3, 2000, at 1405 eastern standard time, a Beech A23, N1489L, sustained 
substantial damage on impact with a snowbank during a landing on runway 36 (4,400 feet X 
75 feet, dry/asphalt) at Starke County Airport, near Knox, Indiana (OXI).  The flight was being 
conducted as a 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight, in visual meteorological conditions, with a 
student pilot and certified flight instructor on board.  The pilots sustained no injuries.  The 
flight originated from Porter County Municipal Airport, Valparaiso, Indiana (VPZ) at 1220 
central standard time and was landing at OXI at the time of the accident.
The instructor stated, "While taxing to active runway we went through slushy snow area not 
cleared by airport personnel.  We departed VPZ [and] stayed in pattern and performed a go-
around on 27.  Departed VPZ for OXI to perform x wind landings so that student could solo at 
VPZ.  Student performed two go-around and on third attempt had every thing lined up for a 
good landing.  As the aircraft settled onto the runway the aircraft pulled to the right.  I grabbed 
controls, added full power.  Right tire went into snow bank along side of runway and pulled 
aircraft off of runway, skidding side ways and collapsing nose wheel.  After departing aircraft I 
checked runway and found a single skid tiremark on runway, about 20 feet long.  My 
assumption is that the slush during taxi at VPZ froze the tire up and caused us to be pulled off 
runway on landing at Stark County Airport."
The student stated, "Upon my flare I drifted slightly right of center line and sat the plane down.  
It immediately pulled to the right."
The airplane was moved prior to a Federal Aviation Administration examination.  The 
examination did not reveal any anomalies.
