The pilot reported that he and his groundcrew were preparing to commence an aerial 
application job for a farmer who was reportedly 'anxious' to get the job underway. The 
helicopter was transported to the job site on a trailer from which it was normally operated. 
After a preflight, the pilot prepared to take off from the trailer. Upon lift-off, the rear portion of 
the left skid became 'snagged' on the left rear tiedown. According to a witness and the pilot, the 
aircraft 'pitched up, rolled left', and at 'least one of the main rotor blades struck the ground.' 
Subsequently, the skid broke loose from the tie down, and the nose pitched down and impacted 
the ground. During this sequence, the tail boom separated from the helicopter. The pilot 
reported that he and his groundcrew were fatigued when they arrived on the job. During a 168 
day time period, he had flown over 400 hours, and had spent approximately 656 hours driving 
to jobs. He reported his normal work day to be 0500 to 2300 (allowing 6 hours for sleep). The 
pilot stated that he needed 8 hours of sleep on average to feel fully rested. 
the pilot's failure to ensure a proper preflight and the groundcrew's failure to remove the 
tiedown. Factors were pilot and groundcrew fatigue. 
 On October 1, 1996, approximately 0900 central standard time, a Continental Copters-Darling 
El Tomcat MK-5A helicopter, N7MH, was substantially damaged after impacting terrain during 
takeoff near Lafayette, Louisiana.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant who owned and 
operated the agricultural helicopter, sustained serious injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 137 aerial application 
flight.
The pilot reported that he and his ground crew were preparing to commence an aerial 
application job for a farmer who was reportedly "anxious" to get the job underway.  The 
helicopter was transported to the job site on a trailer from which it was normally operated.  
After a pre-flight, the pilot prepared to take off from the trailer.  Upon lift off, the rear portion 
of the left skid became "snagged" on the left rear tie down.  According to a witness and the 
pilot, the aircraft "pitched up, rolled left", and at "least one of the main rotor blades struck the 
ground."  Subsequently, the skid broke loose from the tie down, and the nose pitched down and 
impacted the ground.  During this sequence, the tail boom separated from the helicopter.         
The pilot reported that he and his ground crew were fatigued when they arrived on the job on 
the morning of the accident.  He stated that during a 168 day time period, he had worked 164 
days, flown over 400 hours, and spent approximately 656 hours driving to jobs.  He reported 
his normal work day to be 0500 to 2300 (allowing 6 hours for sleep).  In an interview with the 
investigator-in-charge, the pilot stated that he requires an average of  8 hours of sleep per day 
to feel fully rested.  He submitted the following calculations to quantify his reported fatigue: 
164 days X 8 = 1312 hours 164 days X 6 =   984 hours 1312 minus 984 = 328 hours total sleep 
deficit in 168 days prior to the accident.
The above calculations are similar to data that are currently being studied at the NASA AMES 
Research Center regarding fatigue and work/sleep cycles in the transportation industry.  The 
NTSB and NASA sponsored a "Fatigue Symposium" on November 1-2, 1995, at Tyson's Corner, 
Virginia.  The symposium proceedings were published and are available through the NTSB, 
Office of Public Inquiries, Washington, D.C.
