The pilot was departing his 700 feet long grass strip in a tundra-tire/tail-wheel equipped 
airplane to transport a passenger to a hunting area. The airplane climbed to about 100 feet 
above the ground while in a slight right turn. The pilot described the airplane's tail as suddenly 
being pushed downward by a gust of wind. The airplane then descended in a right wing and 
nose low attitude toward the ground, through two strands of high voltage electrical wires. The 
pilot recalled seeing sparks emanating from the right wingtip. The airplane struck the ground 
in a small grove of trees 2/10 of a mile from the departure end of the runway, and a postcrash 
fire erupted. No mechanical malfunction of the engine was found. The pilot reported the wind 
conditions as light and variable. Wind conditions from an airport 1/2 mile northeast of the 
accident site, one half hour before the accident, were reported as 9 knots. One half hour after 
the accident, the wind conditions were 15 knots with gusts to 32 knots. Local residents reported 
strong gusty winds throughout the area. No evidence was found that the pilot had obtained an 
official weather briefing. 
the pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions and failure to maintain adequate 
airspeed, which resulted in an inadvertent stall.  The unfavorable wind condition was a related 
factor. 
 History of the Flight
On October 2, 1996, at 1224 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Piper PA-18, N64RS, 
crashed during takeoff from a private airstrip 1/2 mile southwest of the Palmer, Alaska, airport.  
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight 
when the accident occurred.  The airplane, registered to and operated by the pilot, was 
destroyed by impact and postimpact fire.  The certificated private pilot received serious 
injuries.  The sole passenger received fatal injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The pilot reported he was departing his 700 feet long grass strip to transport the passenger to a 
hunting spot.  He described the wind conditions as light and variable.  The departure runway is 
oriented on a 210 degree heading.  Following a run-up of the engine, the pilot departed and 
climbed the airplane to about 100 feet above the ground while in a slight right turn.  The pilot 
described the airplane's tail suddenly being pushed downward.  The engine was operating at 
full power.  The airplane then descended in a right wing and nose low attitude toward the 
ground.  The airplane descended through two strands of high voltage electrical wires located 
41.5 feet above the ground.  The pilot recalled seeing sparks emanating from the right wingtip.  
The airplane struck the ground in a small grove of trees and a postcrash fire erupted.
Witnesses observed the airplane climb to about 100 feet above the ground and begin a slight 
right turn.  The turn suddenly steepened and the nose of the airplane dropped toward the 
ground.  No rotation of the fuselage was noted and the engine continued to produce normal 
sounds.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight at latitude 61 degrees, 34.107 minutes north 
and longitude 149 degrees, 06.152 minutes west.  The location is 2/10 of a mile, on a 235 
degree magnetic heading, from the end of the departure runway.
Other Damage
The electrical wires struck by the accident airplane sustained abrasion and scuffing damage.  
The wires did not break.
Crew Information
The pilot holds a private pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating.  The most 
recent third-class medical certificate was issued to the pilot on May 25, 1995, and contained the 
limitation that correcting lenses be worn while exercising the privileges of his airman 
certificate.
According to the pilot/operator report submitted by the pilot, his total aeronautical experience 
consists of about 2,441 hours, of which 2,140 hours were accrued in the accident airplane make 
and model.  In the preceding 90 and 30 days prior to the accident, the report lists a total of 36 
and 20 hours respectively.
Aircraft Information
The airplane's recording hour meter, installed in the engine RPM gauge, was destroyed.  
Examination of the maintenance records revealed the most recent annual inspection of the 
engine and airframe was accomplished on June 19, 1996.  At that time, the airplane had 
accrued 4,263.94 hours.  The engine had accrued 1,567.54 hours since a major overhaul on 
October 1, 1981.
The airplane has a supplemental type certificate (STC) to permit the use of automotive 
gasoline.  The pilot reported the airplane was fueled with 16 gallons of gasoline prior to the 
flight.
Meteorological Information
The closest official weather observation station is the Palmer, Alaska, airport which is located 
about 1/2 nautical mile northeast of the accident site.  At 1156, an aviation routine weather 
report (METAR) was reporting in part: wind, 145 degrees (magnetic) at 9 knots; visibility, 40 
miles; sky condition, clear; temperature, 41 degrees F; dew point, 22 degrees F; altimeter, 
29.69 inHg.
At 1258, a METAR was reporting in part: wind, 015 degrees (magnetic) at 15 knots, gusts to 32 
knots; visibility, 40 miles; sky condition, clear; temperature, 45 degrees F; dew point, 18 
degrees F; altimeter, 29.66 inHg.
A local area resident reported he was traveling in an area about 4 miles northwest of the 
accident area about 1215.  Weather conditions consisted of strong gusty winds from the 
northeast about 40 miles per hour.  A few minutes later, at his residence about 2 miles 
northeast of the accident site, the wind conditions were calm.
Following the accident, neighbors near the accident site told the pilot they had assembled 
stacks of hay for baling.  At the time of the accident, strong gusty winds from the northwest, 
scattered the hay stacks.
There is no evidence the pilot obtained an official weather briefing.
Aerodrome and Ground Facilities
The departure airstrip is privately owned by the pilot.  It is a 700 foot long grass strip, oriented 
on a 210/030 degree heading at an elevation of 240 feet mean sea level.  The airstrip is 
equipped with a wind sock, located about midfield on the south side of the strip.  The grass was 
cut short along the entire runway.
Wreckage and Impact Information
The National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge (IIC) examined the airplane 
wreckage at the accident site on October 2, 1996.  The airplane came to rest upright with the 
nose of the airplane oriented on a magnetic heading of about 180 degrees in a small stand of 
bare trees.  Several trees, 2 to 3 inches in diameter, were found cleanly dissected.  The cut limbs 
were oriented on about a 45 degree angle along the vertical axis of the trees.  (All 
heading/bearings noted in this report are oriented toward magnetic north.)
All of the airplane's major components were found at the main wreckage area.  The wings 
remained attached to their respective attach points but exhibited extensive fire damage and 
melting.  Both lift struts remained attached to their respective wing and lower attach points.   
The right wing exhibited spanwise leading edge upward crushing and flattening on the 
underside of the leading edge.  The underside of the right wing metal leading edge was crushed 
upward about 12 inches inboard of the right wingtip position light assembly and displayed a 
scuffing that resembled a braided appearance.  The underside of the right wing position light 
assembly exhibited evidence of paint removal and electrical arcing at the junction of the light 
assembly and wingtip rib.
The empennage was about 6 feet above the ground.  The fuselage was bent at a 45 degree angle 
along the longitudinal axis, just aft of the rear seat and angled upward toward the tail.  The 
fuselage tubing, aft of the rear cargo area, displayed bending and buckling of the vertical 
tubing.  The longitudinal tubing of the same area displayed a more rounded and curved 
bending in an aft direction toward the empennage.  The fuselage tubing adjacent to the rear 
seat displayed downward buckling of the overhead tubing and outward bending of the left side 
of the fuselage.  The main landing gear was attached to their respective attach points and 
crushed upward.
The flight control surfaces remained connected to their respective attach points and were fire 
damaged.  The manually operated flaps were attached to their respective attach points.  Both 
flaps had drooped down to 40 degrees.  The horizontal stabilizer trim actuator mechanism was 
found with 14 threads exposed below the actuator.  According to the airplane manufacturer, the 
horizontal stabilizer trim actuator corresponded to a 2.9 degree leading edge up (near full 
nose-down trim) setting.  The continuity of the flight control cables was established to the 
cockpit control stick. 
On October 4, 1996, the engine and airframe were examined after recovery of the wreckage 
from the accident site.  The parties noted in this report participated in the examination.
The propeller assembly remained connected to the engine crankshaft.  One propeller blade was 
bent forward slightly about 12 inches outboard from the hub and exhibited leading edge 
abrasion and slight torsional twisting.  The second blade exhibited slight forward bending and 
leading edge scuffing near the tip. The chambered side of the blade exhibited a curved scuff 
mark and removal of paint about 5 inches inboard from the tip.  The scuff mark had a braided 
appearance.
The engine sustained extensive fire damage.  The crankshaft could be rotated by the propeller.  
Gear and valve train continuity was established and thumb compression in each cylinder was 
noted, when the crankshaft was rotated by hand.  The muffler was free of obstructions.  The 
lower left side exhaust tubes were crushed upward and flattened.  The number 2 exhaust tube 
displayed a sharp bend and wrinkling of the tube with no evidence of breaking or cracking at 
the radius of the bend.
The right magneto was found to be timed at 25 degrees before top dead center (BTC).  Both 
magnetos sustained fire damage but produced spark from all leads upon hand rotation.
The massive electrode sparks plugs from the number 1 and 3 cylinders exhibited a sooty, black, 
appearance.  The spark plugs from the number 2 and 4 cylinders exhibited a dark brown 
appearance.
The carburetor sustained impact damage on the underside of the air box and bowl.  It also 
exhibited external fire damage.  The metal floats sustained thermal damage with slight melting 
of its solder joints.  The carburetor inlet fuel screen was free of contaminants.
Fire Aspects
A postcrash fire erupted after impact with the ground.  The pilot reported he and a neighbor 
attempted to extricate the passenger from the wreckage.  A large expansion of the flames forced 
them away from the wreckage.
Survival Aspects
Following the impact, the pilot did not recall how he egressed from the airplane.  He noticed 
the passenger was still seated in the rear seat of the airplane.  The only egress from the airplane 
is through the right front area of the fuselage where a combination, downward hinged door and 
upward hinged window, is located.  Compression and folding of the fuselage trapped the 
passenger's hips in the seat and wreckage.
Wreckage Release
The Safety Board released the wreckage, located at Wick Air Inc., Palmer, Alaska, to the owner 
on October 7, 1996.  No parts or components were retained by the Safety Board.
