The airplane was parked on shore near a dock. The flight instructor (CFI) reported that after 
starting the engine, the airplane began to move forward, and the wing strut and wing cleared 
the dock. After the wing cleared the dock, the instructor began to lower the water rudders, and 
the tail of the airplane began moving toward the dock. A right crosswind was present during 
the departure from the shore. The instructor reported that full left rudder with the water 
rudders partially extended was ineffective in stopping the horizontal stabilizer of the airplane 
from hitting the dock.  
failure of the flight instructor (CFI) to ensure that clearance from the dock was maintained, 
while starting to taxi. The crosswind was a related factor. 
 On October 3, 1996, at 0815 central daylight time (cdt), a Cessna 185, N185ND, sustained 
substantial damage when the airplane's horizontal stabilizer collided with a dock.  The airplane 
was taxiing for takeoff, on Golden Lake, near Finley, North Dakota, when the accident 
occurred.  The flight instructor and student pilot were uninjured in the accident.  The 14 CFR 
Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
The flight instructor reported on NTSB form 6120.1/2 that the airplane was parked on the 
shore near the dock.  Before departing the shore the instructor reported that she and the 
student discussed the departure, and believed that distance between the dock and the airplane 
did not appear to present a problem during departure.
The instructor reported that after starting the airplane's engine the airplane began to move 
forward, and the wing strut and wing cleared the dock.  After clearing the dock with the wing 
the instructor reported that she began to lower the water rudders, and the tail of the airplane 
began moving towards the dock.  The diagram included with the report shows that the aircraft 
was experiencing a right crosswind during the departure from shore.  The instructor reported 
that full left rudder with the water rudders partially extended was ineffective in stopping the 
horizontal of the airplane from hitting the dock.  The pilot did not report any airplane or engine 
malfunctions.  
The airplane's horizontal stabilizer required replacement, following the accident.
