According to the pilot, he was rolling down the runway, had reached rotation speed, rotated, 
and started climbing. After attaining a positive rate of climb, he selected gear up.  The pilot had 
stated, 'then I felt that my right shoe lace was caught on something.'  While the airplane was 
climbing, he bent down to fix his shoe lace.  He estimated that 1-2 seconds had past while 
fixing his shoe lace.  He thought that he had enough back pressure for the plane to climb, but 
stated, 'maybe I pushed the yoke a little forward with my chest.'  When he was getting up from 
fixing his shoe lace, he noticed that the plane was going down.  The airplane hit the runway,  
then bounced back in the air.  While in the air, the pilot tried to get the gear down, but it would 
not come down.  The airplane hit the runway again, and slid down the runway until it came to a 
stop.   The pilot had also stated to the FAA, that he did not have any mechanical problems with 
the airplane or engines. 
the pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane resulting in an in flight collision with the 
runway.  A factor in this accident was the pilot diverted his attention away from flying the 
airplane to fix his shoe lace. 
 On October 2, 1996, about 1212 central daylight time, a Beech Baron 58, N4178S, 
operated by Paragon Air Express Inc., crashed during takeoff from the Jackson International 
Airport, Jackson, Mississippi.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time, and no 
flight plan was filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91, positioning flight.  The airplane was 
substantially damaged and the airline transport-rated pilot, the sole occupant, received serious 
injuries.  The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot's statement on the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, "...I was rolling down 
the runway, reached rotation speed, rotated, and started climbing.  After positive rate of climb, 
I selected gear up.  Then I felt that my right shoe lace was caught on something.  While the 
plane was climbing, I bend [sic] down to fix it.  I estimate that time elapsed while fixing my 
shoe lace was 1-2 seconds.  I thought that I had enough back pressure for the plane to climb, 
but maybe I pushed the yoke a little forward with my chest.  When I was getting up from fixing 
my shoe lace, I noticed that the plane was going down.  I pulled back immediately, but it was to 
late.  The plane hit the ground, then bounced back in the air...while in the air, I tried to get the 
gear down, but it would not come down.  I hit the runway again, and the plane slides [sic] down 
the runway till it comes to a stop."
The pilot stated to the FAA that his shoe lace became untied, and became "tangled in the 
rudder pedals."  The pilot had also stated to the FAA that he did not have any mechanical 
problems with the airplane or engines.
