The private pilot reported that upon arrival in the area of the private 2,700 foot long, gravel 
airstrip, he executed a descending 360-degree turn to lose altitude, and then lined up to land to 
the southeast under light and variable wind conditions.  He reported sequentially lowering the 
flaps to 30 degrees on the approach and then experienced a rapid descent rate.  The touchdown 
was reported as within the first third of the runway at 60 knots.  He then applied braking but 
felt the aircraft was not decelerating adequately.  He then applied heavier braking during which 
the brakes locked and the aircraft continued off the upwind end of the runway impacting trees.  
A commuter pilot who landed at the airstrip about one hour later reported, 'Skid marks were 
present in the gravel approximately the last 500 feet of the runway to where the aircraft was 
resting in the trees' and the airstrip was 'not for the inexperienced' pilot.  The aircraft flight 
manual for the Cessna 172P provided a 'Short Field' landing distance planning table which 
showed that at sea level and a weight of 2,400 pounds (maximum gross weight) and 10 degrees 
Centigrade, a ground roll distance of 530 feet was expected with a total distance of 1,265 feet to 
clear a 50 foot obstacle.  The landing criteria were based upon no wind, flaps 30 degrees, power 
off, and maximum braking on a level, dry, paved runway.  No mechanical malfunction of the 
aircraft's brakes or wheels was noted following the accident. 
The pilot's improper distance/speed during the approach, which lead to an overrun during the 
landing roll and subsequent collision with trees.  A factor was the trees beyond the upwind end 
of the runway. 
 On November 2, 2000, approximately 1155 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 172P, N65923, 
registered to Pearson & Pearson Leasing, operated by Pearson Air, Inc., and being flown by a 
private pilot, was substantially damaged when the aircraft continued beyond the upwind end of 
the runway during the landing roll, and impacted trees.  The accident occurred at Waldronaire 
airport, on Waldron, Island, Washington, and both occupants were uninjured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was in effect.  The flight, which was 
personal, was operated under 14CFR91, and originated from Olympia, Washington, at 1040.
The private pilot reported that upon arrival in the Waldron Island area, he executed a 
descending 360-degree turn to lose altitude, and then lined up to land to the southeast.  The 
private airstrip was equipped with a single runway (32/14) which was reported as 2,700 feet in 
length.  The pilot reported that the landing surface was gravel with turf surrounding the 
runway and that the winds on landing were light and variable.
He reported sequentially lowering the flaps to 30 degrees on the approach and then 
experienced a rapid descent rate.  The touchdown was reported as within the first third of the 
runway at 60 knots.  He then applied braking but felt the aircraft was not decelerating 
adequately.  He then applied heavier braking during which the brakes locked and the aircraft 
continued off the upwind end of the runway impacting trees.  The pilot reported that the 
aircraft's main wheels rolled freely during the recovery from the accident site and that he 
experienced no brake malfunction.
The pilot was sent NTSB Form 6120.1/2 on November 3, 2000, with a second mailing via 
certified mail on February 2, 2001 (refer to Attachment USPS I).  No response was received in 
either case.
The pilot was issued his private pilot certificate on April 23, 1999, and reported a total of 100 
hours of flight experience at his last medical examination conducted July 12, 1999.  His total 
flight time and experience in make and model at the time of the accident was not known.
An inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) telephonically interviewed the 
pilot on the date of the accident (refer to Attachment RTC I).  Additionally, the FAA inspector 
telephonically interviewed a commuter pilot who landed at the same airstrip about one hour 
later.  The commuter pilot reported, "Skid marks were present in the gravel approximately the 
last 500 feet of the runway to where the aircraft was resting in the trees."  Additionally he 
reported that "...the airstrip is approximately 3,000 feet in length and is surrounded by large 
Douglas Firs ranging in height from 100 to 150 feet..." the runway was "covered by loose gravel 
and golf-ball sized rocks..." and "...the airport is "not for the inexperienced" pilot..." (refer to 
attachment RTC II and CHART I).
The aircraft flight manual for the Cessna 172P provided a "Short Field" landing distance 
planning table which showed that at sea level and a weight of 2,400 pounds (maximum gross 
weight) and 10 degrees Centigrade, a ground roll distance of 530 feet was expected with a total 
distance of 1,265 feet to clear a 50 foot obstacle (refer to TABLE I).  The landing criteria were 
based upon no wind, flaps 30 degrees, power off, and maximum braking on a level, dry, paved 
runway.
The operator reported that following the recovery of the aircraft an examination revealed no 
mechanical malfunction of the aircraft's brakes or wheels.
