The certificated commercial pilot was departing runway 29, from intersection Echo.  He noted 
that the gravel runway had a light accumulation of heavy, wet snow/slush, and estimated about 
1,500 feet of runway remained from intersection Echo.  During the departure roll, the airplane 
veered to the left, and he applied full right rudder to correct the veer.  He was unable to correct 
the veer, so he closed the throttle, aborted the takeoff, and applied maximum braking. The 
airplane ran off the end of the runway, down an embankment, and struck a chain link fence.  
The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings.  Airport personnel reported that 
when departing runway 29 from intersection Echo, the published usable runway remaining is 
1,350 feet.  The published usable full-length of runway 29, is 1,850 feet.  At the time of the 
accident winds were reported to be from 093 degrees (magnetic) at 9 knots. 
The pilot's failure to use all available runway.  Factors associated with the accident were the 
pilot's inadequate preflight planning/preparation, a short runway, a tailwind, and a slush-
covered runway. 
 On November 3, 2000, about 1345 Alaska standard time, a wheel equipped Cessna 207A 
airplane, N7336U, sustained substantial damage during an aborted takeoff from the Bethel 
Airport, Bethel, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-
demand cargo flight transporting mail under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident 
occurred.  The airplane was owned by Flight Alaska, Inc., doing business as Yute Air Alaska.  
The solo commercial pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and 
company visual flight rules (VFR) flight following procedures were in effect for the flight to 
Kongiganak, Alaska.     
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on November 3, the pilot reported that while taxiing from the parking apron, en 
route to the departure runway, the Bethel Air Traffic Control Tower (ATCT) advised him that 
an immediate departure would be possible if he was able to accept another runway, runway 29.  
The pilot said that after accepting the alternate runway, he taxied onto runway 29 at 
intersection Echo.  He said runway 29 was a gravel runway that had a light accumulation of 
heavy, wet snow/slush, and estimated that he would have about 1,500 feet of runway 
remaining from intersection Echo.  The pilot said while departing runway 29, the airplane 
veered to the left, and he applied full right rudder to correct the veer.  He said that he was 
unable to correct the veer, so he closed the throttle, aborted the takeoff, and applied maximum 
braking.  The airplane ran off the end of the runway, down an embankment, and struck a chain 
link fence.  The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings.
Bethel tower personnel reported that when departing runway 29 from intersection Echo, the 
published usable remaining runway is 1,350 feet.  In addition, published usable full-length of 
runway 29, is 1,850 feet.  
The closest weather observation station is Bethel.  On November 3, at 1353, an Aviation 
Routine Weather Report (METAR) was reporting in part: Sky conditions and ceiling, 4,000 
feet broken, 10,000 feet broken, 14,000 feet overcast; visibility, 10 statute miles; wind, 093 
degrees (magnetic) at 9 knots; temperature, 37 degrees F; dew point, 33 degrees F; altimeter, 
29.84.  
The pilot submitted a written report to the NTSB dated November 4.  In his written report, the 
pilot wrote, in part: "After a few hundred feet I could feel the right main gear grabbing.  I let off 
of the right rudder and it still continued.  I began to drift from centerline, and found myself 
using more left rudder than right.  Realizing that the right main gear was stuck or frozen, I 
thrusted my right foot on the right break in hopes of breaking it free.  This maneuver failed so I 
immediately applied breaks and pulled the throttle to idle."
On November 15, the operator reported that there were no postaccident mechanical anomalies 
noted with the accident airplane's engine, flight controls, or brakes.
