While operating on an IFR flight plan in VMC, the pilot experienced a total loss of engine 
power.  He diverted, and attempted to execute a forced landing to a local airport, but while on 
short final, the airplane contacted trees. Examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of 
fuel leakage.  In addition, the right fuel tank was full, the left fuel tank was empty, and the fuel 
selector was set to the left tank.  In addition, the pilot stated that the loss of engine power was 
from 'fuel starvation.' 
The pilot' failure to properly manage the available fuel onboard, which result in fuel starvation, 
and a loss of engine power. 
 On November 1, 2000, about 1015 Eastern Standard Time, a Beech A-36, N565P, was 
substantially damaged while executing a forced landing at the Holmes County Airport (10G), 
Millersburg, Ohio.  The certificated private pilot and two passengers were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological condition prevailed for the personal flight that departed Norfolk, Virginia, 
destined for Holland, Michigan.  An instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed and the 
flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, when the airplane was approximately 6 miles to the northwest of 
Millersburg, he experienced a total loss of engine power.  The pilot advised Indianapolis Center 
of his situation, and the controller provided radar vectors to Millersburg.  The pilot elected to 
keep the airplane in a "clean" configuration to improve glide performance.  While on final 
approach for Runway 27, the airplane contacted trees, and impacted the ground to the left of 
the runway.  The airplane came to a stop, and the occupants exited under their own power.
In a written statement by the pilot, he stated that the loss of engine power was from "fuel 
starvation."  He also stated, that during the flight he was distracted from monitoring the fuel 
because of a conversation he was having with the front seat passenger.  He added that the 
autopilot was on, and the weather was "beautiful."
According to a Federal Aviation Administration inspector that examined the wreckage, the 
airplane came to rest upright and intact on the grass to the left side of Runway 27, about 300 
feet beyond the landing threshold.  At the scene, the inspector observed no evidence of fuel 
spillage or inflight venting of fuel.  The inspector examined the left fuel tank by looking in the 
tank, and rocking the airplane.  He did not see or hear any fuel moving in the tank.  The 
inspector examined the right fuel tank, which was approximately full, and he examined the fuel 
selector, which was set to the left fuel tank.
