The airplane impacted the terrain following a loss of engine power.  The pilot reported that he 
performed a preflight of the airplane with the exception of verifying a chart used to keep track 
of the fuel on board.  According to the pilot he thought there were 19 gallons of fuel on board, 
however, 15.2 gallons of the fuel were used on a previous flight. He reported, "...I misread that 
part of the calculation."  Fuel exhaustion occurred about 20 minutes after takeoff while at an 
altitude of 1,050 feet above the ground.  The pilot reported "Approximately 22 seconds later I 
impacted the ground with a 75' landing distance, measured using step method.  A/C did not 
roll or tumble, but I was able to keep it upright through the impact.  The speed of impact was 
approximately 110 mph as I had to avoid a bridge and set it down immediately." He reported 
on the form that the accident cold have been prevented "By thorough ground, physical, 
preflight.  Do not use a chart, without actual in sight ck. of fuel levels."
The pilot's inadequate preflight of the airplane and his failure to verify the fuel supply on 
board, which resulted in fuel exhaustion.  Factors associated with the accident were the low 
altitude at which the power loss occurred and the lack of suitable terrain given the low altitude. 
 On November 1, 2000, at 1600 central standard time, an Aviat Pitts S-2B, N169DM, operated 
by a commercial pilot collided with the terrain during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power.  The forced landing was made in a field near 115th and Beloit Avenue in Worth, 
Illinois.  The pilot was not injured and the airplane was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR 
Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  
The flight originated from Kankakee, Illinois, at 1540.
The pilot reported that he performed a preflight of the airplane with the exception of verifying 
a chart used to keep track of the fuel on board.  According to the pilot he thought there were 19 
gallons of fuel on board, however, 15.2 gallons of the fuel were used on a previous flight.  He 
reported, "...I misread that part of the calculation."  The pilot reported that fuel exhaustion 
occurred approximately 20 minutes after takeoff.  He was at an altitude of 1,050 feet above the 
ground.  He reported, "Approximately 22 seconds later I impacted the ground with a 75' 
landing distance, measured using step method.  A/C did not roll or tumble, but I was able to 
keep it upright through the impact.  The speed of impact was approximately 110 mph as I had 
to avoid a bridge and set it down immediately."
The pilot completed an NTSB Form 6120.1/2.  He reported on the form that the accident cold 
have been prevented "By thorough ground, physical, preflight.  Do not use a chart, without 
actual in sight ck. of fuel levels."
