The pilot established a final approach for a touch and go landing. The pilot landed with 40 
degrees of flaps, and during the takeoff phase of the touch and go procedure, he retracted the 
flaps to 10 degrees.  He continued the climbout and retracted the remanding flaps in 
increments.  As he retracted the flaps, the airplane lost altitude and collided with trees.  No 
mechanical problems with the airplane were reported by the pilot.  According to the pilot's 
handbook takeoff should not be accomplished with 30 or 40 degrees of flaps. 
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed which resulted in a stall and subsequent 
impact with trees. 
 On May 1, 1999, about 1715 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 150J, N50943, collided with trees 
during climbout from a private airstrip near Seneca, South Carolina.  The flight was operated 
by the private pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The private pilot and passenger 
received minor injuries and the airplane was substantially damaged. The flight departed 
Pickens County Airport in Pickens, South Carolina, at 1700, enroute to Clemson, South 
Carolina. 
After refueling at Pickens, the pilot and his son flew to a friend's private airstrip near, Seneca, 
South Carolina. After takeoff, the pilot flew directly to his friend's airstrip. Upon arriving at his 
friend's airstrip, they noticed that his friend's car was not there, so the pilot's son suggested 
they make a touch and go landing before returning home.  The pilot established a final 
approach for a normal landing with 40 degrees of wing flaps. After the touch down the pilot 
stated that he retracted the flaps, but noticed during the initial climb that the flaps had only 
retracted to 30 degrees. As he continued the climb the pilot retracted the flaps another ten 
degrees. Shortly after retracting the flaps to 20 degrees the airplane lost lift and altitude, and 
collided with trees on the departure end of the runway. 
No mechanical problems with the airplane were reported by the pilot. According to the Cessna 
150 pilot's handbook, "flap deflections of 30 and 40 degrees are not recommended at any time 
for takeoff". Ten degrees of flap may be used for short or soft field takeoffs. The pilot stated 
that " in the future, wherever possible, I intend to stay off grass runways"; the departure 
runway was grass.
