The engine experienced an uncommanded loss of power from 6,000 rpm to 5,400 rpm over a 
period of 4-seconds.  The pilot reported that he established the airplane on best glide speed 
and prepared for an off-field landing while the engine experienced a constant depletion of 
power, finally loosing all power after a period of approximately 30 seconds.  The pilot stated 
that he executed a forced landing into a farm field that had, 'modest furrows'.  Substantial 
damage to the airplane was sustained during the landing. External visual inspection of the 
engine revealed a hole in the lower engine case on the Power Takeoff (PTO) cylinder side.  
Internal examination of the engine revealed metal deposits on the PTO cylinder dome, cylinder 
wall, and piston head.  Examination of the PTO connecting rod revealed that the connecting-
rod bearing had failed. 
The failure of the connecting rod bearing, and the rough/uneven terrain condition. 
 On May 1, 1999, at 1130 central daylight time, a Narzinski Avid Flyer Mark IV, N313N, owned 
and piloted by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing, 
following a loss of engine power during cruise flight, near West Alton, Missouri.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was 
operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.  The pilot 
reported no injuries.  The local flight departed Creve Coeur Airport, Creve Coeur, Missouri at 
1100.
According to the pilot's written statement, after approximately 30-minutes of flight time, at an 
altitude of 1,400 feet above mean sea level, the engine experienced an uncommanded loss of 
power from 6,000 rpm to 5,400 rpm over a period of 4-seconds.  The pilot reported that he 
established the airplane on best glide speed and prepared for an off-field landing while the 
engine experienced a constant depletion of power, finally loosing all power after a period of 
approximately 30 seconds.  The pilot stated that he executed a forced landing into a farm field 
that had, "modest furrows".  Substantial damage to the airplane was sustained during the 
landing.
The Rotax 582 engine, serial number 4084252, was subjected to a tear-down inspection 
conducted by the NTSB Investigator-in-Charge and a representative of the engine 
manufacture.  External visual inspection of the engine revealed a hole in the lower engine case 
on the Power Takeoff (PTO) cylinder side.  Internal examination of the engine revealed metal 
deposits on the PTO cylinder dome, cylinder wall, and piston head.  Examination of the PTO 
connecting rod revealed that the connecting-rod bearing had failed.  Photos of the hole in the 
lower engine case, cylinder dome, cylinder wall, piston head, and connecting-rod are attached 
to this factual report.
