During a north landing at a private airstrip, the airplane drifted left of centerline, and its left 
main landing gear struck a pile of dirt located on the left side of the approach end of the 
runway.  Subsequently, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.  The pile of dirt on 
the left edge of the runway was the result of construction at the airstrip.  According to the pilot, 
the airstrip elevation rises to the north, and the last 600 feet has a 'dog-leg' to the right.  He 
added that all pilots approach to the north over the left side of the approach end of the runway.  
The pilot reported that the wind was calm, and he had landed at the airstrip in 'a Maule 5 times 
previously.' 
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the dirt bank during the landing flare. 
 On May 1, 1999, approximately 0745 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 182Q, N95631, was 
substantially damaged during landing at a private airstrip near Marfa, Texas.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 personal cross-country flight.  The aircraft was registered to a private 
individual, and operated by Gene's Flight School and Pilot Services of Santa Teresa, New 
Mexico.  The private pilot and his only passenger sustained minor injuries.  The flight 
originated from the El Paso International Airport, El Paso, Texas, at 0645.
The pilot reported to the FAA inspector that during the approach to the private airstrip, the 
aircraft drifted left of centerline.  During the landing to the north, the airplane's left main 
landing gear struck a pile of dirt, located on the left side of the approach end of the runway.  
Subsequently, the aircraft nosed over and came to rest inverted.  The pilot further reported that 
the wind was calm at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, that 
the airstrip rises to the north and the last 600 feet has a "dog-leg" to the right.  He added that 
all pilots approach to the north over the left side of the approach end of the runway.  The pilot 
further reported that the pile of dirt on the left edge of the runway was a result of the airstrip's 
construction.  The pilot also stated that he had landed at the airstrip in "a Maule 5 times 
previously."
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that the fuselage, firewall, vertical 
stabilizer, and wings were damaged.
