While at a cruise altitude of 3,500 feet msl, the pilot observed a fuel flow fluctuation, and the 
experimental airplane's engine lost power.  The pilot was unable to restart the turboprop 
engine and prepared for a forced landing to a road.  During the forced landing, about 100 feet 
agl, the pilot initiated a turn in order to see the traffic on the road.  As the airplane crossed the 
road, 'the left wingtip and left main gear contacted the asphalt road, very hard.'  The airplane 
came to rest upright in a ditch, which paralleled the road.  Examination of the fuel system by 
the pilot revealed a caterpillar was lodged in the forward facing vent to the right wing fuel tank. 
The loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of a blocked fuel vent.  A factor was 
the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
 On May 1, 1999, approximately 0740 central daylight time, a Luscombe 8E experimental 
airplane, N2638K, was substantially damaged during a forced landing, following a loss of 
engine power near Conroe, Texas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan 
was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 cross-country positioning flight.  
The aircraft was registered to and operated by the Don Luscombe Aviation History Foundation 
of Chandler, Arizona.  The airline transport pilot, sole occupant of the aircraft, was seriously 
injured.  The flight originated from Lafayette, Louisiana, at 0600, and was en route to Austin, 
Texas.
According to the FAA inspector, the pilot contacted Houston Center and reported the 
turboprop powered aircraft was experiencing engine problems.  Houston Center gave the pilot 
radar vectors to the nearest airport; however, the aircraft was unable to make the airport.
The pilot reported that he descended from 5,500 feet msl to 3,500 feet msl in order to take 
advantage of the "higher tailwinds."  After about 10 to 15 minutes, he observed a fuel flow 
"fluctuation from 15 GPH to 12 GPH, back to 15 GPH, then 11 GPH, and finally to about 2 
GPH."  Subsequently, the engine lost power.  "Two restart cycles were attempted.  One on the 
right tank, and a second on the left tank, though abbreviated due to proximity to the ground.  
The engine did not re-light, and power was not regained."
The 14,000-hour pilot reported to the NTSB investigator-in-charge that he was unable to locate 
the airport that ATC had identified as the nearest airport and prepared for a forced landing to a 
road.  At about 100 feet agl, he initiated a turn to the west in order to see the traffic on the road.  
The aircraft passed under a 35 foot high power line.  As the aircraft crossed over the road, "the 
left wingtip and left main gear contacted the asphalt road, very hard.  The gear sheared and 
ricocheted off the wing strut.  The propeller hit at a 15 degree nose down attitude, and the right 
gear sheared, leaving me [the aircraft] skidding on the belly."  The aircraft came to rest upright 
in a ditch, which paralleled the road.
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that both wings were structurally 
damaged, the firewall was buckled, and the empennage was bent.  There was evidence at the 
accident site of a fuel spill.
Examination of the fuel system by the pilot revealed a "caterpillar lodged in the forward facing 
vent" to the right wing fuel tank.  The other four small auxiliary holes in the tank cap did not 
"seem capable of venting the tank while fuel is used at a rate of 15 GPH."
According to the pilot, a post accident examination and test run of the engine was satisfactory.  
At the time of the accident, there were 30 gallons of fuel on board.
