During the initial climb, the airplane was witnessed to pitch nose-down, enter a spin, and 
impact terrain.  According to a pilot, who was current in the accident airplane, the altitude and 
location where the airplane entered the stall/spin would be consistent with where the landing 
gear would have been in retraction.  According to pilots, who had flown in the accident 
airplane, the gear retraction procedure was to climb to 1,500 feet above ground level, slow the 
airplane to within 10 MPH of the stall (power-off, gear-down, flaps-retracted) speed, and then 
retract the landing gear by the manually-actuated lever.  According to pilots, who had flown in 
the accident airplane, when the airplane was held in a stalled condition it would rapidly pitch 
down and bank sharply to the left.  The designer of the airplane stated that during a power-on 
stall the wing would drop, 'almost vertical,' and that 300 to 500 feet would be lost during the 
recovery from the stall. 
aircraft control and airspeed not maintained by the pilot-in-command.  A factor to the accident 
was the inadvertent stall. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 1, 1999, at 1400 central daylight time, a Berrick GP-4, N54WB, owned and piloted by a 
commercial pilot, was destroyed on impact with terrain following a departure from controlled 
flight during initial climb from runway 16 (4,100 feet by 100 feet, dry/concrete) at the 
Plattsmouth Municipal Airport, Plattsmouth, Nebraska.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was operating under the provisions of 
14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.  The pilot-in-command and one pilot-rated 
passenger sustained fatal injuries.  The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
Witnesses to the accident stated that the airplane was approximately 500 to 700 feet above 
ground level (agl) when the airplane pitched nose down, entered a spin, and impacted the 
terrain.  According to a pilot who was current in the accident airplane, the altitude and location 
where the airplane entered the spin, would be consistent with where the landing gear would 
have been in retraction.
The airplane came to rest approximately two statute miles south of the departure end of 
runway 16 and .25 statute miles south of the intersection of U.S. Highway 75 and Nebraska 
State Highway 1.
PERSONAL INFORMATION
The pilot-in-command (PIC), born September 15, 1926, was the holder of a commercial pilot 
certificate with privileges for single engine land airplane, and held an instrument rating.  
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records indicate that the pilot's last aviation medical 
examination was performed on June 6, 1997.  The pilot possessed a third class medical with the 
limitation that he, "Wear corrective lenses for near and distance vision."
According to the pilot's flight records, he had accumulated a total of 1,978 hours of flight time 
prior to the accident flight.  According to the logbooks, the pilot had accumulated 181.4 hours 
in the accident airplane.  According to FAA records, the pilot had completed four phases of the 
Wings - Pilot Proficiency Award Program. The most recent phase was completed on March 18, 
1999, and was awarded by the FAA Safety Program Manager of the Lincoln Flight Standards 
District Office (FSDO).
The pilot-rated passenger, born June 26, 1939, was the holder of a private pilot certificate with 
privileges for single engine land airplane.  FAA records indicate that the pilot's last aviation 
medical examination was performed on November 25, 1997.  The pilot possessed a third class 
medical with the limitation that he, "Must wear corrective lenses."
According to the pilot's flight logbook and FAA records, he had accumulated a total of 446 
hours of flight time prior to the accident flight.  According to the logbook, the pilot had not 
logged any flight time in the accident airplane.  According to FAA records, the pilot had 
completed two phases of the Wings - Pilot Proficiency Award Program.  The most recent phase 
was completed on June 21, 1997, and was awarded by the FAA Safety Program Manager of the 
Lincoln FSDO.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The aircraft was a Berrick GP-4, N54WB, serial number 151.  The GP-4 is a built-by-plans, all-
wood, full cantilever low-wing airplane with a retractable landing gear and can accommodate a 
pilot and a single passenger in a side-by-side orientation.  The airplane was constructed by the 
owner, William H. Berrick, and was certified as an experimental/amateur-built airplane by the 
FAA Lincoln FSDO on February 28, 1998.  The airplane had logged a total-time of 181.4 hours 
prior to the accident flight.  The last condition inspection of the airplane was completed March 
24, 1999, by the owner/builder.
The engine was a Textron Lycoming IO-360-A1A, serial number L-760-51, and prior to the 
accident flight had accumulated 181.4 hours since major overhaul.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A weather observation station, located at the Eppley Airfield Airport (OMA), 23 nautical miles 
from the accident site on 003-degree magnetic heading, reported the weather 8 minutes prior 
to the accident as:
Observation Time:1352 cdt Wind:140-degrees at 10 
knots Visibility:10 statute miles Sky Condition:Sky 
Clear Temperature:21-degrees centigrade Dew Point Temperature:05-
degrees centigrade Pressure:30.16 inches of mercury
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
FAA Inspectors, from the Lincoln FSDO, represented the National Transportation Safety Board 
(NTSB) for the on-scene portion of the investigation.
The airplane came to rest approximately two statute miles south of the departure end of 
runway 16 which was approximately .25 statute miles south of the intersection of U.S. Highway 
75 and Nebraska State Highway 1.  The wreckage was contained within a 50-yard radius on an 
embankment originating from the shoulder of U.S. Highway 75.
The airplane was destroyed during the impact with terrain. The wreckage was found nose 
down, with the forward portion of the engine and one propeller blade buried in the terrain.  All 
airframe components were accounted for at the accident site.  Aileron, elevator, and rudder 
control continuity was established from the control surfaces to the cockpit.  The landing gear 
and flap positions could not be determined due to impact damage.
Engine continuity could not be established due to impact damage.  The oil pan, fuel injector, 
and starter were found separated from the engine. The engine crankshaft was found separated 
from the engine/propeller flange, which was found still attached to the propeller hub assembly.  
The propeller blades exhibited rearward and S-shaped bending.  The spark plugs were removed 
and were light gray in color with no oil fouling noted. There was a fluid, blue in color, leaking 
from a ruptured fuel tank.
No anomalies, relative to the airplane or its systems, were found that could be associated with a 
preexisting condition.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot-in-command at the Douglas County Hospital Morgue, 
Omaha, Nebraska, on May 2, 1999. The autopsy report listed the cause of death as, "... massive 
blunt trauma to the head, neck, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and extremities...".
A Forensic Toxicology Fatal Accident Report was prepared by the FAA Civil Aeromedical 
Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
The toxicology report indicated the following results:
* No Ethanol detected in Kidney * 4 (mg/dL, mg/hg) Acetaldehyde detected in Kidney * 29 
(mg/dL, mg/hg) Ethanol detected in Muscle * No legal or illegal drugs were detected in Kidney
The toxicology report noted, "The ethanol found in this case is from postmortem ethanol 
production and not from the ingestion of ethanol."
An autopsy was performed on the pilot-rated passenger at the Douglas County Hospital 
Morgue, Omaha, Nebraska, on May 2, 1999. The autopsy report listed the cause of death as, "... 
massive blunt trauma to the head, chest, abdomen, pelvis, and extremities...".
A Forensic Toxicology Fatal Accident Report was prepared by the FAA Civil Aeromedical 
Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
The toxicology report indicated the following results:
* No cyanide detected in Blood * 12 (mg/dL, mg/hg) Ethanol detected in Blood * 33 (mg/dL, 
mg/hg) Acetaldehyde detected in Blood * 1 (mg/dL, mg/hg) Acetaldehyde detected in Brain * 
No Ethanol detected in Brain * 68 (mg/dL, mg/hg) Isobutanol detected in Brain * 204 (mg/dL, 
mg/hg) Methanol detected in Brain * 39 (mg/dL, mg/hg) N-Propanol detected in Brain * No 
Ethanol detected in Muscle Fluid * 2 (mg/dL, mg/hg) Isobutanol detected in Muscle Fluid * 1 
(mg/dL, mg/hg) N-Butanol detected in Muscle Fluid * No legal or illegal drugs were detected 
in Blood
The toxicology report noted, "The ethanol found in this case may be from postmortem ethanol 
production and not from the ingestion of ethanol."
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION
In a written statement, provided by the designer of the GP-4 airplane, the stall characteristics 
of the prototype GP-4 were discussed.  According to the designer's statement, the Power-on 
and Accelerated Maneuvering Stalls were described as:
"Power on Stall: Power set at 20 inches, propeller at 2400 a very steep nose high angle is 
attained before the stall at 70 MPH IAS.  In this straight ahead approach the right wing drops 
almost vertical.  Recovery is very fast with rudder and stick application.  You can expect to 
loose 300 to 500 feet in the recovery with full flaps, 32 degrees, gear down the stall is 62 to 65 
MPH."
"Accelerated Stall Clean: Power at 25 square. In a hard left or right 4 to 5 G turn, excessive aft 
stick pressure will produce a buffet just prior to a fast wing rotation or snap.  Rotation is 
opposite to the turn.  Relaxing any aft stick pressure gives immediate recovery.  If held the 
aircraft will snap over the top for a spin entry.  Recovery is fast with proper recovery 
application."
In the designer's written statement, he made the following design notations concerning the GP-
4's stability, control, and gear retraction:
"Another characteristic of the GP-4 is its neutral stability.  If you roll into a turn or set up a 
climb or descent, the aircraft will stay there.  It will not return to its pre trimmed condition 
without a control input."
"The elevator is very responsive in pitch control as well as roll.  Care must be taken not to 
bump the stick while retracting the gear with the Johnson bar.  Since the GP-4 accelerates 
rapidly after lift off the gear should be retracted before much over 100 MPH.  The faster you go 
the harder it is to retract the gear due to the low pressure area on the main gear doors."
According to the Pilot's Operating Handbook (POH), developed by the builder of the Berrick 
GP-4, stalls and their recommended recoveries were described as:
"STALLS
Turn on electric fuel pump before practicing stalls.  For power-on stalls, use about 65% 
power.  Enter stalls only from coordinated flight.  Approach the stall slowly by reducing 
airspeed until detecting the first evidence of the approaching stall.  There may be rapid decay 
of control effectiveness, aerodynamic buffeting, and downward pitching with the rapid loss of 
altitude with control stick aft.
RECOVER by releasing elevator back pressure and applying power on recognizing the 
approaching stall. Holding the aircraft in stall with control stick fully aft may result in a roll to 
one side or the other unless precise control coordination is maintained.  The rudder may be 
more effective than the ailerons in preventing the roll.  If the aircraft assumes a steep nose-
down attitude, delay adding power to prevent excessive build-up of airspeed."
According to the POH, "Intentional spins are prohibited in this aircraft, however, if stall 
recovery is delayed or if the airplane is held in stall in an uncoordinated manner, it will likely 
go into a spin."
The POH states the takeoff procedure as, "Retract gear when safely airborne and in control, 
after centering nose wheel and applying brakes to stop wheel rotation.  (May be necessary to 
climb to safe altitude, and slow to 80 MPH to retract)."
A pilot, who had accumulated 51.1 hours in the accident airplane, provided a written statement 
regarding the landing gear retraction for the Berrick GP-4 airplane.  According to the pilot's 
statement, the gear retraction procedure was to climb to 1,500 agl, retard the throttle to idle, 
slow the aircraft to 80 MPH, then move the landing gear actuating bar to retract the landing 
gear.  The pilot described the power-off stall characteristics as, "...power off, gear down, flaps 
up configuration, initial buffet was easily identified; however, when the aircraft stalled it 
rapidly pitched down and banked sharply to the left."  The pilot stated that the power-off, gear-
down, flaps-retracted stall speed was approximately 65 to 70 MPH.  The pilot's statement full 
statement is attached to this report.
Another pilot, who had accumulated 15 hours in the accident airplane, described similar 
experiences with regard to the gear retraction procedure and stalling qualities of the accident 
airplane.  This pilot's statement is attached to this report.  
A party to the investigation was the Federal Aviation Administration Flight Standards District 
Office, Lincoln, Nebraska.
