The pilot rated passenger (PRP) was flying the airplane from the rear seat, and was on final 
approach to land to the north at a grass strip.  The PRP turned the airplane to the northeast 
when he observed an ultralight departing the grass strip to the south.  At that point the 
commercial pilot in the front seat took control of the airplane and pitched the airplane's 'nose 
up to climb a little and reduce speed.'  He was turning the airplane left from downwind to base 
when the airplane's 'nose pitched down sharply and impacted the ground.'  The pilot reported 
that as the airplane turned, the 'engine died,' and he continued turning toward an open area.  
Examination of the wreckage revealed that one propeller blade 'exhibited evidence of power.'  
There were also deep gouges in the ground that 'appear to be propeller slashes.'  Continuity was 
established to all flight controls.  The PRP stated that 'he did not observe any problems with 
the aircraft or engine performance.' 
The pilot's failure to maintain minimum airspeed for flight while maneuvering, which resulted 
in an inadvertent stall. 
 On May 1, 1999, about 1918 central daylight time, a Piper J3C-65 airplane, N3732C, registered 
to and operated by Sam Riggs Flying Service, Inc., of Claremore, Oklahoma, was destroyed by a 
fire following terrain impact while maneuvering in the traffic pattern at the Sam Riggs Airpark 
near Claremore.  The commercial pilot and his pilot rated passenger were seriously injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The local flight originated from the Sam Riggs 
Airpark at 1830.
The commercial pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 
6120.1/2, that when the pilot rated passenger aligned the aircraft with runway 36 for landing, 
"an ultralight did a very aggressive landing procedure."  The pilot further reported that he 
"took sole command of the aircraft," and flew to the east side of the runway for "a downwind 
leg" to land south.  As the aircraft approached a road, which crosses the approach end of the 
runway, he "pitched the nose up to climb a little and reduce speed."  He then "turned for a 
rounded base and final."  As the aircraft turned, the "engine died," and he "continued to turn to 
get to open ground."  He attempted an emergency landing, but the aircraft "hit too hard."
The pilot rated passenger reported to the FAA inspector that he was in the back seat and was 
landing the aircraft to the north on a grass strip.  The aircraft was approximately 50 feet above 
a line of trees that run east and west when he "noticed an ultralight taking off to the south on 
the same runway."  He then made a right turn to 040 degrees and leveled off.  The passenger 
further reported that the pilot in the front seat "took over control of the aircraft and pitched the 
nose up and began a left turn to land to the south."  He "noticed that the airspeed was low and 
then the aircraft began to stall."  The pilot was able to get the wings level before the aircraft's 
"nose pitched down sharply and impacted the ground."  The passenger stated that "he did not 
observe any problems with the aircraft or engine performance." 
Examination of the aircraft wreckage by the FAA inspector revealed that the inboard section of 
both wings and the fuselage, except for the tail, were destroyed by fire.  One propeller blade 
was destroyed by fire, and the other blade "exhibited evidence of power."  There were also deep 
gouges in the ground that "appear to be propeller slashes."  Continuity was established to all 
flight controls.
