The two commercially certificated flying pilots, accompanied by an airline transport rated pilot 
and a second passenger, departed Oakland, California, en route to North Bend, Oregon. A 
weather briefing had been obtained indicating an AIRMET for rime icing from the freezing 
level to 18,000 feet. The aircraft departed late in the afternoon, climbed to 12,000 feet and 
occasionally climbed to 13,000 feet for short durations in order to remain VMC above a cloud 
layer. Night environmental  conditions existed when both engines began losing power and the 
copilot radioed Seattle Center that the aircraft had encountered "way too much induction ice to 
the engines," declaring an emergency. The pilot-in-command reported the outside air 
temperature at the power loss was about -20 degrees Celsius and he immediately applied full 
carburetor heat and began trouble shooting the problem while descending back toward a 
nearby airport. Application of carburetor heat bypassed the ice blocked induction air filters 
allowing unfiltered, warmed air to flow directly to the carburetors. Remedial action by the crew 
failed to regain full power and the aircraft broke out of the cloud bases in heavy snow too far 
down the runway to effect a landing. The pilot then began a turn to line up and land on the 
adjacent highway just east of the runway during which the aircraft's right wing struck several 
trees and the aircraft impacted near the west edge of the highway a short distance beyond.
Both the pilot-in-command and the co-pilot allowing the aircraft to enter into an area of 
adverse weather (icing conditions at low [-20 degrees C] temperatures) resulting in sequential 
induction icing, induction filter blockage, carburetor icing and the subsequent partial loss of 
power in both engines followed by  tree impact and collision with terrain during an emergency 
descent/approach.  Contributing factors were icing conditions, low temperatures, night 
conditions and trees.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2004, at 1832 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-44-180, N53505, registered to a 
limited liability corporation, being operated by Auburn Flight Service, Inc., and being flown by 
two commercial pilots, accompanied by an airline transport rated passenger and a non-rated 
passenger, sustained substantial damage during an in-flight collision with trees/terrain while 
attempting an emergency landing at the Illinois Valley airport, Cave Junction, Oregon (3S4) 
following a partial loss of power in both engines while in cruise.  The left seat pilot and both 
passengers suffered serious injuries and the right seat pilot was fatally injured.  Instrument 
meteorological conditions existed at the accident site and an IFR flight plan had been filed and 
activated.  The aircraft departed Oakland International airport, Oakland, California, at 1612 on 
the afternoon of the accident and was destined for North Bend, Oregon.  The flight, which was 
personal, was operated under 14 CFR 91.
At 1539:48 the pilot who would occupy the right seat of the aircraft on the return flight from 
Oakland called Oakland Flight Service via telephone and filed a flight plan from Oakland to 
North Bend requesting a standard weather briefing for the route of flight.  He was advised of 
the en route weather including "...widespread moderate to heavy rain across the routes, air 
mass is moist and cool, AIRMETS [Airman's Meteorological information] for icing above uh 
freezing level to eighteen thousand...."
At 1601:56 the right seat pilot obtained the IFR clearance to North Bend and at 1609:06 he 
declared the aircraft was ready for taxi.  The aircraft was cleared to taxi to runway 27 right and 
at 1611:26 the flight was cleared for takeoff.
At 1613:09 the right seat pilot contacted Northern California TRACON [Terminal Radar 
Approach Control] and the aircraft was ultimately cleared direct Point Reyes and to 6,000 feet.
At 1619:05 the right seat pilot contacted Oakland ARTCC [Air Route Traffic Control Center] 
and the aircraft was cleared to an amended altitude of 8,000 feet and subsequently cleared 
direct Mendocino.
At 1635:01 the right seat pilot requested a climb to 10,000, which was approved, and shortly 
thereafter a request for direct North Bend along with a climb to 12,000 was made and 
approved.
Between 1701:25 and 1709:27 the right seat pilot communicated with Oakland Flight Watch 
providing a pilot report and requesting the weather for North Bend, which was provided.
At 1714:52 the right seat pilot requested and the aircraft was approved for a climb to13,000 
feet.  He subsequently requested and received clearance for a descent back to 12,000.
At 1737:21 the right seat pilot contacted Seattle ARTCC and then requested a climb to 13,000 
feet, which was approved.  And, at 1754:19 he requested a descent back to 12,000, which was 
approved.
At 1812:31 the right seat pilot contacted Seattle Flight Watch reporting "...we're about uh forty 
five minutes away from landing at Newport, like to get current weather at Newport but then 
we're going to be uh trying to make our way to Seattle uh so kind of like to get uh uh standard 
briefing on maybe the best route to get us up there to avoid some of this weather...."  The Flight 
Watch Specialist provided weather information and specifically address AIRMETS for 
"...occasional moderate rime or mixed icing in clouds...."  During the course of this 
communication the right seat pilot indicated the aircraft was about 20 nautical miles due east 
of Crescent City, California, at 12,000 feet and the outside air temperature was -18 degrees 
Celsius.
At 1823:56 the right seat pilot advised, "...we need a descent ah right now and we need ah 
vectors for obstacle clearance..." and the aircraft was cleared to descend to 7,300 feet.  Radar 
data showed the aircraft descending through 11,700 feet at this time.
At 1824:28 the right seat pilot declared an emergency and requested "...vectors to an airport 
immediately..." indicating that they had engine problems.  The Illinois Valley airport was 
identified as being at the flight's four o'clock position and radar data showed the aircraft 
beginning a right turn toward the airport.
At 1826:36 the right seat pilot radioed "...I think that the problem we're having is ah induction 
ice, we've got way too much induction ice to the engines so we've got partial power ah um yeah 
we're descending at ah we're unable to maintain altitude..." and radar data showed the aircraft 
descending between 8,800 and 8,600 feet.
At 1827:54 the last radar target from the aircraft was received showing the aircraft descending 
through 7,000 feet (refer to Attachment RD-I and Chart I) and immediately thereafter Seattle 
ARTCC advised the aircraft they were attempting to get the (Illinois Valley) airport lights on.
The last radio transmission received from the flight was at 1829:29 indicating 4,800 feet 
altitude (refer to Attachments RT-1 through RT-11 and statements ATC-1).
The only known witness to the accident, a pilot who was a resident living at the Illinois Valley 
airport reported that he was inside his residence when he heard the aircraft and described it as 
a "low power setting."  He went outdoors and observed the aircraft proceeding south.  He 
indicated that he thought the aircraft was going to land long and that it banked and then 
disappeared over trees and he then heard an impact.  He also reported that the runway lights 
were on (refer to Statements JCSO-1 and FSDO-1).
The left seat (flying) pilot reported that his first indication of a problem was a manifold 
pressure and airspeed bleed off.  He applied (full ON) carburetor heat, checked the mixtures 
rich, turned the auxiliary fuel pumps on, tried cross-feeding the engines, and opened the cowl 
flaps.  He indicated that during the descent, cycling of the throttles changed the amount of 
power and he never completely lost power in either of the engines (refer to Statements PS-1 
and PI-1).
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
     Left Seat Pilot:
The left seat pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single/multi-engine and 
instrument ratings.  He also held a current flight instructor's certificate for airplane 
single/multi-engine and instrument training.  His most recent medical examination was 
conducted on October 9, 2003, and he was issued a first class medical with no 
restrictions/waivers.   According to records provided by the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) and the Operator, he reported an approximate total 390 hours of flight experience of 
which 285 hours were as pilot-in-command.  He also reported a total of 52 hours in the PA-44 
of which 21 hours were as pilot-in-command.
     Right Seat Pilot:
The right seat pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single/multi-engine and 
instrument ratings.  His most recent medical examination was conducted on June 18, 2003, 
and he was issued a first class medical with the restrictions that he "must wear lenses for 
distant - possess glasses for near vision."   According to records provided by the FAA and the 
Operator, he reported an approximate total 440 hours of flight experience of which 283 hours 
were as pilot-in-command.  He also reported a total of 55 hours in the PA-44.
     Passenger rated pilot:
The passenger rated pilot, who occupied the right rear seat, held an airline transport pilot 
certificate with instrument ratings and airplane multi-engine ratings.  She also held 
commercial privileges in airplane single-engine land.  Additionally, she held a current flight 
instructor's certificate for airplane single/multi-engine and instrument training as well as an 
advanced ground instructor's certificate.  Her most recent medical examination was conducted 
on October 10, 2003, and she was issued a first class medical with no restrictions/waivers.   
According to records provided by the FAA and the Operator, she reported an approximate total 
2,681 hours of flight experience of which 2,581 hours were as pilot-in-command.  Her flight 
experience in the PA-44 was not reported.  She had served as a flight instructor to both the left 
and right seat pilots during their flight training.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N53505, a piper PA-44-180, was equipped with two Lycoming carbureted O-360-A1H6 
engines.  The aircraft was not pressurized nor did it have supplemental oxygen on board.  
According to records from the fueling facility at Oakland airport, 32 gallons of fuel were added 
prior to the departure of the accident flight.  The left seat pilot reported that this topped off the 
aircraft providing 110 gallons of fuel, or approximately 4.5 hours of flight.
Each engine was provided an air supply by means of an air intake line which feeds an induction 
air box equipped with a manual valve and controlled by a carburetor heat selector lever on the 
engine control pedestal.  Placing the carburetor heat in the UP [OFF] position closes the valve 
and allows filtered air to flow to the carburetor throat.  Placing the carburetor heat in the 
DOWN [ON] position opens the valve blocking filtered air and allows unfiltered bypass air to 
flow to the carburetor throat (refer to Attachment POH-1).  The unfiltered air is passed through 
a heat exchanger at the number 4 cylinder exhaust manifold.  The heat exchanger transfers 
energy to the unfiltered air raising its temperature prior to the air entering the carburetor 
throat.  
The aircraft is not certified for flight in known icing conditions and, aside from carburetor heat 
and pitot heat, has no anti/de-ice systems (refer to Attachment POH-2).  The Pilot Operating 
Handbook contains emergency procedures, which discuss carburetor icing stating in part 
"Carburetor heat should be full on when carburetor ice is encountered" (refer to Attachments 
POH-3 and 4).  The aircraft was not equipped with the optional carburetor ice detection 
system.
The aircraft underwent a 100-hour inspection on December 17/18, 2003, and had a total of 
1246.7 hours of flight time at that time.  The aircraft Hobbs meter was observed to read 828.8 
hours following the accident and the airframe log noted that to arrive at true aircraft total time 
468.0 hours should be added to the current Hobbs reading.
METEOROLOGICAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL INFORMATION
Search and rescue personnel reported heavy snow falling upon their arrival at the accident site 
the evening of the accident (refer to Statement JCSO-1).
The general meteorological conditions in the vicinity of the accident site included cloud bases 
forming about 2,750 feet above mean sea level (MSL) and extending up to 9,000 feet at a 
relative humidity level of 75%.  Cloud layers continued above 9,000 feet with mixed rime and 
clear icing conditions existing from 3,000 feet MSL up to 9,000 feet MSL (refer to Attachment 
M-1).  The temperature and dew point at 12,000 feet MSL for Medford, Oregon, at 1600 local 
was -20 and -25 degrees Celsius respectively.  Medford is located 68 nautical miles east-
northeast of Cave Junction.  Diagram 1 is a carburetor icing probability chart.  
Dark night environmental conditions were determined based on the latitude/longitude, date 
and time of the accident and the altitude of the aircraft at 1823:54 (refer to Attachment E-1).
COMMUNICATIONS
Refer to Attachments RT-1 through RT-11, which provide a record of the radio communications 
between N53505 and the associated FAA facilities from departure at Oakland until loss of radio 
contact near the accident site.
AERODROME INFORMATION
The Illinois Valley airport (3S4) was equipped with a bi-directional, asphalt runway measuring 
5,200 feet in length by 75 feet in width and was 1,394 feet MSL.  The magnetic bearing of the 
centerline was oriented 360/180 degrees magnetic (refer to Attachment AMR-I).  The runway 
was equipped with low intensity runway lights (LIRL), which were activated by keying the local 
common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF), 122.8 megahertz.  No instrument approach 
procedure was in place for the airport.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The aircraft impacted several conifer trees located approximately 1,000 feet beyond and 
bearing 153 degrees magnetic from the threshold of runway 36 (refer to graphic image 1) in an 
area along the northern edge of a flooding stream known as "Rough and Ready Creek."  The 
aircraft, exclusive of the right wing section outboard of the right engine nacelle, came to rest 
inverted along the west side of Highway 199 at a location approximately 1,200 feet from and 
bearing 147 degrees magnetic from the threshold of runway 36 (refer to graphic image 2).  The 
latitude and longitude of the accident was determined by a global positioning system and was 
42 degrees 05.647 minutes north and 123 degrees 40.925 minutes west respectively (refer to 
graphic images 3 and 4).  The elevation of the accident site was approximately 1,410 feet above 
mean sea level (refer to graphic image 5 and Chart II).
The right wing outboard section was located on the ground in the vicinity of, and slightly east 
of the impacted trees.  The leading edge section displayed several major impact impressions 
(refer to graphic image 6).  The larger of the two was closest to the point where the wing 
separated at the engine nacelle and the angle between the vertical axis of this impact 
impression and the aircraft's vertical axis was approximately 27 degrees (right wing up).  The 
smaller impression located about two feet further outboard from the primary impression 
displayed an angle between its vertical axis and the aircraft's vertical axis of approximately 38 
degrees (right wing down).  Refer to graphic image 7.
The aircraft was re-examined at the facilities of Specialty Aircraft, Redmond, Oregon.  Both 
main landing gear were found to be in the extended position and the gear selector in the 
cockpit was also in the down position.  Both propellers had separated from their respective 
engine drive shafts.  One blade of each propeller displayed aft tip bending and each propeller's 
opposing blade was relatively straight displaying several light leading edge impact impressions 
(refer to graphic images 8 and 9).  The carburetor heat controls for both engines were observed 
in the full "ON" position (refer to graphic image 10).  The manual carburetor heat valve for the 
left engine was found captured in the fully open (hot) position and the valve for the right 
engine was found in an intermediate position.  Both engines were partially disassembled and 
examined and no mechanical malfunction was noted for either.  There was no evidence of pre-
impact flight or engine control disconnect.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
James N. Olson, M.D., Deputy State Medical Examiner conducted post-mortem examination of 
the right seat pilot, at the facilities of Hull and Hull Funeral Home, Grants Pass, Oregon, on 
January 6, 2004, (case number A-2-04).
The FAA's Toxicology Accident and Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 
conducted toxicological evaluation of samples from the right seat pilot.  All findings were 
reported as negative (refer to attached TOX report).
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
An FAA Inspector conducted on-site examination on January 2, 2004.  The wreckage was then 
moved to the facilities of Specialty Aircraft, at Redmond, Oregon, where the investigative team 
conducted a second examination on February 18, 2004.  The wreckage was verbally released to 
Mr. Brad Hernke, representative for USAIGE, which held the insurance on the aircraft.  
Written wreckage release was accomplished on July 19, 2004, and was documented on NTSB 
form 6120.15 (attached).
