Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Walhalla, SC
Accident Number:
ATL06LA060
Date & Time:
04/02/2006, 0945 EDT 
Registration:
N9085N
Aircraft:
Just Aircraft LLC Highlander
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to the builder/owner of the airplane, the airplane was certified as a Light Sport 
Airplane (LSA) on March 28, 2006, and was being prepared for an air show in Florida. During 
the preparation of the airplane, the builder/owner stated that they noticed that a vacuum hose 
was loose. They repaired the hose and the pilot flew the airplane around for an hour, and 
everything checked out "ok". The builder/owner stated that on the morning of the accident the 
pilot flew the airplane around again to check to make sure they had good "temperatures". The 
pilot took off again and after climbing to approximately 100 feet AGL the engine began to 
sputter in and out. He landed the airplane and shut the engine down. The builder/owner stated 
that when the pilot started up the airplane again he conducted 2 run-ups before take off. Both 
run-ups sounded good. The pilot took off again and the engine again began to sputter during 
the climb out. A witness who was located across the lake from the airstrip heard the engine 
sputtering as he observed the airplane above the tree line adjacent to the lake. The airplane 
made a hard left turn but was "still on a level plain". The airplane went below the tree line and 
disappeared from view. The witness heard "the engine race one last time before the sound of 
impact." Examination of the fuel pumps revealed that both pumps had a fine mesh screens on 
the inlet side of the pumps. The screens were found to have excessive debris build up. 
Examination of the debris revealed it appeared to be fiberglass fibers, and the fibers were 
consistent with the fuel tank construction materials.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot and owner/builders failure to determine the reason for partial loss of engine power 
resulting in loss of engine power due to fuel system contamination on a subsequent flight.
Page 2 of 7ATL06LA060
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. FUEL SYSTEM - CONTAMINATION
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - IMPROPER - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
3. FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
Findings
4. OBJECT - TREE(S)
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7ATL06LA060
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 2, 2006, at 0945 eastern daylight time, a Just Aircraft, Highlander, N9085N, 
registered to and operated by G-Dawg LLC, as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed 
following a loss of engine power during climb after takeoff at a private strip in Walhalla, South 
Carolina. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no flight 
plan was filed. The airplane was substantially damaged, and the private pilot received serious 
injuries. The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the builder/owner of the airplane, the airplane was certified as a Light Sport 
Airplane (LSA) on March 28, 2006, and was being prepared for an air show in Florida. During 
the preparation of the airplane, the builder/owner stated that they noticed that a vacuum hose 
was loose when they were at the Oconee County Regional Airport, Clemson, South Carolina. 
They repaired the hose and the pilot flew the airplane around for an hour, and everything 
checked out "ok". The builder/owner stated that on the morning of the accident the pilot flew 
the airplane around again to check to make sure they had good "temperatures". Everything 
looked fine and the pilot landed the airplane. He took off again and after climbing to 100 feet 
AGL the engine began to sputter. The pilot landed the airplane and shut the engine down. The 
builder/owner stated that when the pilot started up the engine again he conducted 2 run-ups 
before take off, both run-ups sounded good according to the builder/owner.  The pilot departed 
and the engine again began to sputter during the climb out. 
A witness who was located across the lake from the airstrip heard the airplane take off. The 
engine started sputtering and he observed the airplane above the tree line adjacent to the lake. 
The airplane made a hard left turn but was "still on a level plane". The airplane went below the 
tree line and disappeared from his view. The witness heard "the engine race one last time 
before the sound of impact." The witness telephoned the 911 emergency services and reported 
the accident. The Oconee County Sheriffs department located the  airplane down an 
embankment off of Duck Pond road, in Walhalla, South Carolina. 
PILOT INFORMATION
Review of information of file with FAA Airman's Certification Division, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, revealed the pilot was issued a private pilot certificate on November 17, 2002, with 
ratings for airplane single-engine land and sea, instrument airplane. The pilot possess a third-
class medical certificate issued on March 6, 2006, with the restriction, "must wear corrective 
lenses." The FAA airman's report revealed that the pilot had a total of 4,030 civil hours. The 
pilot's logbooks were not recovered for review, and the pilot reported 1,500 fight hours in make 
and model airplane.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a Just Aircraft Highlander (serial number JAESC 0019), certificated light 
sport airplane. It was a two-seat, high-wing airplane of tubular aluminum and fabric covered 
construction with tail-wheel landing gear orientation. A Rotax 914UL engine powered Light-
Sport airplane. The engine was an overhauled engine with 4.4 hours time since overhaul, and 
was rebuilt as an experimental engine. A Light-Sport Aircraft statement of compliance, and 
special airworthiness certificate was issued on March 28, 2006. The "production flight testing 
operating limitation for Light Sport Aircraft" was issued on March 28, 2006.
Page 4 of 7ATL06LA060
WRECKAGE EXAMINATION
Examination of the wreckage by an FAA inspector revealed that the airplane collided with trees 
while descending, and eventually collided with the ground in a nose down attitude. The 
airplane was on a heading of 270-degrees magnetic. The spinner was crushed into the flange, 
and two blades remained attached to the three bladed-propeller assembly. The propeller blades 
revealed chordwise scoring. Flight control continuity was established to the primary and 
secondary flight controls. The engine assembly remained attached to the engine mounts, and 
was pushed back into the cockpit area. The cabin section of the airplane was crushed. 
Examination of the engine tachometer indicated five hours of engine operation. The throttle 
was in the full forward position, and the mixture lever was full rich. The fuel selector was in the 
"on" position. 
Examination of the fuselage and empennage revealed wrinkles in the fabric covering the 
airframe structure. The main landing gears and tail wheel remained attached to the airframe. 
The main fuselage, vertical and horizontal stabilizers were not damaged. The rudder and 
elevators were not damaged. 
The left wing was attached to the forward upper attachment point, and accelerated forward. 
The wing showed wrinkles in the fabric throughout the span of the wing. The aileron and flap 
remained attached to their attachment fittings. The left wing strut remained attached to the 
wing and the fuselage attachment point. The fuel tank was not ruptured, and the fuel cap had a 
tight seal. Examination of the fuel tank revealed fuel was present in the fuel tank.
The right wing remained attached to the rear attachment point, and was pushed aft. The wing 
showed wrinkles in the fabric throughout the span of the wing. The aileron and flap remained 
attached to their attachment fittings. The right wing strut remained attached to the wing and 
the fuselage attachment point. The fuel tank was not ruptured, and the fuel cap had a tight seal. 
Examination of the fuel tank revealed fuel was present in the fuel tank.
Examination of the engine revealed the gearbox showed impact damage that moved the 
propeller shaft back into the crankcase. The propeller shaft was unable to rotate due to the 
impact damage. The gearbox was removed and all mechanical parts moved freely. Due to the 
extensive damage to the gearbox, propeller shaft, intake system, air box, and sensors for the 
turbo control unit, the engine could not be test run. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Examination of the fuel pumps revealed that both pumps had a fine mesh screens on the inlet 
side of the pumps. The screens were found to have excessive debris build up. Examination of 
the debris revealed it appeared to be fiberglass fibers, and the fibers were consistent with the 
fuel tank construction materials. The airplane was not equipped with a fuel pressure gauge, 
thus the loss of fuel pressure could not monitored by the pilot.
The aircraft was released to Just Aircraft LLC on April 2, 2006.
Page 5 of 7ATL06LA060
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3850 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1500 hours (Total, this make and model), 3800 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Just Aircraft LLC
Registration:
N9085N
Model/Series:
Highlander 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
JAESC0019
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
914
Registered Owner:
Just Aircraft LLC.
Rated Power:
115 hp
Operator:
Gary W Schmitt
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
G-Dawg LLC
Operator Designator Code:
Page 6 of 7ATL06LA060
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CEU, 892 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
3 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0954 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.07 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Walhalla, SC 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Walhalla, SC 
Type of Clearance:
Unknown
Departure Time:
0945 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
34.725000, -83.085000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eric H Alleyne
Adopted Date:
06/27/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Bob Jenkins; Columbia FSDO-13; Columbia, SC
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7ATL06LA060
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
