National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Crossville, TN
Accident Number: ATL05CA092
Date & Time: 06/03/2005, 1430 CDT
Registration: N1202V
Aircraft: Cessna 172
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, when he departed his departure airport for his short cross-country flight he requested to fly visual flight rules on top due to the low visibility.
Upon arriving at the destination airport, the pilot discovered that there was a cloud layer over the airport.
He looked for an opening in the clouds so that he could begin his descent.
During the descent through the clouds the pilot encountered instrument meteorological conditions.
As the flight descended through the clouds, the airplane collided with the ground.
The pilot did not report any flight control or mechanical anomalies prior to the accident.
The nearest weather reporting facility Crossville Memorial Airport reported: scattered clouds at 1000 feet, overcast at 1700 feet, and seven miles visibility.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's continued VFR flight into IMC conditions which resulted in an in-flight collision with trees.
A related factor was the clouds.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: DESCENT Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CLOUDS 2.
(C) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: DESCENT - NORMAL Findings 3.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
