While the student pilot was maneuvering for a practice off-field landing, the flight instructor 
observed that it was starting to drizzle, so he instructed the student to apply carburetor heat, 
which he did. As the student was continuing to maneuver for the approach to landing, the 
instructor detected a loss of engine power. The flight instructor immediately took control of the 
helicopter, rolled the throttle off and on to recover the loss of rotor rpm, and subsequently 
instructed the student to try to restart the engine while he set up an emergency landing. The 
student attempted three engine restarts, each of which was unsuccessful. The flight instructor 
then performed an emergency autorotation to upsloping terrain, which resulted in a hard 
landing and substantial damage to the helicopter. The instructor stated that the engine was 
running at idle after the landing. A postaccident examination of the engine and a subsequent 
engine run revealed no operational difficulties that would have precluded normal operation. 
The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
A loss of engine power while maneuvering for reasons that could not be determined because 
postaccident examination of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation.
On May 2, 2012, about 1700 Hawaii standard time, N209KR, a Robinson R22 Beta helicopter, 
was substantially damaged during a hard landing following a reported partial loss of engine 
power near Kailua-Kona, Hawaii. The helicopter was registered to Mauna Loa Helicopters of 
Kailua-Kona, Hawaii. The certified flight instructor and student pilot were not injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The  instructional flight was 
being operated in accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, and no flight plan 
was filed. The flight departed the Kona International Airport (HKO), Kailua-Kona, Hawaii 
about 1630.
In a report submitted to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the certified flight instructor (CFI) reported that after departing on the training 
flight the student climbed upslope to about 2,000 feet mean sea level (msl) to practice off-
airport landings. The CFI stated that after locating a suitable landing area the student began 
orbiting the spot with a slow descent to about 1,500 feet msl.  As it started to sprinkle the CFI 
instructed the student to pull carb heat [to the ON position]. The instructor reported that about 
half way through the approach, which was 300 feet above ground level (agl), he heard 
mechanical sounds similar to a poorly running engine, which was followed by a loss of lift and 
rotor rpm. The CFI revealed that after he took control of the helicopter he lowered the 
collective and rolled on throttle. When rotor rpm did not recover he initiated a full autorotation 
and applied aft cyclic to prevent stalling the main rotor. The instructor further revealed that as 
he was rolling the throttle on and off, he did not detect a change in engine rpm, and assumed 
that the engine had quit. The instructor stated that during the autorotation he instructed the 
student to attempt to restart the engine. He then made an 80-degree turn upslope to clear 
some trees, and before landing he reported that he heard the starter turning over as he rolled 
the throttle on and off. During the landing approach while clearing a set of trees the CFI 
reported that he did not have sufficient airspeed for the landing flare to be successful, and 
consequently the helicopter landed hard upslope. The instructor stated that after landing he 
realized that the engine was running at idle, adding that he thought the engine had started on 
the third restart attempt by the student.
In a statement submitted to the NTSB IIC, the student pilot reported that about 200 to 300 
feet agl and at a normal rate of descent with carburetor heat full up in the ON position, the 
engine started to lose power; the first indication of this was an unusual noise. The student 
further reported that at this time the instructor took control of the helicopter and instructed 
him to start the engine. The student added that as the CFI manipulated the throttle to restore 
power, he was trying to start the engine, which he reported was three times without success. 
The student also reported that the low rotor rpm horn had activated, and that at about 20 to 30 
feet agl, with the collective in the full up position, is when aircraft control was lost. The student 
stated that after the helicopter had landed the low rotor horn [remained on], the main rotor 
blades were still turning, and that he heard the sound of the engine. 
A postaccident examination of the helicopter was overseen by representatives from the NTSB 
and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). The engine inspection was performed while it 
remained attached to the helicopter, subsequent to being recovered to the operator's 
maintenance facility located a HKO. The inspection revealed that the spark plugs were in good 
condition, with the exception of the #4 cylinder bottom plug, which showed a small sign of lead 
deposits; the #4 top plug revealed evidence of a small amount of carbon deposit. All spark 
plugs were tested and observed to emit spark. Additionally, each ignition lead fired, and both 
magnetos were functional with no anomalies noted. The engine™s valve train was determined to 
be intact, with no indication of push rod deformation. Both intake and exhaust valves were 
observed to open and close properly, with no anomalies noted. A check of the compression of 
each cylinder was confirmed. An examination of the carburetor™s venturi revealed no 
contamination. The air induction filter revealed impact damage but no signs of contamination. 
The carburetor heat control cable was intact. A fuel sample was obtained from the gascolator, 
with no evidence of contamination noted. The engine was subsequently started and run for 
about one minute with no anomalies noted. The engine was operated only at idle power, due to 
its precarious position as attached to the airframe. The reason for the reported partial loss of 
engine power was  undetermined. 
At 1653, the weather reporting facility at the HKO reported wind 180 degrees at 10 knots, 
visibility 10 miles, overcast clouds at 6,000 feet, temperature 27 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 
16 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.95 inches of mercury. 
A carburetor icing probability chart revealed that at the ambient temperature and dew point at 
the time of the accident favored serious carburetor icing at glide power.
