During an instructional flight, when the pilot receiving instruction was recovering from a 
practice power-off stall, the engine lost power. Multiple attempts by the flight instructor to 
restart the engine were unsuccessful, and she subsequently performed a forced landing to an 
open field. During the landing roll, the nose gear dug into the ground, and the airplane nosed 
over, coming to rest inverted. During a postaccident examination, after a substitute propeller 
was installed in place of the airplane™s damaged propeller, the engine started and operated 
normally, exhibiting normal pressures and acceleration. The reason for the loss of engine 
power was not determined.
A loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
On May 1, 2012, about 1315 mountain daylight time, a Cessna T210L, N210LH, was 
substantially damaged following a forced landing due to a loss of engine power about 7 nautical 
miles north of Elberta, Utah. The certified flight instructor (CFI) was not injured, and the 
private pilot sustained serious injuries. The local instructional flight was being operated in 
accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, and a flight plan was not filed. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The flight departed the 
Provo Municipal Airport (PVU), Provo, Utah, about 1245.
In a statement provided to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the CFI reported that the purpose of the instructional flight was to practice 
power-off stalls, of which 3 had been performed prior to the accident. The CFI stated that 
during the 4th stall as the pilot receiving instruction proceeded to recover from the stall, a loss 
of power was observed. At this time the CFI took control of the airplane and attempted to 
restart the engine by leaning the mixture, increasing the throttle, turning the boost pump on, 
switching fuel tanks, and pumping the throttle; the restart was not successful. She then called 
the PVU air traffic control tower, declared an emergency, and then began looking for a suitable 
field in which to make a forced landing. During the descent the CFI observed the manifold 
pressure gauge reading rise to about 25 inches but not the tachometer gauge. The CFI reported 
that she attempted to restart the engine all the way down to the flare prior to landing, but with 
no success. She subsequently landed with the landing gear extended in a flat and bumpy field. 
The airplane sustained substantial damage after
it rolled into a ravine and nosed over due to the nose landing gear digging into some soft dirt.
A postaccident examination of the airplane™s engine was overseen by a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) airworthiness aviation safety inspector. In a written statement provided 
to the IIC, the inspector reported that after a substitute propeller was installed, the fuel system 
was disconnected at the right wing root. An external fuel line was then connected from an 
external fuel tank and routed to the right wing root where it was connected to the aircraft fuel 
system. A normal engine start procedure was used, with no anomalies noted. After the engine 
was started a normal run up was accomplished from the idle to a medium power setting, but 
not to full power. This was due to the less than total secure nature of the airplane to the trailer 
on which the engine was positioned. Additionally, the operation of the boost pump was 
checked and showed normal indications and operation. The examination revealed no 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation of the engine.
The pilot provided a fuel receipt that was dated April 30, 2012, the day prior to the accident, 
which indicated that the airplane was topped off with 55.8 gallons of 100LL aviation fuel. The 
pilot reported to the FAA inspector that the airplane had not been flown between the time of 
the last refueling and the time of the accident flight.
At 1253, the weather reporting facility located at the Salt Lake International Airport (SLC), Salt 
Lake City, Utah, located about 40 miles north of the accident site, reported wind 140 degrees at 
4 knots, visibility 10 miles, few clouds at 4,500 feet, scattered clouds 7,000 feet, temperature 17 
degrees Celsius (C), dew point 8 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.86 inches of mercury.
According to the Cessna Pilots Association Tech Note No. 011, entitled ﬁVapor Lock Problems 
in 210 Series From 1964 to 1981 Model Year,ﬂ dated December 5, 1996, Cessna Aircraft 
Company issued service bulletin SE81-33, which called out for the modification of the fuel 
system so that the forward fuel feed line is teed into the rear fuel feed line to the reservoir tank. 
The intent of this modification was to greatly reduce vapor collection in the reservoir tank and 
associated vapor related problems. During the investigation it was not determined if the 
modification had been performed. The Tech Note further revealed that an FAA Airworthiness 
Directive 79-15-01, which dealt with the subject of fuel vapor in Cessna 210s, called for the 
installation of a placard on the instrument panel that contained specific instructions of what to 
do if major fuel flow fluctuations/power surges were encountered. The instructions are to turn 
the auxiliary fuel pump on and adjust the mixture, switch fuel tanks, and when the flow 
steadied to resume normal operations. The accident airplane was equipped with the mandated 
placard. The above referenced Tech Note, Service Bulletin, and Airworthiness Directive are 
each appended to this report in the public docket.
In a conversation with the author of the above referenced Tech Note, the author related that in 
order to recover from a vapor lock condition, all you would need to do is to switch to the other 
fuel tank and turn on the fuel boost pump. This would result in the engine starting in a few 
seconds.
