The helicopter, with the pilot and two passengers aboard, was hovering about 100 to 150 feet 
above ground level with a quartering tailwind. As the pilot turned the helicopter to the right, 
the helicopter started to spin, as reported by the pilot and several witnesses. He applied full left 
pedal and left forward cyclic, and slightly reduced power to stop the rotation. The pilot added 
that he sensed the loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE) and continued with the control inputs to 
fly out of the LTE. The pilot was unable to regain control of the helicopter before it impacted 
the ground. The pilot reported no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the 
helicopter that would have precluded normal operation. Based on the flight conditions at the 
time, the accident sequence is consistent with the helicopter encountering a LTE event.
The pilot™s inadequate compensation for the wind conditions during a hover maneuver, which 
resulted in a loss of tail rotor effectiveness. 
On May 2, 2012, about 0920 central daylight time, a Bell 206B Helicopter, N85RB, impacted 
terrain following a loss of control, near Valley Falls, Kansas. The commercial rated pilot and 
two passengers received minor injuries.  The helicopter sustained substantial damage. The 
helicopter was registered to a private individual and operated by Hawkeye Helicopters, Ottawa, 
KS.  Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 aerial observation flight.
 
Several witnesses reported the helicopter ﬁspinningﬂ before the crash.  The helicopter impacted 
the ground near a footpath, with trees on either side of the path.  The helicopter came to rest 
on its left side, with the tailboom and left skid separated from the fuselage. The pilot stated that 
the engine continued to run for a brief time after the accident.
The pilot reported that during a 100-150 agl (above ground level) hover, the helicopter started 
an uncommanded right turn. He applied left full pedal, left-forward cyclic, and a slight 
reduction of power, to stop the rotation.  The pilot added that he sensed the loss of tailrotor 
effectiveness (LTE), and continued with the control inputs to fly out of the LTE. Unable to get 
the helicopter to stop rotating, the pilot elected to enter an autorotation aiming for an open 
area, between a row of trees.
  
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector stated that the pilot reported 
that during an out-of-ground hover, the helicopter had a quartering tailwind.  The pilot 
initiated a right turn and the helicopter started to spin.  The inspector added that the accident 
pilot had recently received his rotorcraft-helicopter rating based on prior military experience; 
however, the pilot did not have much recent helicopter experience.  On the NTSB 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report, 6120.1 form, the pilot reported a total of 
2,398 flight hours in rotorcraft, with 2.1 hours in the accident make/model of helicopter.
FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 90-95, Unanticipated Right Yaw in Helicopters, dated February 
26, 1995 states that the loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE) is a critical, low-speed 
aerodynamic flight characteristic which could result in an uncommanded rapid yaw rate which 
does not subside of its own accord and, if not corrected, could result in the loss of aircraft 
control. It also states, "LTE is not related to a maintenance malfunction and may occur in 
varying degrees in all single main rotor helicopters at airspeeds less than 30 knots."
Paragraph 6 of the AC covered conditions under which LTE may occur. It states:
"Any maneuver which requires the pilot to operate in a high-power, low-airspeed environment 
with a left crosswind or tailwind creates an environment where unanticipated right yaw may 
occur."
Paragraph 9 of the AC states: "When maneuvering between hover and 30 knots: (1) Avoid 
tailwinds. If loss of translational lift occurs, it will result in an increased high power demand 
and an additional anti-torque requirement. (2) Avoid out of ground effect (OGE) hover and 
high power demand situations, such as low-speed downwind turns. (3) Be especially aware of 
wind direction and velocity when hovering in winds of about 8-12 knots (especially OGE). 
There are no strong indicators to the pilot of a reduction of translation lift. (4) Be aware that if 
considerable amount of left pedal is being maintained a sufficient amount of left pedal may not 
be available to counteract an unanticipated right yaw. (5) Be alert to changing aircraft flight 
and wind conditions which may be experienced when flying along ridge lines and around 
buildings. (6) Stay vigilant to power and wind conditions."
