Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Mayaguez, PR
Accident Number:
ERA10LA158
Date & Time:
03/03/2010, 1335 AST 
Registration:
N514PM
Aircraft:
MONROIG PEDRO J RANS S-6S
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The sport pilot was informed by a friend, who had landed at an intermediate airport along their 
planned route of flight, that there was a heavy crosswind. The friend informed the sport pilot to 
continue to their destination airport since he had sufficient fuel. The sport pilot elected to make 
an approach, which resulted in a go-around. The friend advised the sport pilot again to 
continue to the destination airport. The sport pilot entered a left traffic pattern and made 
another approach. The friend stated that the pilot™s flare over the runway was fast. The nose of 
the airplane was observed to pitch up to a 45-degree nose high attitude. The friend instructed 
the pilot via radio to add power, and he heard an increase in power. The airplane reached about 
75 feet above ground level and the airspeed decreased. The airplane stalled, the left wing 
dropped, the airplane entered a spin to the left and collided with the ground. Review of the 
pilot's log book revealed he had 48 total flight hours, of which 42.75 hours were with a flight 
instructor. The pilot had 5.25 hours as pilot-in-command. Examination of the airframe, flight 
controls, engine assembly, and associated components revealed no anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The sport pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed during landing in crosswind conditions 
resulting in an aerodynamic stall.
Findings
Aircraft
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6ERA10LA158
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 3, 2010, at 1335 Atlantic standard time, an experimental amateur-built Monroig 
Rans S-6S, N514PM, experienced a loss of control during landing at Eugenio Mario de Hostos 
Airport (TJMZ), Mayaguez, Puerto Rico. Visual meteorological conditional prevailed and no 
flight plan was filed. The personal flight was operated in accordance with 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. The certificated sport pilot was killed. The flight originated from Patillas, 
Puerto Rico, at 1100.
A witness and friend of the pilot stated they had picked up another airplane and were flying 
both airplanes to Arecibo, Puerto Rico. They decided not to cross over the mountains and 
decided to land at Mayaguez, Puerto, Rico. The witness added he crossed the airfield from 
south to north, for a left downwind entry to runway 9. He overheard a Caravan pilot state on 
the radio that there was a heavy crosswind from the south and the landing was going to be 
difficult. The Caravan landed and the witness made an approach and landed.
The witness called his friend on the radio and informed him about the crosswind, then advised 
him that since he had plenty of fuel, to continue to Arecibo. The accident pilot stated he would 
make an approach, which ended up in a go-around. The pilot entered left downwind for a 
second approach and the witness again told the pilot to go to Arecibo. The pilot elected to 
continue with the second approach.
The pilot's flare over the runway was fast. The nose of the airplane pitched up more than 45 
degrees. The airplane climbed to about 75 feet above ground level and the airspeed was 
observed to decrease. The airplane stalled, the left wing and nose dropped down, and the 
airplane entered a spin to the left. The witness instructed the pilot over the radio to add power 
and he heard an increase in power. The airplane collided with the ground in a nose down, left 
wing low attitude and came to rest inverted. The airplane received structural damage to the 
cabin area and both wings.
 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot age 55, held a sport pilot certificate issued on September 4, 2009. The pilot held a 
third-class medical certificate issued on August 30, 2006, with the restriction, "must wear 
corrective lenses." The pilot indicated on his application for the medical certificate that he had 
2 total flight hours. Review of the pilot™s logbook revealed he had 48 total flight hours, of which 
42.75 hours was with a flight instructor. The pilot had logged 25 hours in the RANS S-6S, of 
which 5.25 hours were as pilot-in-command. The pilot had flown 8 hours in the last 90 days 
and 5 hours in the last 30 days preceding the accident.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The two-seat single-engine airplane, serial number 11031532, was issued a special 
airworthiness certificate on October 19, 2005. Its maximum gross weight is 1200 pounds. It is 
powered by a Rotax 912 UL, 80-horsepower engine, and equipped with a Sensensich fixed 
pitch composite propeller. Review of the aircraft logbooks revealed the last condition 
inspection was conducted on May 14, 2009; however no tachometer time was recorded in the 
logbook. The total time flown since the condition inspection could not be determined. The 
Page 3 of 6ERA10LA158
tachometer at the crash site indicated 261 total hours. According to the witness to the accident 
site, both of their airplanes were topped off with automotive gasoline before departing Patillas, 
Puerto Rico, on the accident flight.
 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1252 TJMZ surface weather observation was: wind 160 degrees at 10 knots, gusting 20 
knots, visibility 10 miles, broken clouds at 3,000 feet, temperature 31 degrees Celsius, dew 
point temperature 22 degrees Celsius, and altimeter 29.90 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Initial examination of the crash site revealed the airplane collided with the ground in a nose 
down left wing low attitude and came to rest on a heading of 170 degrees magnetic. The upper 
and lower engine cowling was separated. The propeller assembly remained attached the 
propeller crankshaft flange. Both propeller blades had separated from the propeller hub. The 
engine assembly was pushed up, aft, and to the left. The engine firewall was buckled and 
displaced to the right. The nose wheel assembly remained attached to the airframe.
 
The forward windscreen and overhead windscreen were broken. The cabin area was damaged. 
The instrument panel was pushed inward, downward and up. The magneto switch was in the 
both position. The throttle was full forward. The fuel valve was on. The right fuel tank was 
ruptured and the left fuel tank was not ruptured. The left fuel tank was about three-fourths full 
of fuel. Both fuel caps had a tight seal. Fuel was present in both carburetors. Both left and right 
cabin seats were displaced aft and to the right. The pilot's seatbelt and shoulder harness was in 
use. Continuity of the flight controls was confirmed to all flight control surfaces. The main 
landing gear remained attached to the airframe.
The right wing remained attached at the wing root and was pushed aft. The leading edge of the 
right wing was damaged at the wing root, extending outboard to the wingtip. The wing struts 
remained attached at the wing and at the fuselage. The right aileron remained attached at all 
attachment points. The right flap remained attached at all attachment point and was retracted. 
The empennage aft of the pilot™s compartment was intact and not damaged.
 The left wing remained attached at the wing root. The leading edge of the left wing was 
buckled at the wing root. The wing struts remained attached at the wing and at the fuselage. 
The left aileron remained attached at all attachment points. The left flap remained attached at 
all attachment point and was retracted.
 
Examination of the engine assembly was conducted on March 23, 2010, in the presence of a 
Federal Aviation Administration inspector at Mayaguez, Puerto Rico. No mechanical problems 
were found during the engine examination.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Instituto de Ciencias Forenses, San Juan, Puerto Rico, conducted a postmortem 
examination of the sport pilot on March 4, 2010. The cause of death was severe physical 
trauma. The Forensic Toxicology Research Section, FAA, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma performed 
Page 4 of 6ERA10LA158
postmortem toxicology of specimens from the pilot. The specimens were negative for carbon 
monoxide, cyanide, ethanol, or drugs.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Review of the RANS, INC. Pilot Operating Handbook, Section 4 Performance, Stall Speeds 
indicates at 1200 pounds, with flaps up, at a 0-degree bank angle the airplane will stall at 43 
miles per hour. At a 45-degree bank angle, the airplane will stall at 51 miles per hour. At a 60-
degree angle of bank, the airplane will stall at 61 miles per hour. The maximum altitude loss 
during stall recovery is approximately 75 feet.
History of Flight
Landing-flare/touchdown
Abrupt maneuver
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Sport Pilot
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/30/2006
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
48 hours (Total, all aircraft), 25 hours (Total, this make and model), 5 hours (Pilot In Command, 
all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA10LA158
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MONROIG PEDRO J
Registration:
N514PM
Model/Series:
RANS S-6S 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental Light Sport
Serial Number:
11031532
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/14/2009, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
261 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
912
Registered Owner:
RODRIGUEZ RICHARD
Rated Power:
80 hp
Operator:
RODRIGUEZ RICHARD
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TJMZ, 28 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1252 AST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 20 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.9 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Patillas, PR (X65)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Mayaguez, PR (TJMZ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1100 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Eugenio Maria de Hostos (TJMZ)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
28 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
09
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4998 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Go Around
Page 6 of 6ERA10LA158
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
18.255556, -67.148333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Carrol A Smith
Adopted Date:
10/21/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Ismael O De Jesus; FAA/FSDO Miami; Mirimar, FL
Eric Tucker; Kodiak Research; Nassau,
Publish Date:
10/21/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75434
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
