The aircraft experienced a loss of engine power on the initial climb. The pilot reported the low 
pressure fuel light illuminated, and the fuel pressure gauge read near zero. The pilot 
manipulated the fuel selector through all tank positions with the electric fuel boost pump 
switch in the 'on' position, but fuel pressure was not restored. Subsequently, the airplane 
collided with trees dring a forced landing on mountainous terrain about 2.3 miles southwest of 
the airport. The airplane had been modified with the installation of an auxiliary ferry fuel tank, 
which was only to be used during cruise flight. Fuel flow to the engine from the ferry tank was 
controlled by a selector valve handle, which had two positions, off and on. During a postcrash 
examination, the selector valve handle was found positioned a few degrees off the closed 
position. The ferry tank fuel line received suction whenever the mechanical or electrical fuel 
pumps are operating. When the valve was set at least 5 degrees off the closed position, air 
entered the fuel line to the engine. The valve was located near the right foot of the right seat 
occupant. This airplane was normally to be flown from the right seat. 
the pilot inadvertently allowed the ferry tank fuel selector to be in (or to be moved to) a 
partially open position before or during takeoff, which allowed air to enter the fuel system lines 
and result in fuel starvation.  The location of the valve in the cockpit allowed the ferry tank fuel 
selector handle to be susceptible to inadvertent movement by the pilot's foot. 
 On November 2, 1995, at 1450 hours mountain standard time, an Agusta Spa F.260D, 
N404FD, collided with trees and mountainous terrain during a forced landing after takeoff 
from the Grand Canyon National Park Airport, Grand Canyon, Arizona.  The aircraft was 
destroyed, and the airline transport certificated pilot received serious injuries.  The restricted 
category aircraft was being operated as a ferry flight by Valhalla Aviation, Inc. of  Los Angeles, 
California.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  A VFR flight plan had been filed for the 
flight which originated from the Grand Canyon around 1440. 
The aircraft had taken off from runway 21 and was on initial climb out when the pilot reported 
to the controller at the airport traffic control tower (ATCT) that the aircraft was losing power 
and altitude.  The aircraft impacted mountainous terrain 2.3 miles southwest of the airport, 
striking approximately 18 pine trees in the process.      
The pilot later reported that on climb out the low pressure fuel light illuminated.  When he 
checked the fuel pressure gauge he noticed it was reading near zero.  He switched the fuel 
selector from the left main tank to the right main tank.  Fuel pressure was not restored.  The 
pilot then verified that the fuel boost pump was in the on position.  As a last resort he switched 
the fuel selector to the right tip tank position. 
The pilot stated that he had not taken on any fuel after landing at the Grand Canyon Airport.  
His last refueling stop was at Executive Aviation in Albuquerque, New Mexico.  On October 26, 
1995, the airplane had been ferried from London, England, to the United States.
An inspection of the aircraft revealed its fuel system consisted of five fuel tanks.  Recovery 
personnel reported that the two main tanks each contained 13 gallons of fuel.  The two tip 
tanks each contained about 10 gallons of fuel, and the temporary ferry tank contained 32 
gallons of fuel.  The fuel shutoff valve was found in the open position.  The fuel system was 
inspected for continuity and obstructions in the lines and vents. 
The main fuel system was equipped with a fuel selector that was installed on the aft side of the 
throttle quadrant.  The fuel selector handle was found positioned to the right main tank.  The 
fuel selector was inspected for binding, misalignment, and leaks. The fuel system was also 
equipped with a suction type electrical fuel boost pump and an engine-driven mechanical fuel 
pump.  
The temporary ferry tank had been installed pursuant to an FAA Form 337, dated October 12, 
1995.  In pertinent part, the FAA Form 337 listed the following operating limitations:  (1) All 
takeoffs and landings are to be made on the main wing tanks; and (2) The auxiliary fuel system 
should be used in cruise flight only.  
Ferry tank fuel flow was controlled by a tank selector valve which was installed a few inches 
above the floor and along the right forward side of the cabin.  The valve is a two position ball 
valve which is either closed or open.  The ferry tank valve handle was found a few degrees from 
the fully closed (off) position.  The valve assembly did not incorporate a positive detent in 
either position.  
The ferry tank fuel line is independent of the main fuel selector in that suction to the ferry tank 
line exists whenever the mechanical or electrical fuel pumps are operating.  During a further 
examination of the valve, it was found that the valve would allow air to enter the fuel line if the 
selector handle was positioned as little as 5 degrees from the full off position. The installed 
position of the valve places it in close proximity to the right foot of an occupant climbing in or 
out of the right seat.  The pilot in this aircraft flies from the right seat.  
In preparation for an engine test run, fuel was temporarily supplied to the engine through the 
right main fuel line.  The electric fuel pump was powered and produced about 6 psi.  No leaks 
were detected during its operation.  The engine was then started and ran normally.  With the 
electric fuel pump in the off position, the engine-driven fuel pump sustained a fuel pressure of 
about 4 psi.  The low fuel pressure light was observed to operate during the run.  Because of the 
damaged propeller and resulting vibration, engine speed was limited to 1,200 rpm.  No 
discrepancies were identified during the aircraft inspection and subsequent engine run.
