As the flight approached an area in which preceding flights had reported moderate turbulence, 
the flight crew turned on the fasten seatbelt sign, announced the impending turbulence to the 
cabin, and instructed the flight attendants to be seated. While the fasten seatbelt sign was on, a 
female, English-speaking passenger, left her seat and went to the lavatory despite a verbal 
warning from a flight attendant about the eminent turbulence. As the passenger was exiting the 
lavatory the flight encountered moderate turbulence and the passenger fell to the floor. The 
passenger complained of pain in her right leg. Cabin and flight crew personnel stabilized her 
leg and helped her to a nearby seat. Post-flight medical examination revealed that the 
passenger had suffered multiple fractures of the right leg and foot.  
the failure of the passenger to comply with the fasten seatbelt signs and the verbal directives of 
the flight and cabin crew. 
 On November 1, 1995, at 1515 UTC, one passenger was seriously injured onboard United 
Airlines flight 830, during a moderate turbulence encounter over the Pacific Ocean.  The 
aircraft, a Boeing 747-122, N4714U, was operated by United Airlines, Inc., as a regularly 
scheduled non-stop international passenger flight from Tokyo, Japan, to Honolulu, Hawaii.  
The accident occurred in international airspace between latitudes 28 - 33 degrees north and at 
longitude 173 degrees west, while the aircraft was in cruise at flight level 350.  The aircraft was 
not damaged.  The remaining 279 passengers, 18 flight attendants, and flight deck crew of 
three were not injured.  The flight originated from Narita Airport, Tokyo, Japan, at 1037 UTC 
and subsequently landed at Honolulu, Hawaii, at 1721 UTC.
Reports provided by the flight crew to the United Airlines Flight Safety Department stated that 
at the time of the accident the aircraft was in clear air.  Convective activity associated with a 
front was visible in the distance ahead and on radar.  The flight crew characterized the radar 
return as a solid yellow band across their flight course with an area of green return to the 
south.  The flight crew elected to alter course to the south and follow a preceding Japan 
Airlines flight through the area of lighter returns.  In response to a report of moderate 
turbulence from the preceding aircraft, the flight crew turned on the fasten seat belt sign about 
1500 hours.  Ten minutes later, because of turbulence, the cabin attendants were instructed to 
take their seats.  
During the period that the flight attendants were seated and the flight was encountering light 
turbulence, a female passenger in the upper deck lounge left her seat to go to the lavatory.  
According to reports by the flight attendants and other passenger witnesses, the flight 
attendants called to the English-speaking, American passenger to remain seated, but she 
declined and continued to the lavatory.  While returning to her seat, moderate turbulence was 
encountered and the passenger fell in the aisle.  The passenger complained of pain in her right 
leg and flight attendants, assisted by the second officer, immobilized her leg prior to helping 
her to a nearby seat.  Two medical doctors aboard the flight talked with the passenger and 
paramedic personnel met the flight in Honolulu.  Subsequent examination revealed multiple 
fractures of the passenger's right leg.
