The helicopter was being flown from a fishing vessel during a fish spotting operation. The pilot 
reported that shortly after liftoff from the ship, he experienced a hydraulic failure. The seas 
were reported as high, and the pilot did not feel he could safely return to the pitching and 
rolling ship deck without hydraulic assist. He decided to land the float equipped helicopter in 
the water next to the ship. While hovering just above the water, the spotter unexpectedly 
jumped out of the helicopter without permission from the pilot. This resulted in a sudden 
imbalance, and the pilot lost control of the helicopter. The helicopter then rolled over, collided 
with the water, and sank. 
failure of the pilot to maintain lateral control of the helicopter, while hovering in preparation 
for a precautionary landing next to a ship at sea.  Factors relating to the accident were: the 
passenger's premature evacuation from the helicopter, and the resultant lateral imbalance of 
the helicopter as the passenger jumped. 
 On November 2, 1995, about 1000 hours local ship time, a Bell 47G-4A helicopter, N99138, 
collided with the Pacific Ocean about 800 miles east of Guam, MP, while attempting a 
precautionary return to the tuna fishing vessel MV Milagros Z.  The aircraft was operated by Z 
Fishing Company of Pita, Guam, MP, and was engaged in fish spotting operations.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.  The helicopter was 
destroyed.  Neither the certificated commercial pilot nor the spotter was injured.  The flight 
originated from the ship about 5 minutes prior to the accident.
The pilot reported to his insurance company adjuster that shortly after liftoff he experienced a 
hydraulic failure.  The seas were reported as high, and the pilot did not feel he could safely 
return to the pitching and rolling ship deck without hydraulic assist.  He decided to land in the 
water next to the ship.  While hovering just above the water, the spotter jumped out of the 
helicopter without permission from the pilot.  The sudden imbalance caused the pilot to lose 
control of the helicopter and it rolled over, collided with the water and sank.
The pilot did not report the accident to either the Safety Board or to the FAA.  The accident was 
reported by the insurance company adjuster on March 16, 1996.  To date, the pilot has not 
responded to repeated written requests to complete a Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, 
NTSB Form 6120.1/2.
