The student pilot took off, with full fuel in the left tank and 1/4 fuel in the right tank, to practice 
touch-and-go landings at a nearby airport. He was returning to Will Rogers World Airport 
approximately 1 hour later when the engine 'quit' approximately 5 miles west of the 
destination. He reports that he flew the whole flight with the fuel selector on the left fuel tank. 
He restarted the engine, but it 'quit' again about 1 mile west of runway 35L. The pilot further 
stated that he never used carburetor heat. During the landing roll in a field, the airplane hit a 
'small gully,' nosed over, and came to rest in the inverted position. According to the carburetor 
icing probability chart the weather conditions at the time of the accident were conducive to the 
formation of carburetor ice. Additionally, the engine was test run and found to have no 
mechanical anomalies. Repeated attempts to obtain a completed Pilot/Operator Report of the 
accident from the student pilot were unsuccessful. 
The student pilot's failure to use carburetor heat resulting in loss of engine power due to 
carburetor icing. A factor was the lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing. 
 On November 2, 1995, at 1733 central standard time, a Cessna 172, N6364E, registered to and 
operated by a private owner under Title 14 CFR Part 91 was substantially damaged during a 
forced landing following a power loss near Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The student pilot was 
not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight that originated from 
Will Rogers World Airport approximately 1 hour before the accident.  No flight plan was filed.  
During a personal interview, conducted by an FAA inspector, the pilot reported that he left Will 
Rogers World Airport with a fully fueled left tank and a 1/4 fueled right tank and flew to 
Will Rogers World Airport when the engine "quit" approximately 5 miles west of the 
destination.  He stated that he flew the entire flight with the fuel selector on the left tank.  He 
restarted the engine, but it "quit" again about 1 mile west of runway 35L at Will Rogers World 
Airport.  The pilot further stated that he never used carburetor heat.  During the landing roll in 
a field, the airplane hit a "small gully," nosed over, and came to rest in the inverted position.
Evaluation of the weather, at the time of the accident, revealed a temperature of 39 degrees and 
dew point of 27 degrees.  The enclosed icing probability curve chart indicates that this float 
type carbureted engine was being operated in a region of serious carburetor icing conditions.  
Additionally, on November 8, 1995, the airplane's engine was test run and found to have no 
mechanical anomalies.  See attached manufacture's report. 
Repeated attempts to obtain a completed Pilot/Operator Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, from 
the student pilot were unsuccessful.
