The certificated commercial pilot and six passengers were departing a remote airstrip on a 
scheduled commuter flight. Snow showers were present in the area.  The pilot loaded the 
passengers and waited on the ground for conditions to improve.  Prior to departure, the pilot 
removed snow from the windshield and the leading edge of the wing.  After a ground time of 
about 40 minutes, the pilot began a takeoff on a runway that sloped uphill about 2 percent.  
The airplane did not become airborne until the pilot added full flaps.  The airplane lifted off but 
could not climb out of ground effect.  A small hill was ahead of the pilot and she began to 
retract the flaps.  The airplane collided with rising terrain about 1/4 mile north of the departure 
end of the runway.  A pilot/witness indicated that after the accident, he walked to the accident 
site and observed snow on the upper surface of the wings. 
The pilot's inadequate planning/decision, improper use of the flaps, and inadequate removal of 
snow/frost from the wings of the airplane.  An upsloping runway and snow conditions were 
factors in the accident. 
 On November 3, 1995, about 1647 Alaska standard time, a wheel equipped Cessna 207, 
N88BC, collided with terrain during takeoff at Toksook Bay, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated as flight number 1216 on a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country scheduled 
passenger flight under Title 14 CFR Part 135 when the accident occurred.  The airplane, 
operated by Mark Air Express, Anchorage, Alaska, sustained substantial damage.  The 
certificated commercial pilot and 6 passengers, were not injured. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.  VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The operator reported that the pilot was departing runway 33 for a flight to Bethel, Alaska.  The 
pilot and other pilot witnesses reported that snow showers were present in the area.  The pilot 
arrived at Toksook Bay about 1609.  She loaded the passengers and waited on the ground for 
conditions to improve.  The pilot indicated that prior to departure, she removed snow from the 
windshield and the leading edge of the wing.  During the takeoff roll, the airplane did not 
become airborne until the pilot added full flaps.  The airplane lifted off but could not climb out 
of ground effect.  A small hill was ahead of the pilot and she began to retract the flaps.  The 
airplane collided with rising terrain about 1/4 mile north of the departure end of the runway.  
The airplane received damage to the left main landing gear, left wing, nose gear and propeller.
A pilot/witness indicated that after the accident, he walked to the accident site and observed 
snow on the upper surface of the wings.  The Alaska airport/facility directory supplement 
indicates in part:..."Runway uneven grade, deep dip 800 feet from threshold of runway 33.  
Runway 15-33 slopes down 2 percent to the south end"...
