During rotation, on the takeoff roll, the right engine of a Boeing 737-3B7, ingested a bird.  
Several fan blades broke; however, there was no uncontained failure of the blades. There was 
no fire and the engine continued to run until shut down by the flight crew, after which the pilot 
returned for a single-engine landing. Feathers recovered from the engine belonged to a bird 
with a weight between 2.7 to 6.4 pounds, and a average weight of 3.8 pounds. The engine 
performed within the limits of its certification criteria. 
a bird strike during takeoff, which resulted in failure of several fan blades in the right engine 
and a partial loss of engine power. 
 On November 2, 1995, at 1828 eastern standard time, a Boeing 737-3B7, N373US, operated by 
USAir as flight 1669, struck a bird in the number 2 engine, during takeoff from the Portland 
International Jetport, Portland, Maine.  The occupants were not injured, and the airplane 
received minor damage.  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and the scheduled, 
domestic, passenger/cargo flight was operated on an Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) flight plan 
under 14 CFR 121.
     The CAPTAIN'S REPORT OF NON-STANDARD OR IRREGULAR OPERATION stated:
     At takeoff rotation we experienced an apparent bird      strike in the #2 engine followed by a 
loud bang &      excessive engine vibration.  #2 engine was shut down,      an emergency was 
declared & emergency procedures were      followed ending with an uneventful single engine      
landing.
     According to the Powerplant Group Chairman Report, conducted by a Safety Board 
Investigator from RE-40, Aviation Engineering Services:
     ...The fuselage adjacent to the No. 2 engine did not      have any apparent damage from 
engine debris.  An      inspection of the entire airplane did not show any      indications of other 
bird impacts or damage...There      were no penetrations through any of the engine      
casings...Feathers and other organic debris identified      to be bird remains were found in the 
fan, compressor,      and combustor.  There was no indication of any      preexisting engine 
damage...Feather pieces...[were      identified] as a female Common Eider (Somateria      
mollissima).  The weight of the female Common Eider can      range from 42 to 103 ounces (2.7 
to 6.4 pound) with the      average weight being 61 ounces (3.8 pounds)...The      airworthiness 
certification requirements for bird      ingestion into a turbine engine...states, in part that      the 
engine must demonstrate that the ingestion of a 4-      pound bird may not cause the engine to 
catch fire,      burst or release hazardous fragments through the engine      case, generate loads 
greater than the engine mount      attachment ultimate load limits, or lose the capability      of 
being shut down...the fractured fan blades, and the      gearbox mount pad adapter were 
returned to the NTSB      Materials laboratory to determine the mod of fracture.       
Examination showed all the fractures were due to       overstress, with no evidence of 
progressive cracking...
