Page 1 of 2WPR17FA117
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Ventura, CA
Accident Number:
WPR17FA117
Date & Time:
06/01/2017, 1157 PDT 
Registration:
N3683C
Aircraft:
CESSNA 180
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On June 1, 2017, about 1157 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 180 airplane, N3683C, experienced 
an inflight break up and was destroyed when it impacted terrain about
 
7 miles northeast of 
Ventura, California. The private pilot was fatally injured. The airplane was registered to and 
operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 (CFR) Part 
91. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed. The 
local personal flight departed Santa Paula Airport (SZP), Santa Paula, California about 1110. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Investigator-in-Charge (IIC) and 
representatives examined the wreckage on June 2, 2017 at the accident site. The debris path 
was about 1½ miles in length, oriented north to south, over mountainous terrain, which 
included areas of dense vegetation. All major components of the airplane were identified in the 
debris path, except the right elevator.
 
The fuselage, located near the top of a hill, was the first 
identified section of wreckage located on the debris field. The inboard left wing was located 
about 278 ft. southeast of the fuselage; the empennage, including the rudder and left elevator, 
was located about 400 ft. south-southeast of the fuselage; the right wing was located about 402 
ft. south-southeast of the fuselage; and the engine and propeller were located about 499 ft. 
southwest of the fuselage. Additional components located along the debris path included 
fragments of both wings, elevator counterweights, and the cabin doors.
Several witnesses located near the accident site heard a loud sound. One witness stated that 
prior to the loud noise, the airplane's engine sounded like it was powering up.
 
Another witness 
stated that after hearing the noise, he looked up and observed the airplane spinning towards 
the ground, and the engine and both wings had separated from the airplane. He added that the 
tail section remained attached to the fuselage, when he first observed the airplane spinning to 
the ground.
The airplane was recovered to a secure facility for further examination.
Page 2 of 2WPR17FA117
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N3683C
Model/Series:
180 UNDESIGNAT
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OXR
Observation Time:
1151 PDT
Distance from Accident Site:
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 13°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2300 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
7 knots / , 240°
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
29.89 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
SANTA PAULA, CA (SZP)
Destination: 
SANTA PAULA, CA (SZP)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
  (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Albert P Nixon
Additional Participating Persons:
Frank Motter; Federal Aviation Administration; Van Nuys, CA
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
