Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
McHenry, MD
Accident Number:
NYC07LA021
Date & Time:
11/02/2006, 1210 EST 
Registration:
N7953F
Aircraft:
Cessna 150F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot serviced the airplane with fuel about 2 flight hours prior to the accident flight.  
During the preflight inspection prior to the accident flight, the pilot did not visually verify the 
fuel level, as he had done prior to the previous flight, but assumed about 7 gallons of fuel 
remained in the fuel tanks.  About 1 minute after takeoff the engine began to "sputter," and the 
pilot made an off-airport forced landing.  During the postaccident recovery efforts, less than 
one gallon of fuel was drained from each of the airplane's fuel tanks.  When fuel was added, the 
engine was successfully started and run.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inadequate preflight inspection, which resulted in fuel exhaustion and a loss of 
engine power during takeoff-initial climb.
Page 2 of 6NYC07LA021
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. (C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6NYC07LA021
Factual Information
On November 2, 2006, at 1210 eastern standard time, a Cessna 150F, N7953F, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing near McHenry, Maryland.  The certificated 
private pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan 
was filed for the flight, which departed Garrett County Airport (2G4), Oakland, Maryland, 
destined for Grant County Airport (W99), Petersburg, West Virginia.  The personal flight was 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
During a telephone interview, and during an interview conducted by a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot recounted the events that transpired prior to and 
during the accident flight.  He stated that the airplane was based at Pottstown/Limerick 
Airport (PTW), Pottstown, Pennsylvania.  Prior to departing from Pottstown, the pilot serviced 
the airplane with 18.9 gallons of fuel.  The pilot stated that 6 gallons were added to the left fuel 
tank, and that the right fuel tank was "topped off."  He then verified the fuel quantity by 
visually examining the level in the fuel tanks.  The pilot routinely flew from Pottstown to 
Garrett County, a flight which typically lasted about 2 hours.  The flight immediately prior to 
the accident flight took slightly longer than 2 hours, with no mechanical abnormalities noted 
during the flight.  The airplane was not serviced with fuel after that flight, or prior to the 
accident flight.  
On the day of the accident, the pilot performed a preflight inspection of the airplane, which did 
not include a visual verification of the fuel level, and completed a run up check of the engine 
prior to takeoff.  He assumed, based on past flying experience, about 7 gallons of fuel remained 
in the tanks.  The takeoff proceeded normally; however, about 1 minute later the engine began 
to "sputter."  The pilot notified the airport via the Unicom frequency that the airplane was 
having engine problems, and turned back towards the airport.  He then realized that he would 
not be able to make it back to the airport, and chose a field to perform a forced landing to.  
During the landing, the right wing of the airplane struck several small trees and a fence, 
resulting in substantial damage.
FAA inspectors examined the airplane at the accident site.  According to the inspectors, when 
power was applied to the fuel quantity indicating system, the right fuel tank gauge displayed an 
empty indication, and the left fuel gauge was slightly below the empty indication.  Damage to 
the right fuel tank sump precluded any sampling, and fuel drained from the left fuel tank sump 
was "good."  No fuel could be drained from the gascolator.  The airplane was subsequently 
recovered on November 11, 2006.  During the recovery efforts, less than one gallon of fuel was 
drained from each fuel tank.  When fuel was added, the engine was successfully started and 
run.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single engine land.  His most 
recent FAA third class medical certificate was issued on August 26, 2006.  The pilot reported to 
the Safety Board that he had approximately 1,100 total hours of flight experience at the time of 
the accident.
The weather conditions reported at Greater Cumberland Regional Airport (CBE), Cumberland, 
Maryland, about 27 nautical miles east, at 1153, included clear skies, winds from 290 degrees at 
9 knots, gusting to 21 knots, temperature 44 degrees Fahrenheit, dewpoint 27 degrees 
Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting of 30.16 inches of mercury.
Page 4 of 6NYC07LA021
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2006
Flight Time:
1100 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1000 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N7953F
Model/Series:
150F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15064053
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1680 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-200A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC07LA021
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CBE, 775 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
27 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 21 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.16 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / -3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Oakland, MD (2G4)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Petersburg, WV (W99)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1205 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
39.564722, -79.375556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Luke Schiada
Adopted Date:
09/14/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
David Gary; FAA/FSDO; Baltimore, MD
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC07LA021
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
