Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Kalispell, MT
Accident Number:
SEA07FA014
Date & Time:
11/02/2006, 2055 MST 
Registration:
N407KH
Aircraft:
Bell 407
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning - Air Medical (Medical Emergency)
Analysis 
While conducting EMS operations the helicopter sustained substantial damage after a loss of 
engine power, autorotation, and forced landing.  The pilot reported hearing a loud bang, 
followed by the engine spooling down.  The helicopter collided with a chain link fence during 
the forced landing sequence.  Postaccident inspection of the engine revealed an uncontained 
second stage turbine wheel burst (on-speed) as a result of oil starvation and subsequent 
bearing failure.  During the onsite examination, fresh oil residue was noted along the right side 
of the helicopter's fuselage, tail boom assembly and leading edges of the tail rotor blades.  Oil 
wetting and staining was also observed on the concrete hangar apron, and a trail of fresh oil 
extended from apron to the helipad where the helicopter departed.  Additionally, onsite 
investigators noted that the oil pressure transducer line coupling B-nut (near the foreword 
bulkhead) was found two flats loose, and four complete rotations from complete separation.  
Evidence of oil loss, sooting and localized fire damage was observed in the area of the fitting 
union.  The accident flight was the helicopter's first flight following the completion of a 
maintenance action item in the general area of the aforementioned fitting.  Following the 
maintenance action, an engine run (ground) and post run inspection was completed by a line 
pilot.  No discrepancies were noted and the helicopter was returned to service.  The mechanic 
who performed the maintenance action was not present during the post run inspection.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
On-speed failure of the second stage turbine wheel as the result of engine oil starvation.  The 
lack of maintenance oversight was a contributing factor.
Page 2 of 10SEA07FA014
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) TURBINE ASSEMBLY,TURBINE WHEEL - BURST
2. (F) FLUID,OIL - STARVATION
3. (F) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
4. TURBINE ASSEMBLY,SHAFT BEARING - FAILURE
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
5. OBJECT - FENCE
Page 3 of 10SEA07FA014
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On November 2, 2006, at 2055 mountain standard time, a Bell 407 helicopter, N407KH, 
sustained substantial damage during a forced landing, subsequent to a loss of engine power 
(uncontained failure), shortly after departure from the Kalispell Regional Medical Center, 
Kalispell, Montana.  The helicopter was operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) emergency 
medical services (EMS) positioning flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91.  Of the three occupants 
aboard, the certificated commercial helicopter pilot and two medical crewmembers were not 
injured. The helicopter was owned and operated by Kalispell Regional Medical Center, 
Kalispell, Montana.  Dark night visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company VFR 
flight following procedures were in effect.  The flight originated about 2051 from the hospital's 
helipad, and was en route to Bigfork, Montana (approximately 12 miles east-southeast).  The 
helicopter sustained substantial damage to the tail boom assembly during the landing 
sequence.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge (November 2), and in a subsequent written statement, the pilot of the accident 
helicopter reported that approximately 1 minute after takeoff (during the initial climb) from 
the hospital's helipad, the flight paramedic, who was seated in the left front seat, informed him 
(the pilot) that the "ENG [engine] CHIP" light on the caution light panel had just illuminated.  
The pilot stated that after confirming the caution light "I immediately flipped my goggles [the 
pilot was wearing night vision goggles- NVG's] up and turned the helicopter around and 
headed back to hospital because it was the closest available pad and it was illuminated."  The 
pilot stated that the engine started making "weird growling noises" and began to "surge" as he 
turned a 1/4-mile final for the helipad.  The pilot reported that the growling noise and surging 
was followed by a loud "bang" which emanated from the rear of the helicopter.  The pilot stated 
that he lowered the collective and entered an autorotation.    
The helicopter touched down at the perimeter of the intended helipad and collided with a chain 
link fence.  The helicopter slid approximately 25 feet before coming to rest.  The pilot 
completed an emergency "shutdown," and he and the two crewmembers exited the helicopter 
without injuries.  After exiting the helicopter, the pilot and staff from the hospital's emergency 
department (ED) extinguished a small fire in the helicopters engine bay.             
The purpose of the flight was to pick-up a medical patient in Bigfork and return to the 
departure hospital.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The pilot, seated in the right front seat, the flight paramedic, seated in the left front seat and 
the flight nurse, seated in the right rear forward facing seat, were not injured.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot-in-command held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land, 
helicopter-rotorcraft and helicopter instrument ratings.  
The pilot's most recent FAA second-class medical certificate was issued on October 10, 2006.  
The medical certificate carried no limitations or waivers.   
Page 4 of 10SEA07FA014
According to the Pilot/Operator accident report (Form 6120.1/2), completed by the operator, 
the pilot's total time was 3,000 hours; 2,430 hours (PIC) rotorcraft and 500 hours total PIC 
time in Bell 407's.  
The report indicated that the pilot had flown 43 hours in the 90-day period preceding the 
accident, of which 31 hours were in a Bell 407.
The pilot completed a 5-day factory ground and flight training course for the Bell 407 at the 
Bell Helicopter Training Academy in August of 2006.
On March 31, 2006, the pilot completed initial training and testing requirements prescribed by 
FAR 135.293 and 135.295.
The pilot began his employment as a pilot with Kalispell Regional Medical Center in March of 
2006.
HELICOPTER INFORMATION
The helicopter, a Bell 407, serial number 53395, was manufactured in 1999.  The single-engine 
helicopter was powered by a Rolls-Royce model 250-C47B turbo shaft engine (serial number 
CAE 847433).  The helicopter was configured and equipped for EMS operations. 
The helicopter was maintained in accordance with an Approved Airworthiness Inspection 
Program (AAIP) on a continuous basis.  The helicopter's last inspection, a phase 3 inspection, 
in accordance with the AAIP, was completed on September 15, 2006.  The helicopter's total 
time at inspection was 3,138 hours.  At the time of the accident, the helicopter's total time was 
3,213.9 hours.
According to the operator, the helicopter was removed from service on the day of the accident 
to facilitate the completion of Bell Helicopter Technical Bulletin (TB) 407-05-63 "Rotor Brake 
Modification Kit 407-704-022-101, Installation Of."  The TB outlines the procedures and 
parameters for replacement/modification of the rotor brake assembly.  According to the 
manufacture, installation of the brake modification kit will minimize wear associated with 
vibration.  The Hobbs time at the completion of the maintenance action was 3,213.8.  
At the completion of the aforementioned maintenance actions, an engine run (ground) was 
completed.  A post run-up inspection, completed by the pilot, noted no discrepancies or 
anomalies.  Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the engine run.  The 
mechanic who performed the maintenance was not present during the run-up or subsequent 
post run inspection.  The engine cowlings were not opened during the post run inspection.  At 
the completion of the maintenance run, the helicopter was moved to a hangar where the post 
maintenance run inspection was completed and then returned to service.           
The maintenance action began about 1100 and was completed about 1830 local.
There were no open logbook maintenance discrepancies concerning the helicopter at the time 
of the accident.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest weather observation recourse to the accident site was an Automated Surface 
Observing System (ASOS) located at Glacier Park International Airport (KGPI), 6 nautical 
miles northeast of the accident location at an elevation of 2,977 feet above mean sea level (msl).  
The 2053 METAR (Aviation Routine Weather Report) observation was, in part, prevailing 
Page 5 of 10SEA07FA014
visibility 2 statute miles in mist and light snow, overcast skies at 1,700 feet, temperature -2 
degrees C, dew point -3 degrees C.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Representatives from the Helena, Montana, Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), Bell 
Helicopter and Rolls-Royce conducted the initial on scene portion of the investigation, which 
commenced on November 3, and reported the following finding:
The fuselage was intact and minimal damage was noted to the main and aft cabin.  Damage 
was noted to the tail rotor driveshaft, driveshaft housing and horizontal stabilizer.  A section of 
the tail rotor drive shaft was located on the roof of the hospital approximately 225 feet from the 
point of touchdown.  All four main rotor blades were intact, however, impact related damage 
(near the blade tips) was observed to the leading edges of the main rotor blades.  The tail rotor 
gearbox and associated tail rotor blades were intact.  
Fresh oil residue was noted along the right side of the helicopter's fuselage below the engine 
bay.  The oil residue was more prominent near the forward section of the engine bay.  Fresh oil 
residue was also noted along the tail boom assembly and on the leading edges of the tail rotor 
blades.  The onsite investigative team also reported that oil wetting and staining was observed 
on the concrete hangar apron, and a trail of fresh oil extended from apron to the helipad where 
the helicopter departed.  Oil was also noted on the hangar door and several locations around 
the pad.
Extensive tearing type damage was noted to the upper engine cowling.  The damage was 
concentrated at the 9 to 11'oclock and 1 to 3'oclock (when viewed from the aft of the engine 
looking forward), and in the same plane of rotation as the 2nd stage turbine wheel.  Three oil 
lines (the return line to the oil cooler, and two bearing scavenge lines on the starboard side of 
the engine) were severed.  The damaged oil lines were in the same plane of rotation as the 2nd 
stage turbine wheel.  Extensive tearing and puncture type deformation, from the inside out, 
was noted to the turbine case and associated containment ring.  The case (gas producer 
support) was torn open, in the same plane of rotation as the 2nd stage turbine wheel (just aft 
[along the gas path] of the energy absorption ring), and segments of the fractured 2nd stage 
turbine wheel were visible.  Both compressor discharge tubes (right and left) also sustained 
extensive puncture and tearing type damage along the same plane of rotation as the 2nd stage 
turbine wheel.  
The oil pressure transducer line coupling B nut was found loose.  Investigators reported the B 
nut, which is located on the aft right side of the forward engine firewall, was found "two flats" 
loose, and was four complete rotations from separating from the fitting.  Evidence of oil loss, 
sooting and localized fire damage was observed in the area of the fitting union.  
With battery power supplied, the measured gas temperature indicator (MGT) exhibited an "E" 
on the gauge representing an expedience; the gas producer tachometer (Ng) indicator and the 
engine torques meter indicator (TRQ) both read zero.  A download of the instruments was 
unsuccessful.  All other gauges displayed static conditions.      
Following the removal of the engine from the airframe, both magnetic chip detectors were 
removed; the lower chip detector was clean and the upper chip detector contained a large 
amount of metallic slivers and chips.  The gearbox oil was drained during the process, and 
contained approximately 360 milliliters of oil.
Page 6 of 10SEA07FA014
Two segments of the second stage turbine wheel, a 7-bladed segment and a 3-bladed segment, 
were located on the ground along the helicopter's final approach flight path.  The first wheel 
segment contained the remains of approximately 7 airfoil blades; the second segment 
contained the remains of approximately 3 airfoil blades.  
An additional 8-bladed segment of the second stage turbine wheel was later found on the roof 
of the hospital near the location of the accident.     
TESTS AND RESEARCH 
The engine was examined and disassembled on November 28-29, 2006, at the facilities of 
Rolls-Royce, Indianapolis, Indiana.  Representatives from NTSB, FAA, Rolls-Royce, Standard 
Aero and Kalispell Regional Medical Center were in attendance.  The following observations 
were noted during the examination and disassembly.
Compressor Section:  The compressor case, compressor rotor assembly, forward compressor 
support and diffuser scroll were intact and no damage was noted.  The compressor inlet was 
clear and no evidence of foreign object damage (FOD) was observed.  Heat distress and coked 
oil deposits were noted to the aft portion of the spur adapter gear shaft.  No evidence of 
excessive wear or deformation to the spur adapter was noted.  Heat distress, and a lack of 
residual oil, was observed on the number 2 bearing.     
 Accessory Gearbox:  The accessory gearbox was intact and no damage was noted to the 
assembly.  All internal components were functional and no evidence of excessive wear or 
deformation was noted.
Turbine Section:  In addition to the aforementioned damage, disassembly revealed rub type 
damage on the trailing edge of the inner web area and outer rim section of the remaining 
segments of the second stage turbine wheel.  Rub type damage was noted to the leading edge 
airfoils of the second stage nozzle assembly and trailing edge of the inner seal of the energy 
absorption ring.  The first stage turbine wheel assembly remained intact, however, impact type 
damage was noted to the first stage turbine wheel airfoils.  Rub type damage was noted to the 
trailing edge rim face and inner Curvic teeth.  Minimal damage was noted to the first stage 
nozzle assembly.  Damage was noted to the third stage turbine wheel assembly.  The outer 
portions of the airfoils were fractured and missing.  Molten debris and splatter, which was later 
identified as remnants of the turbine splined adapter and end of the turbine to compressor 
coupling, was observed in the bore area of the wheel.
Bearings:  Extensive damage was noted to a number of the bearing assemblies.  Extensive 
deformation, smearing, metal splatter, and thermal discoloration were noted to the number 
eight bearing assembly.  Extensive wear was noted to the individual ball bearings and 
associated ball separators.  A number of the individual ball bearings were separated from the 
cage and were later located when the engine was dissembled.  The number eight oil supply 
strut, which supplies oil to the bearing, was flowed with oil and no anomalies were noted.  
Representatives from Rolls-Royce reported that the damage to the bearing assembly "was 
consistent with damage generated while operating the engine with insufficient lubrication."  
Similar damage was noted to the six and seven bearing assemblies.          
Combustion Section:  The combustion assembly was intact and no damage was noted.              
The engine's electronic control unit (ECU) data was downloaded by Rolls-Royce.  The stored 
data showed that prior to record 10, no faults were recorded, and the engine was in a 
Page 7 of 10SEA07FA014
continuous operational condition. The power turbine (Np [N2]) and main rotor (Nr) were 
approximately 100 percent through record 10, and the gas generator speed (Ng [N1]) was 
approximately 76 percent.  Subsequent to record 10, the plotted data shows a rapid 
deterioration in engine speed.  The fuel flow, gas generator, torque and associated parameters 
immediately begin to drop in conjunction with the rapid loss of power turbine speed.
The Incident recorder (IR) function in the ECU operates by monitoring predetermined engine 
parameters and records conditions that are determined to be abnormal.  If an anomaly is 
detected, the data associated with the anomaly is written to the systems non-volatile memory 
that can later be downloaded and interpreted.
Subsequent to the engine examination and disassembly, personnel from Rolls-Royce reported 
the damage was consistent with an on-speed burst of the second stage turbine wheel.  
Following the engine examination and subsequent laboratory testing, Rolls-Royce issued a 
report outlining the findings pertaining to the fractured turbine wheel.  The report, dated 
March 3, 2007, stated, "Rub damage and thermal distress from friction heating on the forward 
side of the Second Stage Turbine Wheel resulted in an on-speed burst" of the wheel assembly.  
The report also stated that the "composition, hardness and microstructure of the Second Stage 
Turbine Wheel away from the rub damage areas were as required by the engineering 
drawings."
ORGANIZATIONAL INFORMATION
At the time of the accident, Kalispell Regional Medical Center held an air carrier certificate 
issued in May of 1980, by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).  The company's 
operations specifications included authorization to conduct helicopter air ambulance 
operations in accordance with 14 CFR Part 135.  The certificate was managed by the FAA Flight 
Standards District Office (FSDO) in Helena, Montana.
When the accident occurred, Kalispell Regional Medical Center employed five pilots, one 
mechanic, and operated one helicopter.  The mechanic was full-time status and also served as 
the operator's Director of Maintenance (DOM).
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The DOM reported that the referenced B-nut fitting was not manipulated during the 
maintenance procedure involving the rotor brake modification.  He also reported that he did 
not perform a leak check following the maintenance action and engine run.      
The helicopter was released to the operator on December 18, 2006.
Page 8 of 10SEA07FA014
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Military
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/01/2006
Flight Time:
3000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 593 hours (Total, this make and model), 2500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 43 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 14 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N407KH
Model/Series:
407 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
53395
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/2006, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5250 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
68 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
3138 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls-Royce
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250 C47
Registered Owner:
Kalispell Regional Medical 
Center
Rated Power:
674 hp
Operator:
Kalispell Regional Medical 
Center
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Page 9 of 10SEA07FA014
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KGPI, 2977 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2055 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
20°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
2 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 1700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.95 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-2°C / -3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Showers - Snow
Departure Point: 
KALISPELL, MT (MT28)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Kalispell, MT 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2051 HST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
KALISPELL REGIONAL HOSPITAL 
(MT28)
Runway Surface Type:
Concrete; Grass/turf; 
Gravel
Airport Elevation:
2970 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry; Snow
Runway Used:
H
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
In-Flight
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
48.222778, -114.327222
Page 10 of 10
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis  J Hogenson
Adopted Date:
11/29/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Rickey E Koffman; FAA FSDO; Helena, MT
Doug Tate; FAA FSDO; Indianapolis, IN
Mark Stuntzner; Bell Helicopter; Fort Worth, TX
Jeff Edwards; Rolls-Royce; Indianapolis, IN
John Swift; Rolls-Royce; Indianapolis, IN
Doug Roberge; Standard Aero; Winnipeg, MB, Canada,   
Jim Dicks; Kalispell Region Medical; Kalispell, MT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
