National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Factual Report
Location: Albany, TX
Accident Number: CEN18LA069
Date & Time: 01/08/2018, 1345 CST
Registration: N797JR
Aircraft: ROBINSON HELICOPTER COMPANY
R44 II
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Unknown or undetermined
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On January 8, 2018, at 1345 central standard time, a Robinson R44 helicopter, N797JR, 
collided with trees and the terrain during an autorotation following a loss of tailrotor 
effectiveness while in a hover in Albany, Texas. The commercial pilot was not injured. The 
helicopter was substantially damaged. The helicopter was registered to S2 Helicopter Services 
and was operated by an individual as a Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 personal 
flight. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The flight was not operated on a flight 
plan. The local flight originated from a ranch in Albany, Texas, at 1310.
The pilot stated he was using the helicopter to roundup cattle when the accident occurred. He 
reported he applied power to stabilize in a hover about 50 ft above the ground, when he heard a 
single loud bang and "felt it in the pedals." The helicopter spun to the right and the pilot 
applied full left pedal which had no effect. The pilot stated that after about 2 spins, he entered 
an autorotation to remove torque from the rotor system. The helicopter contacted trees as it 
descended to the ground. The helicopter came to rest upright with the tail boom separated.
The pilot reported that he was not sure if there was a "mechanical problem" or not. His 
recommendation was "Conduct a better clearing turn to ensure that nothing was around 
including animals/birds" and to "maintain more forward airspeed in case of emergency."
The helicopter was sitting upright on the skids. The fuselage was intact and the tailboom was 
separated just forward of the empennage. Minor crushing damage was visible on the right side 
of the helicopter aft of the cabin area. Crush damage was visible on the left side of the 
helicopter above the front and rear skid struts. The main rotor blades, main rotor blade hub, 
and main rotor mast were intact. One of the main rotor blades exhibited minor bending near 
the outboard section of the blade. The other blade had a hole in the blade near the tip and the 
leading edge of the blade at the tip was pulled away from the remainder of the blade.
The empennage and tailrotor were separated from the tailboom. The tailrotor drive shaft 
separated at the aft flex plate. The drive shaft remained connected to the clutch assembly. The 
main rotor blades turned when the tailrotor drive shaft was rotated by hand. Ratchet marks 
were visible inside the tailboom near the aft flex plate. Corresponding damage was visible on 
the flex plate and drive shaft.
The trailing edge of the lower vertical stabilizer contained impact damage to the rear edge of 
the surface, pushing the skin forward toward the leading edge. The tail rotor blade assembly 
remained attached to the tail rotor gearbox. One tail rotor blade was bent outward 90 ° at the 
blade root. The other blade was bent out about 20° the blade root. The blade was free to turn 
when rotated by hand.
Pilot Information  
Certificate: Commercial
Age: 28, Male
Airplane Rating(s): None
Seat Occupied: Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s): Helicopter
Second Pilot Present: No
Instructor Rating(s): Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: No
Medical Certification: Class 2 Without
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam: 07/18/2017
Occupational Pilot: No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent: 03/11/2016
Flight Time: 3000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1700 hours (Total, this make and model), 2450 hours (Pilot In
Command, all aircraft), 120 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 29 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: ROBINSON HELICOPTER
COMPANY
Registration: N797JR
Model/Series: R44 II II
Aircraft Category: Helicopter
Year of Manufacture: 2006
Amateur Built: No
Airworthiness Certificate: Normal
Serial Number: 11030
Landing Gear Type: Skid;
Seats: 4
Date/Type of Last Inspection: 06/03/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 2120 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines: 1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time: 2058 Hours
Engine Manufacturer: LYCOMING
ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: IO-540
Registered Owner: S2 HELICOPTER SERVICES LLC
Rated Power: 0 hp
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: BKD, 1284 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site: 25 Nautical Miles
Observation Time: 1955 UTC
Direction from Accident Site: 90°
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 5 knots /
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual: /
Wind Direction: 360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual: /
Altimeter Setting: 30.17 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point: 16°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration: No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: Albany, TX
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Destination: Albany, TX
Type of Clearance: None
Departure Time: 1310 CST
Type of Airspace: Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 None
Latitude, Longitude: 32.730000, -99.309444 (est)
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Pamela S Sullivan
Additional Participating Persons: Anthony Leinneweber; FAA; Lubbock, TX
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=96581
