This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Gulf of Mexico, GM
Accident Number: CEN18FAMS1
Date & Time: 01/03/2018, 1800 CDT
Registration: N325JK
Aircraft: CIRRUS DESIGN CORP SR22T
Injuries: N/A
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On January 3, 2018, about 1800 central standard time, a Cirrus Design Corporation SR22T 
airplane, N325JK, went missing over the Gulf Of Mexico. Since that time the private pilot has 
not been located and the airplane is missing. The personal flight was conducted under the 
provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) flight plan had been filed for the flight. 
The flight departed Wiley Post Airport (KPWA), Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, about 1419, and 
was en route to Georgetown Municipal Airport (KGTU), Georgetown, Texas.
According to preliminary data provided by the Federal Aviation Administration, as the airplane 
approached KGTU, the pilot was instructed by air traffic control to turn right and descend to 
13,000 feet. At that time, the airplane turned to the left. Air traffic controllers made multiple 
attempts to communicate with the pilot of the airplane with no success. The airplane was 
tracked by radar with the last known position about 220 miles north of Cancun, Mexico. 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CIRRUS DESIGN CORP
Registration: N325JK
Model/Series: SR22T
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Observation Time: 
Distance from Accident Site:
Temperature/Dew Point: 
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: / ,
Lowest Ceiling: 
Visibility:
Altimeter Setting:
Type of Flight Plan Filed: IFR
Departure Point: Oklahoma City, OK (PWA)
Destination: Georgetown, TX (GTU)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Damage: Unknown
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: Unknown
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: Unknown
Total Injuries: N/A
Latitude, Longitude: (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Jennifer Rodi
Additional Participating Persons: Matthew Rigsby; Federal Aviation Administration AVP; Fort Worth, TX
Brannon Mayer; Cirrus Aircraft; Duluth, MN
John Kent; Continental Motors International; Mobile, AL
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
