National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FALLON, NV
Accident Number: LAX94LA002
Date & Time: 10/01/1993, 1830 PDT
Registration: N4266V
Aircraft: CESSNA 170
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that he had just purchased the airplane, and the accident occurred during his familiarization flight.
The pilot took off and, along with the previous owner, flew to a local practice area.
The previous owner demonstrated airwork and then demonstrated a takeoff and a landing.
According to the pilot, he then attempted to land the airplane.
During his first approach, he 'waved off.'
The pilot further reported that during his second approach he was low.
The pilot added full engine power, and the airplane's main landing gear collided with the airport's perimeter fence short of the runway.
The pilot had not flown any airplane during the previous 90 days.
Also, he had no previous piloting experience in the accident make and model airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: was the pilot's failure to maintain an adequate approach path to the runway and his inadequate altitude.
Contributing factors were the pilot's delayed remedial action and his lack of recent experience in the airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: UNDERSHOOT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) PROPER GLIDEPATH - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) ALTITUDE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) REMEDIAL ACTION - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 5.
OBJECT - FENCE Factual Information On October 1, 1993, at 1830 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 170, N4266V, operated by the pilot, collided with the airport's perimeter fence on short final approach to runway 31 at the Fallon Municipal Airport, Fallon, Nevada.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the personal flight.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the commercial pilot was not injured.
The passenger received minor injuries.
The flight originated from Fallon at 1750.
The pilot reported that he had just purchased the airplane, and the purpose of the flight was for his familiarization.
The pilot reported that he took off and flew to a local practice area with the seller of the airplane on board.
The seller demonstrated airwork, and then demonstrated a takeoff and a landing.
The pilot further reported he then made an approach to runway 31, "waved off," and attempted another landing.
Regarding the attempted landing, the pilot made the following statement in his completed "Aircraft Accident Report," NTSB Form 6120.1:  "When I realized I was landing short...I added full power to make a go-around.
The main landing gear caught the perimeter fence and the aircraft came to rest on its right side."
The pilot indicated that he had not flown any airplane during the 90 days which preceded the accident.
Also, his total piloting experience in the accident airplane's make and model was zero hours.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
