National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TUCSON, AZ
Accident Number: LAX94LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/1993, 1220 MST
Registration: N5151A
Aircraft: CESSNA O-2A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
 Analysis The front and then rear engines lost partial power during initial climb from the Ryan Field near Tucson, Arizona.
Unable to continue climbing, the pilot made a forced landing in rough terrain about two miles east of the airport.
An examination of the airplane's fuel system revealed two of the front engine's six fuel injectors were partially clogged with a foreign substance.
No clogging of the rear injectors was found.
Prior to the accident (ferry) flight, the airplane had been idle for several years.
In preparation for the flight, recent maintenance which included limited purging of the fuel system had reportedly been accomplished by contractor maintenance personnel.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: was the partial loss of engine power during initial climb due to partial clogging of the engine's fuel injectors.
Blockage of the fuel injectors was due to inadequate maintenance of the fuel system by contract maintenance personnel.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,INJECTOR - BLOCKED(PARTIAL) 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE - INADEQUATE - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN Factual Information On October 1, 1993, at 1220 mountain standard time, a Cessna O- 2A, N5151A, experienced a partial loss of engine power to the front and rear engines during initial climb from the Ryan Field near Tucson, Arizona.
The pilot made a forced landing in an open field about two miles east of the airport.
The airplane was substantially damaged upon impacting the rough, desert terrain.
The commercial pilot was not injured.
The flight was originating at the time of the mishap.
The pilot verbally reported that prior to the accident flight the airplane had been idle for several years.
The pilot had been hired to ferry the airplane from Arizona to the southeast United States.
In preparation for the flight, a contractor had performed limited maintenance on the airplane.
According to the pilot, during takeoff the airplane's front engine suddenly lost power.
Its rpm reduced from full power to about 1,600 rpm, and then the rear engine lost power.
The fuel flow became "low and intermittent" and the airplane stopped climbing.
The pilot further reported that because the engines' oil temperature and pressure remained in the normal operating range, he believed both engines had experienced fuel starvation.
On October 7, 1993, a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector verbally reported to the National Transportation Safety Board that its examination of the airplane revealed two of the front engine's six fuel injectors were found partially clogged with a foreign substance.
The FAA inspector stated that the contractor had evidently not completely purged the airplane's entire fuel system during efforts at preparing the airplane for the ferry flight.
In October of 1993 and in May of 1994, the pilot was requested to complete the required Safety Board "Aircraft Accident Report," NTSB Form 6120.1.
When the Board receives the pilot's form, it will be appended to this report.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land Seat Occupied: Unknown Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 4400 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: CONTINENTAL ELT: Engine Model/Series: IO-360 Registered Owner: SECO AVIATION COMPANY Rated Power: 210 hp Operator: NAT.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
