Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
FLORENCE, SC
Accident Number:
MIA97LA055
Date & Time:
01/01/1997, 1505 EST 
Registration:
N2205Z
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28-181
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot was cleared for an instrument approach in instrument flight conditions. The right fuel 
gauge indicated empty, and the left fuel gauge indicated about 3 gallons of fuel. The engine 
started to sputter and quit. The airplane became VFR and collided with trees and a house. The 
pilot informed law enforcement personnel that the airplane ran out of fuel. There was no odor 
or visible evidence of fuel present at the crash site. About 1/2 ounce of fuel was drained from 
the carburetor bowl. The propeller and flywheel were replaced. The engine started and 
developed power. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot-in-command's improper management of fuel resulting in a total loss of engine power 
due to fuel exhaustion. 
Page 2 of 6MIA97LA055
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - FAF/OUTER MARKER TO THRESHOLD (IFR)
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. (C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - RESIDENTIAL AREA
Page 3 of 6MIA97LA055
Factual Information
 On January 1, 1997, about 1505 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-181, registered to 
Enterprise Seven Leasing Inc., operated as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, experienced a total 
loss of engine power while on an instrument approach to Florence Regional Airport, Florence, 
South Carolina, and crashed into a residential area. Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed and an IFR flight plan was filed. The airplane sustained substantial damage. The 
commercial pilot/pilot-in-command (PIC), and a private pilot occupying the left front seat 
reported serious injuries. One passenger sustained serious injuries, and the other passenger 
sustained minor injuries. The flight originated from Miami, Florida, about 4 hours 22 minutes 
before the accident.
The PIC stated he filed an IFR flight plan listing himself as the PIC. They departed 
Miami en route to Savannah, Georgia, with the private pilot flying the airplane. Upon reaching 
Jacksonville, Florida, he checked weather and requested a clearance direct to Florence, South 
Carolina. They were handed off to Florence Approach Control about 20 miles south of 
Florence. The left fuel gauge indicated 5 to 6 gallons of fuel. The right fuel gauge was empty. 
They were cleared for the ILS approach, and handed off to Florence tower. The left fuel gauge 
indicated about 3 gallons of fuel remaining. They were established on the localizer course and 
just inside the outer marker at 1,800 feet, 4.6 miles from the runway when the engine started 
to sputter. The private pilot turned the boost pump on,  switched fuel tanks, rocked the wings 
and pumped the throttle with negative results. The engine quit. The private pilot established a 
glide and he declared an emergency. They became VFR at about 800 feet. There were no forced 
landing areas available. He informed the private pilot that he had the flight controls. The 
airplane collided with trees and a house.  He further stated there was no odor or leakage of fuel 
present, and there was no known mechanical problem with the airplane. The pilot-in-
command informed a Florence Police Department sergeant during an interview that they were 
on final approach when they ran out of fuel.
A witness stated he heard an airplane overhead. He looked up and saw the airplane 
come out of the clouds. The engine sputtered and then cut off. The airplane continued towards 
the east disappearing below the tree line.
Examination of the crash site revealed no odor or visible evidence of fuel. Inspection of 
the carburetor bowl drain produced less than 1/2 ounce of fuel. No indication of fuel leakage 
stains were found around the fuel filler cap of either wing. The airplane was transported to a 
full service maintenance fixed base operator. The propeller and  flywheel were replaced with 
serviceable parts. The engine was started and developed power.
Page 4 of 6MIA97LA055
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
49, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/14/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2050 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1530 hours (Total, this make and model), 1907 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 73 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 32 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N2205Z
Model/Series:
PA-28-181 PA-28-181
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-7990401
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/12/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
150 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4974 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A4M
Registered Owner:
ENTERPRISE SEVEN INC
Rated Power:
181 hp
Operator:
THOMAS M. SNEDDEN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA97LA055
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
5 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
40°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
MIAMI, FL (MIA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 (FLO)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1043 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
CARROL     A SMITH
Adopted Date:
08/25/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
MARLENE   VAN BEUREN; WEST COLUMBIA, SC
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA97LA055
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
