National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GUSTAVUS, AK
Accident Number: ANC99LA102
Date & Time: 08/01/1999, 1415 AKD
Registration: N6180
Aircraft: Cessna 180A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The certificated commercial pilot had landed on runway 28.
He stated that the touchdown and the landing roll were uneventful, until the airplane's nose veered slightly to the right.
He compensated by applying full left rudder, but the airplane suddenly ground looped to the right.
During the ground loop the left main landing gear collapsed, and the left wing collided with the runway.
The left wing and fuselage sustained substantial damage.
Wind conditions at the time of the accident were reported to be from 190 degrees at 5 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadvertent ground loop/swerve.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The certificated commercial pilot, and the one passenger aboard, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator- in-charge on August 2, the pilot reported that he had just landed on runway 28.
He stated that the touchdown and the landing roll were uneventful, until the airplane's nose veered slightly to the right.
He said he compensated by applying full left rudder, but the airplane suddenly ground looped to the right.
During the ground loop the left main landing gear collapsed, and the left wing collided with the runway.
The left wing and fuselage sustained substantial damage.
Wind conditions at the time of the accident were reported to be from 190 degrees at 5 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine Sea; Single-engine Land; Single- engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
