National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FREDERICK, MD
Accident Number: NYC99LA191
Date & Time: 08/01/1999, 1440 EDT
Registration: N70894
Aircraft: Piper J3C-65
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot obtained a standard weather briefing, and then filed a flight plan.
He then received a weather update from flight service approximately 5 minutes before executing the flight.
During the update, the briefer indicated that scattered thunderstorms in the Hagerstown area were moving east towards Frederick.
The pilot calculated that he would arrive at his destination prior to the thunderstorms, so he departed.
While approaching his destination, the pilot noticed the sky to the north of his position was 'very dark.'
He also experienced an increase in turbulence.
The pilot checked weather with Frederick UNICOM, and was advised the winds were 4 knots.
With the approaching thunderstorms, the pilot expedited his turn from base to final, and executed a 'normal' landing.
As the airplane rolled out it became airborne and started to drift to the right.
The airplane touched down, exited the runway, and the landing gear collapsed when it struck a sign.
The pilot shut off both magnetos, secured the throttle, and exited the airplane.
The pilot stated, 'I think I encountered a gust and simply lost control.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control.
Contributing factors were gusty wind conditions and the sign.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(F) OBJECT - AIRPORT SIGN/MARKER Factual Information On August 1, 1999, at 1440 eastern daylight time, a Piper J3C-65, N70894, was substantially damage during landing, when it departed the right side of runway 23 at Frederick Municipal Airport, Frederick, Maryland.
The certificated commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight that originated from Haysfield Airport, Clarksville, Maryland.
A visual flight rules flight plan was filed, and the flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report Form, the pilot obtained a standard weather briefing, and then filed a flight plan.
He then received a weather update from flight service approximately 5 minutes before executing the flight.
During the update, the briefer indicated that scattered thunderstorms in the Hagerstown, Maryland area were moving east towards Frederick.
The pilot calculated that he would arrive at his destination prior to the thunderstorms, so he departed Haysfield.
While approaching his destination, the pilot noticed the sky to the north of his position was "very dark."
He also experienced an increase in turbulence.
The pilot checked weather with Frederick UNICOM, and was advised the winds were 4 knots.
With the approaching thunderstorms, the pilot expedited his turn from base to final for runway 23.
He then executed a "normal" landing.
As the airplane was rolling out it became airborne and started to drift to the right.
The airplane touched down, exited the runway, and the landing gear collapsed when it struck a sign.
The pilot shut off both magnetos, secured the throttle, and exited the airplane.
The pilot added, "I think I encountered a gust and simply lost control."
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 48, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): Glider; Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
