National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WESTMINSTER, MD
Accident Number: NYC99LA192
Date & Time: 08/01/1999, 2115 EDT
Registration: N6357Y
Aircraft: Beech A36
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he flew a straight-in approach, and touchdown was normal.
Then, the airplane veered to the right, off the side of the runway, and into a ditch.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, and a local mechanic, did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.
A Maryland State Police trooper observed skid marks, left on the runway by all three landing gears.
According to the trooper, the main gear skid marks were oriented 20 degrees to the right of the runway centerline, before the nose gear touched down.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot-in-command's failure to maintain aircraft control while landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On August 1, 1999, about 2115 Eastern Daylight Time, a Beech A36, N6357Y was substantially damaged while landing at Carroll County Regional Airport (W54), Westminster, Maryland.
The certificated airline transport pilot and three passengers were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that originated from Martin State Airport, Baltimore, Maryland.
No flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot stated that he flew a straight-in approach to Runway 34 at W54.
The touchdown was normal, then the airplane veered to the right.
He was unable to control the airplane, and it went off the right side of the runway, into a ditch.
The pilot further stated that he was not sure if the loss of control was pilot error or a mechanical problem.
During the morning hours, on the day of the accident, air was added to the right tire.
Subsequently, the pilot flew with a student before the accident flight.
The student pilot reported that the left rudder pedal had to be depressed to taxi the airplane along a straight line.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, and a local mechanic, did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.
The inspector observed damage to the propeller, landing gears, and webbing along the longeron.
An on-site examination was conducted by the Maryland State Police.
According to the trooper, all three landing gears left skid marks on the runway.
The trooper stated that the main wheel skid marks were oriented 20 degrees to the right of the runway centerline, before the nose gear touched down.
The skid marks continued for approximately 505 feet, off the right side of the runway and onto the grass.
The reported winds, at an airport approximately 30 miles from the accident site, at 2054, were from 280 degrees at 8 knots.
: 3612 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 115 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2740 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO520B Registered Owner: HUNGER FORD AVIATION, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
