Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Puyallup, WA
Accident Number:
WPR09LA223
Date & Time:
05/01/2009, 1518 PDT 
Registration:
N382CH
Aircraft:
CESSNA 182Q
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that the accident flight was the first flight following maintenance that 
replaced the fuel sending units, which required draining the fuel tanks. The pilot stated that 
maintenance personnel added 20 gallons of fuel to each main tank following the work. He did 
not physically check the fuel level in the tanks, but noted that both fuel gages indicated the 
same amount of fuel prior to flight. He reported that the engine lost power about 500 feet 
above ground level on takeoff, and he made an off airport landing that damaged the wings, 
airframe, and rudder. A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the 
airplane the night of the accident, and noted that no fuel was in the left main tank, but 
maintenance personnel drained about 20 gallons from the right tank. On a follow-up exam, 
investigators added 5 gallons of fuel to the left wing tank. The engine started immediately 
without hesitation. It accelerated smoothly to 1,800 rpm, and a magneto check revealed no 
anomalies. The engine was decelerated to idle rpm; the engine ran smoothly, and shutdown 
was unremarkable. The airplane had a recording engine data management unit installed. Data 
indicated that fuel flow dropped to 0 gallons per hour 6 seconds prior to a loss of rpm.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of the pilot™s failure to verify the fuel 
levels in the tanks, and, his failure to select the proper fuel tank.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid level (Cause)
Fuel selector/shutoff valve - Incorrect use/operation (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Residence/building - Not specified
Page 2 of 5WPR09LA223
Factual Information
On May 1, 2009, about 1518 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 182Q, N382CH, collided with 
objects during an off airport forced landing following a loss of engine power at Puyallup, 
Washington.  The owner/pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.  The certificated airline transport pilot sustained minor 
injuries; the airplane sustained substantial damage to the airframe, rudder, and wings from 
impact forces.  The personal cross-country flight was departing with an intended destination of 
Bremerton, Washington.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had 
been filed.
The pilot stated that this was the first flight following completion of an annual inspection, 
which included replacement of the fuel sending units. This required draining the fuel tanks. 
Maintenance personnel indicated that they had fueled the airplane with 20 gallons in each 
tank, and completed a 10-minute ground run of the engine without any difficulties noted prior 
to the accident flight.
The pilot reported that he experienced no anomalies during start, taxi, run-up, or the takeoff. 
He stated that the engine lost power about 500 feet above ground level (agl) over the departure 
end of runway 34. The pilot started a steep 180-degree turn, and intended to land on the 
parallel taxiway. The airplane was short takeoff and landing (STOL) equipped, and he had 
practiced this maneuver.
Local law enforcement was conducting an exercise on the field, and they responded to the 
perceived emergency by driving down the taxiway on which the pilot intended to land. The 
pilot stated that he looked for an alternate landing site, and noted that the area between the 
parallel taxiway and runway was soft due to recent rainfall. While in the turn about 50 feet 
above ground level (agl), he saw a heavy fence, which he thought was too substantial to hit. He 
was also over a port-a-potty maintenance and storage facility, and turned to the right to look 
for a softer target. The pilot stated that he chose to fly the airplane into a 50-foot square block 
of the port-a-potty units, which had a pile of wood chips behind them.
The pilot aimed to contact the units about 3-5 feet above the seat and tank area. He was happy 
with the results as he experienced a 2-g deceleration, and the airplane slowed from an 
estimated 60 knots to 30 knots. As the airplane settled, it nosed over, and came to rest softly in 
the wood chip pile. 
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector reported that the airplane had already been 
moved to a hangar by the time he examined it on the night of the accident. The inspector noted 
that maintenance personnel drained no fuel from the left tank and 20 gallons from the right 
tank. The left wing was intact; the right wing sustained damage and drooped. The fuel selector 
was in the OFF position.
On May 11, maintenance personnel added 5 gallons of fuel to the left wing tank. The engine 
started immediately, and was run until all temperatures and pressures were within normal 
operating limits. The engine was then run up to 1,800 revolutions per minute (rpm); it 
accelerated smoothly without hesitation. A magneto check was performed with a 50 rpm drop 
on both magnetos. The engine was then decelerated to idle rpm; the engine ran smoothly, and 
shutdown was unremarkable.
The inspector interviewed the pilot, who indicated that he did not visually check inside the fuel 
Page 3 of 5WPR09LA223
tanks prior to flight. The pilot stated that the fuel gauges indicated an equal amount in each 
tank.
J.P. Instruments Unit
The airplane had a J.P. Instruments EDM 700/800 engine data management unit installed. 
Among the engine parameters recorded by this unit were the fuel flow in gallons per hour 
(gph), manifold pressure, engine rpm, exhaust gas temperature (EGT), and cylinder head 
temperature (CHT) for all six cylinders. It also recorded the parameters in relation to time.
A plot of the data revealed an initial rpm of 1,400 and a corresponding fuel flow of 4 gph. 
About 32 seconds later, the fuel flow increased linearly over 12 seconds to 28 gph, and the rpm 
increased to 2,600. These values remained constant for 18 seconds. The fuel then decreased 
linearly to 0 gph over 12 seconds. Six seconds after the fuel flow began to decrease, the rpm 
decreased linearly over 6 seconds to 1,400 rpm. It then gradually declined to 700 rpm over the 
next 14 seconds where the data ended. The EGT dropped rapidly as the rpm decreased.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Fuel starvation
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial; 
Flight Engineer
Age:
67, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/31/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/15/2008
Flight Time:
20000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 100 hours (Total, this make and model), 1 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5WPR09LA223
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N382CH
Model/Series:
182Q 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18267390
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/18/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
0 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3000 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Teledyne Continental 
Motors
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550D
Registered Owner:
CLIFFORD G HOWELL
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
CLIFFORD G HOWELL
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KPLU, 538 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1510 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
340°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.91 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Puyallup, WA (PLU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Bremerton, WA (PWT)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1518 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Pierce County (PLU)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
538 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 5 of 5WPR09LA223
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
47.103889, -122.287222 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard D Plagens
Adopted Date:
05/11/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Kris Kern; FAA FSDO; Seattle, WA
Publish Date:
05/10/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
