The flight instructor on the controls of the high skid-equipped-landing-gear helicopter 
reported that he was the pilot-in-command (PIC). The PIC reported that he and another flight 
instructor were performing simulated emergency procedures during the flight. He reported 
that he attempted to demonstrate a simulated fixed-pitch (right stuck antitorque pedal) 
emergency procedure. He reported that, during the maneuver, the nose of the helicopter was 
about 40° nose right of centerline. He reduced the throttle, and the nose corrected to about 20° 
nose right of centerline. The helicopter touched down on taxiway delta with minimal forward 
airspeed, and it then bounced about 5 ft above the ground and yawed right about 1 3/4 turns. 
The helicopter touched down a second time about 65 ft south of the taxiway centerline and 
rolled onto its left side. The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the firewall, main rotor 
drive system, and tail rotor drive system. 
A METAR at the time of the accident reported that the wind was from 110° at 08 kts. The flight 
instructor seated in the right seat reported that the wind at the time of the accident was from 
090° at 08 kts. 
When the PIC was asked by the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge if 
he placed the collective in the full-down position after touchdown or if he increased the 
collective after the initial touchdown, he responded that he could not remember. When asked if 
he applied full left pedal to combat the right yaw, he said that he did not because the event 
happened quickly.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration Helicopter Flying Handbook (FAA-8083-
21A), the Helicopter Instructor's Flying Handbook (FAA-8083-4), and Advisory Circular (AC) 
90-95 "Unanticipated Rapid Right Yaw in Helicopters," the loss of tail rotor effectiveness is a 
critical, low-speed aerodynamic flight characteristic that can result in an uncommanded rapid 
yaw rate that does not subside of its own accord and, if not corrected, can result in the loss of 
aircraft control.
Page 2 of 5GAA17CA132
AC 90-95, Section 7.d.3. (page 7), defines flight characteristics and wind azimuths and states 
that the tail rotor vortex ring state occurs when the wind is from 210° to 330°.
1. Winds within this region will result in the development of the vortex ring state of the tail 
rotor.
AC 90-95, Section 10, "Recommended Recovery Techniques," (page 8), states: 
a. If a sudden unanticipated right yaw occurs, the pilot should perform the following:
(1) Apply full left pedal. Simultaneously, move cyclic forward to increase speed. If altitude 
permits, reduce power.
(2) As recovery is effected, adjust controls for normal forward flight.
b. Collective pitch reduction will aid in arresting the yaw rate but may cause an increase in the 
rate of descent. Any large, rapid increase in collective to prevent ground or obstacle contact 
may further increase the yaw rate and decrease rotor rpm.
The pilot reported that there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the 
helicopter that would have precluded normal operation. 
The pilot-in-command's delayed remedial action to arrest the right yaw after the bounced 
landing while operating in a flight regime conducive to the loss of tail rotor effectiveness, which 
resulted in a roll-over.
