Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CHIEFLAND, FL
Accident Number:
MIA96LA088
Date & Time:
03/01/1996, 1515 EST 
Registration:
N6248X
Aircraft:
Bell 206L4
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business
Analysis 
The pilot stated that during cruise flight about 400 feet mean sea level he heard the engine 
decelerate then heard the engine-out audio.  He maneuvered the helicopter for an autorotative 
landing in a clearing, but after observing uneven terrain he elected to zero his forward 
airspeed.  After a hard landing the helicopter rocked forward causing the main rotor blades to 
contact the tailboom.  Fuel quantity was sufficient to sustain engine operation and visually no 
contaminants were noted.  The helicopter was recovered and the engine was started several 
times using the fuel supply in the fuel tank with no discrepancies noted.  The engine was 
removed from the helicopter and tested at the manufacturers facility with no discrepancies 
noted.  The power turbine governor (PTG) and the main fuel control and engine driven fuel 
pump were removed for bench testing.  The only discrepancy noted was a failed roll pin for the 
throttle level stop in the PTG.  The PTG manufacturer states that the failed roll pin would not 
effect operation of the unit. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Improper cyclic and collective input by the pilot-in-command resulting in the hard landing 
during the autorotative landing.  Contributing to the accident was the total loss of engine 
power due to undetermined reasons. 
Page 2 of 6MIA96LA088
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (F) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. (C) CYCLIC - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) COLLECTIVE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6MIA96LA088
Factual Information
 On March 1, 1996, about 1515 eastern standard time, a Bell 206L4, N6248X, registered to the 
Bell Helicopter Textron, Inc., experienced total loss of engine power during cruise flight and 
was substantially damaged during an autorotative landing near Chiefland, Florida.  Visual 
meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 
CFR Part 91 business flight.  The commercial-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  
The flight originated about 1300 central standard time from the Marianna Municipal Airport, 
Marianna, Florida.
     The pilot stated that during cruise flight about 400 feet mean sea level, in VMC, he first 
heard the engine decelerate then heard the engine out audio announcement.  He verified that 
the throttle was full open then lowered the collective control for an autorotative landing.  He 
observed a clearing and initiated a 180-degree turn but when the flight was near the ground, he 
observed uneven terrain and elected to zero his forward speed.  The helicopter then landed 
hard and rocked forward, causing the main rotor blades to contact the tailboom.  The 
helicopter had been operated for about 1.3 hours since fueling and a total of 74.8 hours since 
manufacture.
     Postaccident examination of the helicopter by an FAA airworthiness inspector revealed 
sufficient fuel to sustain engine operation.  Visual examination of a sample of fuel obtained 
from the fuel tank revealed no evidence of contamination.  The helicopter was recovered and 
the engine was started and operated several times using the fuel supply in the fuel tank with no 
discrepancies noted.  Vacuum test of the fuel system revealed no evidence of preimpact failure 
or malfunction.  The engine was removed from the helicopter for further tests.
     The engine was placed in a test stand at the manufacturer's facility and operated with no 
discrepancies noted.  The engine-driven fuel pump with attached main fuel control and the 
power turbine governor (PTG) were removed and sent to the manufacturer's facility for bench 
tests which revealed no failure or malfunction that would have prevented normal engine 
operation.  The only discrepancy noted was a sheared PTG throttle lever stop roll pin.   
According to Allied Signal personnel, failure of the roll pin has previously been determined to 
occur due to over torque of the outer lever attachment nut.  The failure did not affect operation 
of the throttle input from the cockpit.
     Review of the helicopter historical records revealed that the power turbine governor was 
installed on 12/15/95, and had accumulated 70.5 hours since new.
Page 4 of 6MIA96LA088
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/05/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
9600 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model), 9300 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 34 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N6248X
Model/Series:
206L4 206L4
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
52162
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
72 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C30P
Registered Owner:
BELL HELICOPTER TEXTRON, 
INC.
Rated Power:
650 hp
Operator:
BELL HELICOPTER TEXTRON, 
INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA96LA088
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GNV, 152 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
34 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1451 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
70°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
2.5 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
MARIANNA, FL (MAI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
LAKELAND, FL (LAL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1300 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TIMOTHY    W MONVILLE
Adopted Date:
02/18/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
HOOPER   HARRIS; ORLANDO, FL
A H BOUNDS; FORT WORTH, TX
DALE A STEELE; INDIANAPOLIS, IN
R A TERRY; SOUTH BEND, IN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA96LA088
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
