The turbine powered agricultural airplane was loaded with a payload of 5,500 pounds of 
chemicals prior to a local aerial application flight.  The 8,500-hour non-instrument rated 
commercial pilot reported to local authorities that while in-flight he experienced some 
problems with the on-board agricultural-navigation system; however, he elected to proceed to 
the field to be sprayed.  While en route to the field, the engine surged a couple of times and lost 
power.  The pilot attempted to execute a forced landing to a pasture.  During the approach, the 
pilot was forced to make a sharp turn to avoid colliding with a fence, resulting in a hard landing 
and a subsequent loss of directional control.  The payload of chemicals was found in the 
hopper, and the reason why the pilot did not elect to dump the load following the loss of engine 
power was not determined.  The 2005 model airplane sustained major structural damage in 
the area aft of the engine firewall.  Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation 
Administration inspector, who traveled to the accident site, revealed less than a cup of fuel in 
one tank and less than 5 gallons in the other.  A completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft 
Accident/Incident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) was never received from neither the pilot nor 
the operator.
The loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.  A contributing factor was the lack of suitable 
landing for the pilot to execute the forced landing.
On 1 May 2006, at 0800 central daylight time, a single-engine Air Tractor AT-802A 
agricultural airplane, N8504T, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a 
reported loss of engine power near Jasper, Texas.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the 
airplane, sustained minor injuries.  The airplane was registered to Ag Pilots, Inc., of Onalaska, 
Texas, and was being operated by Thrash Aviation.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the aerial application flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  The local flight originated 
from the Jasper County Airport (JAS) at time unknown.
The turbine powered agricultural airplane was loaded with a payload of 5,500 pounds of 
chemicals prior to a local aerial application flight.  The 8,500-hour non-instrument rated 
commercial pilot reported to local authorities that while in-flight he experienced some 
problems with the on-board agricultural-navigation system; however, he elected to proceed to 
the field to be sprayed.  While enroute to the field, the PT6A series engine surged a couple of 
time and lost power.  The pilot attempted to execute a forced landing to a pasture.  During the 
approach, the pilot was forced to make a sharp turn to avoid colliding with a fence, resulting in 
a hard landing and a loss of directional control.  
The payload of chemicals was found in the hopper, and the reason why the pilot was unable to 
dump the load following the loss of engine power was not determined.  The 2005 model 
airplane sustained major structural damage in the area aft of the engine firewall.  
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, who traveled to 
the accident site, revealed less of a cup of fuel was found in one tank and less than 5 gallons 
were found in the other.  A completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report (NTSB 
Form 6120.1) was not received from either the pilot or the operator.
