The pilot performed a preflight inspection of the helicopter to include checking the tail rotor oil 
level through its sight glass. He had flown the helicopter for more than an hour when the tail 
yawed to the left, slowly at first then rapidly. The pilot ﬁcutﬂ the throttle, flew the helicopter ﬁto 
the ground as fast as possible,ﬂand impacted terrain. A postaccident examination of the 
wreckage revealed that the tail rotor gearbox did not operate when it was rotated. A teardown 
revealed that the interior surfaces of the gearbox were covered with a black oily substance 
consistent with residual lubricating oil contaminated with liberated metal particles. The oil 
level sight glass exhibited no discoloration or other hindrance to normal oil level detection in 
service. 
Examination of the ring and pinion gears revealed that the teeth on the pinion gear were 
deformed and worn almost down to the tooth root in some locations. Wear was observed on 
the top land and drive faces of the ring gear. Wear patterns were noted on the coast faces of the 
ring and pinion gear teeth. The observation of wear on the coast faces of the gear teeth is most 
probably an indication that the spacing between the gears was too tight as a result of improper 
alignment during installation, causing accelerated wear. A logbook entry showed that the 
helicopter™s last annual inspection was completed about 6 months before the accident during 
which the tail rotor gearbox was overhauled and installed.
The improper installation of the tail rotor gearbox by maintenance personnel, which led to 
accelerated wear of the ring and pinion gears, resulting in the loss of tail rotor effectiveness and 
subsequent forced landing.
On January 1, 2012, about 1400 central standard time, a Continental Copters Inc. 47G2 
helicopter, N9021R, impacted terrain during a forced landing following a loss of tail rotor 
effectiveness near Lohn, Texas. The commercial pilot and passenger sustained serious injuries. 
The helicopter™s tailboom was substantially damaged during the forced landing. The helicopter 
was registered to and operated by Sky Horse Helicopters Inc. under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an aerial observation flight. Day visual flight rules (VFR) 
conditions prevailed for the flight, which did not operate on a VFR flight plan. The helicopter 
departed on the local flight about 1300.
The pilot stated in his accident report that he performed a preflight inspection of the helicopter 
to include checking the tail rotor oil level through its sight glass. He flew the helicopter for 
ﬁoverﬂ an hour when the tail yawed to the left. The yaw was slow at first and then the helicopter 
yawed rapidly. The pilot ﬁcutﬂ the throttle and flew the helicopter ﬁto the ground as fast as 
possible.ﬂ
A logbook endorsement showed that the helicopter™s last annual inspection was completed on 
July 13, 2011, and that the helicopter had accumulated 8,989 hours of total flight time. The 
pilot reported that the helicopter had accumulated 9,057 hours of total flight time at the time 
of the accident and that he did not have any records in reference to the tail rotor gearbox.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the wreckage on-scene. The tail 
rotor gearbox did not operate when it was rotated. The FAA inspector measured the gearboxes' 
shim and he reported its thickness measurement as 0.015 inches, plus or minus 0.001 inches.
The accident gearbox, marked with part no. 47-640-044-39 and serial no. A13-3661, was 
retained and was shipped to Scott™s Œ Bell 47 Inc. for detailed examination under FAA 
supervision. The examination, in part, revealed that the interior surfaces of the gearbox were 
covered with a black oily substance consistent with residual lubricating oil contaminated with 
liberated metal particles. The oil level sight glass exhibited no discoloration or other hindrance 
to normal oil level detection in service. Damage was noted on the upper aft portion of the main 
case assembly where the aft casting accommodated the tail rotor guard. This area of displaced 
or previously removed material was filled with a media consistent with an epoxy mix. The 
gearbox assembly was dismantled in accordance with procedures listed in its service 
instruction and no significant difficulties or abnormal conditions were encountered. Scott™s Œ 
Bell 47 Inc. report is appended to the docket material associated with this case.
Parts, to include the ring and pinion gear, were removed and shipped to the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Materials Laboratory. A NTSB Senior Materials Engineer 
examined the parts and produced Materials Laboratory Factual Report No. 13-028. The 
examination revealed that the teeth on the pinion gear were deformed and worn almost down 
to the tooth root in some locations. Wear was observed on the top land and drive faces of the 
ring gear. Wear patterns were noted on the coast faces of the ring and pinion gear teeth. 
Hardness testing revealed that both gears exhibited a trend of increasing hardness with 
decreasing distance from the bottom land surface. The NTSB Materials Laboratory report is 
appended to the docket material associated with this case.
