While on the downwind leg of the landing pattern, the flight instructor asked the student to 
switch fuel tanks in order to balance the remaining fuel. Shortly thereafter, the student added 
power to adjust his approach path to the runway but the engine did not respond. The student 
switched back to the previous fuel tank; however, engine power was not restored. The airplane 
was substantially damaged during the forced landing. The flight instructor stated that, during 
the previous flight, the student had mentioned that the fuel selector valve did not have a 
noticeable detent position and asked if it was normal for the selector to rotate 360 degrees. The 
flight instructor was not familiar with the accident airplane and its various nuances and had 
not flown it before the day of the accident. A postaccident examination of the engine, fuel 
selector valve, and fuel systems revealed no anomalies. A representative of the airplane™s 
manufacturer indicated that the fuel selector valve was an older type that allows the valve to 
rotate without restriction; newer valve designs restrict travel so that the ﬁoffﬂ position cannot 
be selected without depressing a stop. The airplane was not operating in weather conditions 
favorable for the formation of carburetor icing at the time of accident. The reason for the loss of 
engine power could not be determined.
A loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
On January 3, 2012, approximately 1730 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-160 airplane, 
N5768W, was substantially damaged during a forced landing near San Angelo, Texas. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The instructional flight was 
being conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 without a flight 
plan. The certified flight instructor and student pilot were not injured. The local flight departed 
the San Angelo Regional Airport (KSJT), San Angelo, Texas, approximately 1705.
The flight instructor reported that they were performing touch-and-go landings in the traffic 
pattern. While on the downwind leg, the flight instructor asked the student to switch fuel tanks 
in order to balance the remaining fuel. Shortly thereafter, the student added power to adjust 
his approach path to the runway and the engine did not respond. The student switched back to 
the previous tank; however, engine power was not restored. During the forced landing, the 
right wing struck a tree and separated from the airplane.
The flight instructor stated that during the previous flight, the student had mentioned that the 
fuel selector valve did not have a noticeable detent position and asked if it was normal for the 
selector to rotate 360 degrees. The flight instructor was not familiar with the accident airplane 
and had not flown it prior to the day of the accident. He stated that he was not familiar with the 
various nuances of the accident airplane.
An on scene examination of the engine, conducted by the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA), revealed no anomalies. On February 29, 2012, the fuel selector valve and fuel assembly 
were examined by investigators with the National Transportation Safety Board and Piper 
Aircraft. The examination revealed that the fuel selector valve was firm to rotate with notable 
detents at the prescribed positions. The fuel lines, filters, and fuel pump were free of blockage. 
The reason for the loss of engine power was not determined.
The temperature and dew point at the time of the accident were 15 degrees and minus 7 
degrees Celsius respectively. A review of the carburetor icing probability chart, located in the 
FAA's Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin CE-09-35, dated 6/30/2009, revealed that 
the airplane was not operating in an area favorable for the formation of carburetor icing.
