National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Hampton, IA
Accident Number: CHI07LA246
Date & Time: 08/01/2007, 0915 CDT
Registration: N50877
Aircraft: Air Tractor AT-502B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The airplane was substantially damaged when it struck a ditch along the edge of the runway during an aborted landing.
The pilot reported that there was a right 45 degree crosswind at 20 knots which decreased just as he was touching down.
The airplane then yawed to the right and the pilot applied power to execute an aborted landing.
The airplane subsequently became airborne and crossed over the ditch along the right side of the runway.
The airplane settled to the ground and the left wing tip struck the ditch edge.
The airplane subsequently spun to the left, the right landing gear collapsed, and the airplane slid across the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during landing.
Contributing to the accident was a ditch.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 2.
ABORTED LANDING - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The 14 CFR Part 137 aerial application flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
No injuries were reported.
The local flight originated at an unconfirmed time.
The pilot stated that while landing on runway 17 at HPT the winds were about 20 knots from the southwest.
He said that just as he was touching down the wind speed decreased,  which resulted in the airplane yawing to the right.
He said that the tires began to skip and he applied power to execute a go-around.
He stated that as he crossed the ditch along the right side of the runway the airplane settled to the ground and the left wing tip struck the ditch.
The airplane subsequently spun to the left, the right landing gear collapsed, and the airplane slid across the runway.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
