National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Anaktuvuk Pass, AK
Accident Number: ANC07CA072
Date & Time: 08/01/2007, 1100 AKD
Registration: N40832
Aircraft: Piper PA-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The commercial certificated pilot was landing the tundra tire-equipped, tailwheel airplane at an unimproved, off-airport site under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
According to the pilot, during the base leg of the approach for landing, the engine lost power, and the airplane collided with terrain during an emergency descent/landing.
The airplane's owner reported that he observed the airplane's preflight inspection, and watched the pilot sump the fuel tanks, finding a small quantity of water in the tanks.
He said the airplane departed, and upon returning, during landing, the engine lost power.
While inspecting the airplane after the accident, the owner said he found water in the airplane's gascolator, carburetor, and fuel lines.
He said the airplane was fueled from drums with filters, and it had rained during the preceding days.
He said he suspected water contaminated fuel was the cause of the engine stoppage, and that after refueling the airplane with clean fuel, the engine started and ran without any problems.
The owner said the airplane received damage to its fuselage, wings, lift-struts, and landing gear during the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate preflight inspection, which resulted in a loss of engine power during approach due to water contaminated fuel.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION,WATER 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY Findings 3.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
