The instructor pilot stated that while on final approach to runway 20, the student encountered 
both an increase in headwinds and a sink condition.  Noticing a loss of altitude, the student 
voiced doubt they would make the runway, and the instructor pilot took control of the glider.  
The instructor quickly considered and then rejected a cow pasture, and then continued his 
approach to runway 20.  The glider collided with an airport perimeter fence, short of the 
runway. 
The instructor's pilot's misjudgment of altitude and distance, and his inadequate compensation 
for the wind conditions.  Unfavorable winds and a fence were contributing factors. 
 On November 1, 1997, about 1521 eastern standard time, a Let Blanik L-13, N65140, 
registered to a private individual, operated by Southern Soaring, Inc., as a 14 CFR 91 
instructional flight,  crashed in the vicinity of Swan Creek Airport, Elkin, North Carolina, while 
on final approach to runway 20.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan 
was filed. The glider sustained substantial damage. The certified flight instructor, (CFI) and 
rated commercial pilot student reported no injuries.  The flight departed the same airport 
about 1509.  The CFI stated that the student had flown seven to eight instructional 
flights with a least two other instructors, and was close to soloing.  Previously, the student had 
"bounced" a landing, so the training emphasis this flight was to be towed flight and landing 
touchdown.  The student's turn to final approach put them about 2,000 feet from the runway 
threshhold, on speed, on centerline, and about 100 feet high; high enough, in fact, that the CFI 
remembers considering that to be an opportune time to demonstrate the sideslip maneuver, 
but reconsidered.  In quick succession the glider went low, the student voiced doubt they would 
make the runway, the CFI took control, quickly considered and rejected a cow pasture, and 
collided with an airport perimeter fence short of the runway.
The tow pilot compared landing to takeoff conditions as, "higher winds from the south, 
heavy sink, and turbulence". The CFI said, "...winds picked up...160, 170 to 210" (degrees), 
"...15 gusting to 20" (knots) and he  ".. encountered sink, but little turbulence".
