Witnesses stated they observed the airplane start a steep left turn, estimated more than a 45 
degree angle of bank, between 150 to 300 feet at a slow airspeed. The airplane appeared to 
enter an accelerated stall. The nose pitched down,  and the airplane collided with the ground in 
a left wing low, nose-down attitude. Before the airplane collided with the ground, the engine 
was heard to increase to full power. Examination of the airframe and flight control assembly 
revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. 
failure of the pilot to maintain adequate airspeed, while maneuvering at a low altitude, which 
resulted in an inadvertent stall and subsequent in-flight collision with terrain. 
 On November 1, 1997, about 1548 eastern standard time, a Saldairiaga, Buccaneer II, 
N813LJ, operated by a private owner as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed in the vicinity 
of Clermont, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. 
The airplane was destroyed. The student pilot was fatally injured. The flight originated from 
Flying Gator Airpark, Clermont, Florida, about 1 hour 18 minutes before the accident.
Witnesses who knew the pilot stated they observed the airplane between 150 to 300 feet 
southwest of the airpark. The airplane entered a steep left turn, estimated more than a 45-
degree angle of bank at a slow airspeed. The airplane  appeared to enter an accelerated stall. 
The nose pitched down and the airplane collided with the ground in a left wing low nose-down 
attitude. Before the airplane collided with the ground the engine was heard to increase to full 
power.
Examination of the airframe, flight control system and engine assembly revealed no 
evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. All components necessary for flight 
were present at the crash site. Continuity of the flight control system was confirmed for pitch, 
roll, and yaw. An examination of the engine assembly and accessories was not conducted based 
on statements provided by eyewitnesses indicating the engine was operating at time of impact 
with the terrain.
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. Susan M. Rendon, Associate 
Medical Examiner District Five, Leesburg, Florida, on November 2, 1997. The cause of death 
was injuries related to the aircraft accident. Postmortem toxicology studies of specimens from 
the pilot was performed by the Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Federal Aviation 
Administration, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. These studies were negative for alcohol, basic, 
acidic and neutral drugs.
