The student pilot had planned to practice stop-and-go landings on runway 34. He said the 
airplane touched down on all three wheels simultaneously, because he did not flare sufficiently. 
The left main and nose wheel came up, but instead of going around, he pushed the nose down. 
The airplane began to veer to the left, and the student corrected by applying right rudder. 
When the left main wheel contacted the runway, the airplane veered further to the left. The 
student applied additional right rudder retracted the flaps and added power to abort the 
landing. As the airplane departed the left side of the runway, the student closed the throttle 
and applied brakes. The left wing struck a 3,000-foot marker sign, and the airplane collided 
with a fence. 
failure of the pilot to maintain directional control of the airplane, while landing.  Factors 
related to the accident were: the pilot's improper flare for landing, his delay in attempting to go 
around (abort the landing), and the encounter with a runway marker and a fence. 
 On November 1, 1997, approximately 1055 mountain standard time, a Cessna 172P, N96575, 
owned by Flightech LLC, which was leased back by Great Western Aviation, was substantially 
damaged when it collided with a sign and a fence during takeoff at Tooele, Utah.  The student 
pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed for the instructional flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  
The Flight originated at Salt Lake City, Utah, at 0950.
The student pilot had planned to practice unsupervised stop and go landings on runway 34.  
He said the airplane touched down on all three wheels simultaneously because he did not flare 
sufficiently.  The left main and nose wheel came up but instead of going around, he pushed the 
nose down.  The airplane began to veer to the left and he corrected by applying right rudder.  
When the left main wheel contacted the runway, the airplane veered further to the left.  The 
pilot applied additional right rudder retracted the flaps, and added power to abort the landing.  
As the airplane departed the left side of the runway, the pilot closed the throttle and applied 
brakes.  The left wing struck the 3,000-foot marker sign and the airplane collided with a fence.
