A witness observed the airplane in flight just before the accident occurred.  He said that he saw 
the airplane fly south to north at a very low altitude before it disappeared.  A minute later, the 
witness saw the airplane heading westbound.  He watched the airplane until it disappeared 
behind some trees.  The witness said that the weather was very rainy and windy, with very bad 
visibility.  There were no witnesses to the airplane accident.  The pilot was not instrument 
rated, and had logged no flight time in actual instrument weather conditions.  The weather 
observation reported by the Flight Service Station at Terre Haute, Indiana (38 miles north-
northeast of the accident site), on 11/2/97, at 1745 est (1645 cst), was few clouds at 2,400 feet 
above ground level (agl), a broken ceiling at 3,300 feet agl, an overcast ceiling at 5,000 feet agl, 
and rain showers. 
the pilot's improper decision to continue flight into adverse weather conditions  The low ceiling 
and the heavy rain were factors. 
 On November 2, 1997, at 1730 central standard time (cst), a Piper PA-24-250, N7890P, 
operated by a private pilot, was destroyed when while maneuvering close to the ground, the 
airplane's left wing struck a tree.  The airplane subsequently rolled inverted and impacted the 
terrain, 10 miles north of Robinson, Illinois.  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed 
at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.  
There was no flight plan on file.  The pilot was fatally injured.  The cross-country flight 
originated at Roanoke, Virginia, at 1520 eastern standard time (est), and was en route to 
Hannibal, Missouri.
At approximately 1720 cst, a witness heard the airplane approach  at a very low altitude, 
traveling south to north.  The witness observed the airplane continue to the north until it 
disappeared.
Approximately a minute later, the witness saw the airplane again, heading west.  The witness 
observed the airplane until it disappeared behind some trees.  The witness said that he did not 
hear the airplane crash or observe any fire.  The witness described the weather at the time he 
saw the airplane as rainy and windy with very bad visibility.  
There were no witnesses to the airplane accident.
The pilot's wife reported the airplane overdue on November 3, 1997.  The wreckage was 
discovered by an individual who was taking soil samples in the field, on November 4, 1997, at 
1450 cst.
The pilot was not instrument rated.  The pilot's logbook indicated that as of October 31, 1997, 
he had logged a total flight time of 267.2 hours, all in single engine land airplanes.  No flight 
time was logged in actual weather conditions.
The weather observation reported by the Flight Service Station at Terre Haute, Indiana (38 
miles north-northeast of the accident site), on November 2, 1997, at 1745 est (1645 cst), was 
few clouds at 2,400 feet above ground level (agl), a broken ceiling at 3,300 feet agl, an overcast 
ceiling at 5,000 feet agl, and rain showers.      
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane wreckage at the 
accident site, on November 5, 1997.  The main wreckage rested inverted on the edge of a corn 
field, approximately 200 yards from a tree line which lined the opposite edge of the field.  One 
of the trees had broken limbs and branches approximately 50 feet up from the base of the 
trunk.  A ground scar was observed in the corn field approximately 50 yards from the tree line.  
A five- foot long section of the left wing, the left aileron and the wingtip was located just before 
the ground scar.  It was crushed inward at the leading edge.  Pieces of the windscreen, top of 
the fuselage, engine cowling and one propeller blade were found in and around the ground 
scar.  The propeller blade had broken off at the base.  It showed torsional bending.  
Approximately 45 feet from the ground scar was the top half of the vertical stabilizer and 
rudder.  It was bent aft and broken.  Proceeding across the field and tracking to the main 
wreckage, were pieces of the instrument panel, flight instruments, the left outboard one-half of 
the left horizontal stabilizer and elevator, part of the engine cowling, the right horizontal 
stabilizer and elevator, and the inboard section of the left wing.  Beginning 50 yards back from 
the main wreckage were scattered personal effects, the right horizontal stabilizer and elevator, 
and the tailcone.  The main wreckage rested at the remains of a sheared tree trunk on the edge 
of the corn field.  Debris from the tree was inter-mixed with the wreckage.  The main wreckage 
consisted of the right wing, the fuselage, the engine and remaining propeller blade.  The 
fuselage was broken open and bent aft.  The propeller blade showed torsional bending and tip 
curling.  Flight control continuity was confirmed.  No anomalies were revealed from the 
examination of the engine, engine controls or other airplane systems.
