According to personnel at the airport, the airplane, which is based at the Elk City Municipal 
Airport, taxied to runway 35 to depart for a local flight. The pilot was reported to have 
completed the runup facing into the wind at the runup area for runway 35. Following the 
runup, the pilot maneuvered the airplane to take the active runway. While turning the airplane, 
the tail of the airplane was turned into the prevailing wind and the airplane nosed over and 
came to rest in the inverted position. The recorded winds at the Clinton Sherman Industrial 
Airport which is located 18 miles east of Elk City, were reported from 340 degrees at 27 knots, 
gusting to 33. The peak wind was reported at 35 knots on the 1345 hourly observation. 
The high winds and the pilot's poor judgment in attempting to taxi in the existing wind 
conditions. 
 On November 2, 1997, at 1415 central standard time, a Cessna 172G airplane, N5745R, was 
substantially damaged following a loss of control while taxiing, near Elk City, Oklahoma.  The 
non-instrument rated private pilot and his passenger were not injured.  The airplane was 
owned and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal 
flight which was conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight was originating from the Elk 
City Municipal Airport at the time of the accident. 
According to personnel at the airport, the airplane, which is based at the Elk City Municipal 
Airport, taxied for departure on runway 35 for a local flight.  The pilot was reported to have 
completed the runup facing into the wind at the runup area for runway 35.  Following the 
runup, the pilot maneuvered the airplane to take the active runway.  While turning the 
airplane, the tail of the airplane was turned into the prevailing wind and the airplane nosed 
over and came to rest in the inverted position.
The airport manager stated that due to the high winds, the activity at the airport was minimal 
on the day of the accident.  He further stated that approximately one hour prior to the accident, 
a Cessna 182 landed, purchased fuel and departed without incident.  
The pilot reported to the investigator-in-charge, that he intended to fly to the Sayre Municipal 
Airport, which is located approximately 13 miles to the southwest of Elk City.  He further stated 
he was well aware of the winds and had positioned the flight controls in the proper direction to 
maintain control of the airplane.  He added that he purchased the airplane on August 31, 1997.   
Examination of the airplane by the pilot and the airport manager revealed that both wings, the 
vertical stabilizer and the fuselage, aft of the baggage compartment, sustained structural 
damage.
The recorded winds at the Clinton Sherman Industrial Airport, which is located 18 miles east of 
Elk City, were reported from 340 degrees at 27 knots, gusting to 33.  The peak wind was 
reported at 35 knots on the 1345 hourly observation.
