The pilot reported to the operator that the engine experienced a loss of power during the return 
leg of a cross-country flight.  A forced landing was made on an open field.  During the landing 
roll, the airplane collided with a fence. Inspection of the fuel tanks revealed that the left fuel 
tank was empty, and no fuel was produced when sumped.  The right fuel tank contained 
approximately 1/8 of an inch of fuel, and produced approximately eight ounces of fuel when 
sumped.  No fuel was added during the course of the cross-country flight. 
the pilot's failure to refuel which subsequently led to fuel exhaustion. 
 On November 1, 1997, at 1833 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 152, N5190B, operated by Aerial 
Communications of America as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, collided with a fence during a 
forced landing in a field located 14 miles northwest of Eugene, Oregon.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.  The aircraft was substantially 
damaged and the private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  The flight originated from 
Eugene at about 1400 and was destined for Elma, Washington.  The flight was returning from 
Elma to Eugene, when the accident occurred.
The pilot reported to the operator that the engine experienced a loss of power.  A forced 
landing was made on an open field.  During the landing roll, the airplane collided with a fence.
Personnel from the airport, who helped recover the aircraft, reported that the tachometer 
indicated that 4.0 hours had been accumulated, and the Hobbs meter indicated that a total of 
4.4 hours had been accumulated for the flight.  The fuel tanks and sumps were inspected to 
determine the quantity of fuel remaining in the tanks.  It was reported that there was no visible 
sign of fuel in the left fuel tank, and no fuel was produced when sumped.  The right fuel tank 
contained approximately 1/8 of an inch of fuel, and produced approximately eight ounces of 
fuel when sumped.  The engine sump produced approximately 14 ounces of fuel.
Fueling records indicate that the aircraft was last fueled on October 31, 1997.
The structural damage was not reported to the National Transportation Safety Board until 
January 27, 1998.
