The flight had been airborne for 1 hour 15 minutes when a total loss of engine power occurred. 
During a forced landing in a field, the airplane hit a drainage ditch, the nose gear collapsed, 
and subsequently, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted. The airplane contained 
43 gallons of fuel at the time of departure, and the fuel selector remained in the 'BOTH' 
position during the flight. At the site, fuel was found in the fuel tanks; however, a crack was 
noted in the fuel line between the fuel strainer (mounted on the firewall) and the engine fuel 
pump. There was evidence that air entered the fuel system through the cracked line, resulting 
in fuel starvation to the engine. The reason for the crack in the line was not determined. 
a cracked fuel line, which allowed air to enter the line and lead to fuel starvation and loss of 
engine power.  A related factor was: the lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing. 
 On November 2, 1997, at 1630 central standard time, a Cessna 175, N9437B, struck the terrain 
during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power near Arnaudville, Louisiana.  The 
airplane was owned and operated by a private individual under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The 
private pilot and 3 passengers were not injured and the airplane sustained substantial damage.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight that departed from Homer, 
Louisiana, at 1515.  A flight plan was not filed.  
During a personal interview, conducted by the investigator-in-charge, and on the 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot reported that the 
flight departed an airstrip at Homer, Louisiana, and had been airborne for 1 hour 15 minutes 
en route to Breaux Bridge at 1,200 feet MSL when the "engine quit."  The pilot performed the 
emergency checklist procedures; however, the engine did not restart.  The pilot commenced the 
forced landing procedures for landing in a plowed field.  During the landing roll, the airplane 
hit a drainage ditch, collapsing the nose gear.  Subsequently, the airplane nosed over and came 
to rest inverted.  Prior to the original departure from Beaux Bridge, the pilot fueled the airplane 
with 43 gallons of fuel and performed a preflight inspection.  The fuel selector remained in the 
"BOTH" position during the flight.
The FAA inspector examining the airplane found structural damage on the left wing.  
Approximately 6 gallons of fuel was found in the fuel tanks.  The inspector noted a crack in the 
"fuel line between the fuel strainer (mounted on the firewall) and the engine fuel pump. It is 
suspected that air was suctioned in to the fuel system through the cracked line, resulting in fuel 
starvation to the engine."  The reason for the crack in the line was not determined.
