After takeoff, at about 250 to 300 feet AGL, the right engine lost partial power, followed by the 
left engine. The pilot made a wide left turn toward a small field with trees in front, and 
retracted the landing gear. During the forced landing, the pilot 'intentionally' hit the trees in 
order to slow down and go under some power lines. After going under the wires, the airplane 
came to a stop in the field. The airplane had not been flown for about two years, and the pilot 
was to ferry the aircraft for the owner from Galveston, TX, to Colorado Springs, CO. A 
mechanic at the Scholes Field Airport in Galveston prepared the airplane for the flight and 
obtained a ferry permit from the FAA. The mechanic reported that the fuel tanks were drained 
and visually inspected. About one gallon of water was drained from the tanks, and both fuel 
filters were cleaned. The mechanic also reported that rained had fallen on the day before the 
accident flight. Examination of the fuel filters revealed that they were both clogged with debris. 
inadequate maintenance and/or preflight inspection of the airplane, and subsequent blockage 
of the fuel filters, which led to fuel starvation, partial loss of engine power in both engines, and 
a forced landing.  A related factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
 On November 1, 1997, at 1119 central standard time, a Piper PA-23-250 twin engine airplane, 
N40201, registered to and operated by a private owner as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 ferry flight, 
was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power near 
Galveston, Texas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed.  
The airline transport rated pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained minor injuries.  The 
flight had just originated from the Scholes Field Airport, Galveston, Texas.
During a personal interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the pilot reported 
that the airplane had not been flown for approximately two years, and he was to ferry the 
aircraft for the owner from Galveston to Colorado Springs, Colorado.  A mechanic at the 
Scholes Field Airport prepared the airplane for the flight and obtained a ferry permit from the 
FAA.  The pilot further reported that after takeoff from runway 31, at about 250 to 300 feet 
AGL, the airplane's right engine lost partial power, and then the left engine lost partial power.  
He made a wide left turn towards a small field with trees in front and retracted the landing 
gear.  During the emergency landing to the field, he "intentionally" hit the trees in order to slow 
down and go under some power lines.  After going under the wires the airplane came to a stop 
in the field. 
Examination of the airplane by the FAA inspector revealed fire damage to both the left and 
right engines.  Both wings and both horizontal stabilizers were structurally damaged.  
Examination of the fuel filters revealed that they were both clogged with debris.
During a personal interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the mechanic who 
performed maintenance on the airplane to get it ready for the ferry flight reported that the 
airplane had been parked outside for two years at the Seafood Warehouse, a private airstrip.  
Before ferrying the airplane to Galveston for further maintenance, the fuel tanks were drained 
and visually inspected.  About one gallon of water was drained from the tanks before fuel 
started draining out.  Both fuel filters were cleaned.  There were no problems with the engines 
during the ferry flight to Galveston.
The mechanic also reported that he did not fly the airplane, but he did taxi it.  While taxing the 
airplane, he spun it around to dislodge any debris that might be in the fuel bladders.  He also 
shook both wings and no debris was found.  The mechanic further reported that he had test run 
the engines for about 10 hours.  During the test run, one engine was not developing full power, 
and he had another mechanic change the engine's fuel injectors.
The mechanic reported that it rained the day before the accident flight.  A flight instructor told 
the mechanic that he observed the pilot walk out to the airplane; however, he "did not see the 
pilot sump the fuel."  He also observed the pilot perform several high speed taxis before taking 
off.  During these taxis the engines were "sputtering and coughing."  During the ensuing 
takeoff, both engines sounded good until the airplane started to turn.  As the airplane turned, 
one engine lost power, and then the other engine lost power.
