Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
INDIAN SPRINGS, NV
Accident Number:
LAX99FA137
Date & Time:
04/03/1999, 2350 PST 
Registration:
N105HH
Aircraft:
Mbb B0-105CBS-4
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning - Air Medical (Unspecified)
Analysis 
The medical evacuation helicopter was on a positioning flight back to its remote base location 
on a dark night.  The pilot received a weather briefing at 1700; however, there was no record of 
him receiving an update.  The area forecast was for broken clouds, scattered light rain showers, 
instrument flight rules (IFR) conditions, strong northerly winds over rough terrain, light to 
occasional moderate rime icing in precipitation, and a freezing level between 7,000 and 9,000 
feet mean sea level.  A winter advisory was in effect for 2 to 3 inches of snow with winds from 
the southeast at 13 to 22 knots.  A motorist saw the helicopter flying west over a highway 
leading to the accident site at 1,000 feet above ground level (AGL).  The sky was overcast with 
freezing rain that turned into wet snow and then finally freezing sleet.  A second motorist 
nearer the accident site saw the helicopter using its searchlight to follow the highway at 150 to 
200 feet AGL in conditions of lower clouds and reduced visibility.  A resident next to the 
accident site heard the helicopter flying back and forth for a few minutes followed by the crash.  
He drove in the direction of the sound and found the crash site in flames.  Snow had reduced 
visibility to less than 50 yards at the time.  The aircraft was not certified for flight in IFR 
conditions; however, it had full flight instruments, a radar altimeter, a GPS, and VHF 
navigational radios.  The operator reported the pilot had undergone an inadvertent instrument 
meteorological conditions evaluation within the last 90 days; however, documentation of this 
training was not found. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's decision to continue VFR flight in deteriorating IFR conditions resulting in spatial 
disorientation and subsequent loss of control. 
Page 2 of 10LAX99FA137
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. WEATHER CONDITION - SNOW
2. LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
3. UPDATING OF RECORDED WEATHER INFORMATION - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) FLIGHT INTO ADVERSE WEATHER - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
5. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (C) SPATIAL DISORIENTATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. TERRAIN CONDITION - RISING
Page 3 of 10LAX99FA137
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 3, 1999, about 2350 hours Pacific standard time, a Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm 
(Mbb) BO-105CBS-4, N105HH, with the call sign Lifeguard 2, was en route to Pahrump, 
Nevada, when it collided with terrain and burned while maneuvering near Indian Springs, 
Nevada.  The aircraft was destroyed and the certificated airline transport pilot and his two 
medical crewmembers received fatal injuries.  The aircraft was operated as a positioning flight 
under 14 CFR Part 91 by Metro Aviation, Inc., when the accident occurred.  The flight 
originated from Las Vegas, Nevada, about 2315 on April 3, 1999.  Instrument meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the accident site and a company flight plan had been filed.
The aircraft departed Valley Hospital Medical Center in Las Vegas after delivering a patient.  
The purpose of the flight was to reposition the aircraft at its home base at Hidden Hills Airport, 
Pahrump, Nevada.  
A motorist, who was westbound on U.S. highway 95 near the overpass at state highway 156, 
reported seeing a helicopter with a flashing strobe light flying over the highway in the same 
direction on the night of the accident.  He estimated the aircraft's altitude at that time to be 
about 1,000 feet agl.  
He stated that the sky was overcast with freezing rain that turned into wet snow and then 
finally freezing sleet.  Within a few minutes, the freezing precipitation had obscured the 
forward vision through his windshield.  His windshield wipers were unable to remove the 
frozen accumulation and he was forced to roll down his driver's side window in order to obtain 
any forward visibility.  As the intensity of the snow increased, he slowed his speed from 70 mph 
to about 35 mph.  During this time he passed another vehicle, with its emergency flashers on, 
that had stopped along the highway.
A second motorist was traveling southeast bound toward Las Vegas but had not reached Indian 
Springs when he saw a helicopter flying about 150 to 200 feet overhead in the opposite 
direction on the night of the accident.  The helicopter was using its searchlight as it followed 
the highway but would then suddenly fly away from the highway only to return a short time 
later.  At one point, the pilot illuminated another car with his searchlight and seemed to be 
following it for a time.
By the time the first motorist reached Indian Springs, he estimated that visibility was about 50 
feet with winds from the south about 10 mph.  He went inside his motor home and a few 
minutes later heard a "thump."
A second resident of Indian Springs reported that he heard the sounds of an aircraft flying back 
and forth in what he thought was a north-south direction for about 10 minutes.  Finally, the 
engine noise became so faint that he was unable to hear it; however, a few minutes later the 
engine noise returned.  He heard the engine sounds for a few more minutes and then heard a 
"big thump."  Thinking that the aircraft had crashed, he drove toward the origin of the sound 
and found the crash site in flames.  He estimated that snow had reduced visibility to less than 
50 yards at the time.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot was a former military pilot and had served in the Soviet Air Force.  He had logged a 
Page 4 of 10LAX99FA137
total of 10,920 hours, 6,580 of which were in helicopters, with about 3,592 hours of instrument 
time.  He had accumulated about 187 hours in this make and model helicopter and had flown 
about 3 hours during the preceding 24 hours.  He had worked for the operator as an emergency 
medical services (EMS) pilot for about 1 year.
The operator reported that he had satisfactorily completed an inadvertent meteorological 
condition (IMC) evaluation within the last 90 days.  The operator provided copies of his 
training records showing that he had satisfactorily completed an unusual attitude recovery 
evaluation on April 30, 1998.  A further review of the training records showed that the training 
form content had been revised.  The last record that specifically documents inadvertent IMC 
training in combination with unusual attitude recovery was dated October 22, 1997; however, 
on that date inadvertent IMC procedures for the pilot were not evaluated.  The operator did not 
provide any additional records.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The aircraft was not certified for instrument flight; however, it was equipped with flight 
instruments to include an attitude indicator, a horizon situation indicator (HSI), a radar 
altimeter, a global positioning system (GPS), and very high frequency (VHF) navigational 
radios.  The radar altimeter provides an aural warning as the aircraft descends through a 
predesignated altitude; however, continued operation below this altitude will not result in 
subsequent warnings regardless of terrain proximity.
The forward windscreen was equipped with external windshield wipers and an internal 
defroster utilizing engine bleed air. 
The aircraft was approved for flight in wet snow, in accordance with airworthiness directive 
(AD) No. 90-23-08-RO, and Mbb service bulletin (SB)-BO 105-80-108.
A review of the aircraft maintenance forms and records by Safety Board investigators did not 
reveal any discrepancies. 
The operator estimated that the aircraft had about 120 gallons of Jet A onboard at the time of 
the last departure. 
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records disclosed that the pilot had accessed the Data 
Transformation Corporation (DTC) commercial weather service at 1900 on the evening of the 
accident.  The service allows pilots to obtain weather information on-line through a Direct User 
Access Terminal (DUAT) via the Internet, including color radar graphics.  There were no 
records of subsequent weather updates.
The destination, Hidden Hills Airport, Pahrump, does not have weather reports or forecasts 
issued for that location.  The closest reporting station is Desert Rock Airport, Mercury, Nevada, 
43 miles to the north; however, terminal forecasts, as such, are valid only within a 5-mile 
radius of the airport.  The 2356 weather observation for Desert Rock Airport reported winds 
from 110 degrees at 3 knots; 9 miles visibility; an overcast ceiling of 1,900 feet agl; temperature 
of 36 degrees; and dew point of 32 degrees Fahrenheit.  Unknown precipitation began at 2312.  
(Unknown precipitation is reported by automated systems when the system can not determine 
the type of precipitation that is falling, i.e., ice pellets, snow pellets, snow grain, graupel, ice 
needles, drizzle, freezing drizzle, or a combination of those listed.)
Page 5 of 10LAX99FA137
The closest upper air data observation was also located at Desert Rock Airport.  At 2100, the 
sounding indicated that the air was saturated from the surface up to 16,000 feet msl.  The 
freezing level was at the surface (3,310 feet msl), with winds from 210 degrees at 5 knots.
The current area forecast for southern Nevada had been issued at 1945, and was valid until 
0800.  It forecast broken clouds at 7,000 feet msl, scattered light rain showers, and light snow 
over the mountains.  
AIRMET Sierra issued at 1845 forecast mountain obscuration in clouds and precipitation.  
AIRMET Sierra update No. 1 that was issued at 2335 forecast IFR conditions and mountain 
obscuration until 0600.  
AIRMET Tango issued at 1845 forecast occasional moderate turbulence below 16,000 feet msl.  
AIRMET Tango update No. 1 that was issued at 2345 forecast moderate turbulence below 
16,000 feet msl, as well as strong northerly winds over rough terrain.  
AIRMET Zulu, issued at 1845, forecast light to occasional moderate rime icing in precipitation 
below 18,000 feet msl.  AIRMET Zulu update No. 1 that was issued at 2345 forecast the 
freezing level to be between 7,000 and 9,000 feet msl.   
At 2309, the National Weather Service (NWS) Las Vegas Regional Office issued a winter 
advisory for snow and blowing snow.  With 4 inches of snow already reported to have fallen, an 
additional 2 to 3 inches was expected, with winds from the southeast at 13 to 22 knots. 
AIDS TO NAVIGATION
A nondirectional radio beacon (NDB), Mercury, is located at Desert Rock Airport.  There is no 
voice capability on the station frequency.
COMMUNICATIONS
After departure from Valley Hospital Medical Center, the pilot was scheduled to make position 
reports every 15 minutes while flight following on his company FM frequency.  The first 
scheduled position report was due about 2330; however, there was no radio contact at anytime 
from the pilot.
At 2315, the pilot called the Las Vegas air traffic control tower (ATCT).  He requested clearance 
through Class B airspace to the northwest.  He was cleared through the airspace and given the 
current altimeter setting.  The controller then asked if he desired flight following.  The pilot 
replied that he did not and that he would be "staying low."  Radar services were terminated at 
2321.  
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Safety Board investigators arrived at the accident site, east of Old Ben Road, approximately 0.6 
miles north of the intersection between Old Ben and Wilson Roads, on the morning of April 4, 
1999.
The initial ground scar was found located at 36 degrees 33.656 minutes north latitude and 115 
degrees 39.363 minutes west longitude.  The site elevation was estimated to be about 3,200 
feet msl.  The site was located on gently rolling open desert terrain and sloped upward toward 
the south at about 10 to 15 degrees.
The wreckage distribution covered an area 466 feet in length.  From the initial scars, the 
wreckage was fanned out about 30 degrees along either side of the long axis of the debris path 
Page 6 of 10LAX99FA137
on a 188-degree bearing.  A secondary ground scar was found beyond the fire area. 
Both skid tubes and cross tubes were fractured and had separated from the aircraft.  The 
fuselage floor had also separated from the aircraft.
The main rotor head, transmission, and the tail rotor had separated from the airframe and 
were found in the forward portion of the debris field.  All four main rotor blades had separated 
from the hub near the blade grips. 
Both engines showed evidence of foreign object damage (FOD) with compressor blades and 
vanes bent opposite the direction of rotation.  Fuel was found between the fire shields and the 
fuel nozzle supply lines in both engines.  Both engines remained attached to the engine decks.
The compressor case of the No. 1 engine was partially crushed along its left side.  The accessory 
gearbox exhibited a puncture on its bottom, near the front.  The power turbine governor body 
was separated from the accessory gearbox-mounting flange.  The power turbine governor drive 
shaft was sheared at the accessory gearbox.  The fuel control unit body was separated from the 
accessory gearbox-mounting flange.  The fuel control unit drive shaft was sheared.  The 
exhaust collector and power turbine section were separated from the accessory gearbox.  The 
outer combustion case was crushed.  Both compressor air discharge tubes were crushed.  The 
exhaust collector was dented and crushed.  The gas producer rotor turned freely when rotated 
by hand.  Contact with a distorted exhaust collector prevented the power turbine from rotating.
The compressor of the No. 2 engine was crushed along its left side.  The engine inlet de-ice was 
found in the "on" position.  The bleed valve case was separated from the compressor.  The 
accessory gearbox was fragmented; however, all the gears were located.  The fuel control unit 
body was separated from the mounting flange with no apparent damage to the drive splines; 
however, the drive shaft itself was bent.  The power turbine governor body was separated from 
its mounting flange and the drive shaft was sheared.  The engine-driven fuel pump remained 
attached to its mounting position with no visible damage noted.  Both compressor air discharge 
tubes were crushed.  The outer combustion case was crushed.  The combustion liner was 
crushed.  The gas producer rotor turned freely when rotated by hand.  The exhaust collector 
was crushed.  There was evidence of rotational contact between the fourth stage turbine wheel 
blade roots and the exhaust collector.
The main gearbox (MGB) case was separated at two points.  The separations occurred at the 
lower MGB attachment point, and at the planetary gear/internal ring gear, exposing the sun 
gear.  The main rotor head assembly remained attached to the top of the MGB case.  The main 
rotor mast was hand rotated and produced movement of the planetary gear.  The input quill 
and sun gear rotated slightly with force applied by hand in the direction of rotation.  The 
freewheeling clutch engaged on both quills when rotated by hand.  All drive shafts were 
sheered at the MGB attachment ends.
The vertical stabilizer separated from the tailboom at the 10L/11L frame.  The intermediate 
gearbox rotated freely when turned by hand.  The tail rotor drive shaft separated from the 
forward input coupling at the intermediate gearbox.  Rotational scoring was found on the inner 
surface of the forward coupling.
The 90-degree gearbox was separated from the vertical stabilizer.  The tail rotor assembly 
remained attached to the gearbox.  The drive shaft separated at the output end of the 
intermediate gearbox and at the input end of the 90-degree gearbox.  The 90-degree gearbox 
rotated freely when turned by hand.
Page 7 of 10LAX99FA137
The tailboom separated from the aircraft forward of the VOR antenna location.  The remainder 
of the tailboom remained attached to fuselage mounting point.
The right horizontal stabilizer was separated from the tailboom.  The bottom of the tailboom 
was crushed at the 7 o'clock position.  The tail rotor drive shaft remained attached to the 
tailboom.  The top of the tailboom aft of the horizontal stabilizers was crushed at the 12 o'clock 
position.
The tail rotor pitch slider moved freely when moved by hand.  One pitch change link was bent; 
however, both pitch change links remained attached.  The blade associated with the bent pitch 
change link had more visible damage that the opposite bade.
The fuselage crush line was higher on the left side than the right.  All the lower control tubes 
were bent and broken.  All the bolts on the control tube rod ends were in place.
The hydraulic pack was examined.  The slide valve was found in the No. 1 position.  The No. 2 
slide valve was slightly bent.  The measurement of the connecting link was 24.82 mm before 
straightening.  After straightening it was measured as 25.36 mm.  The control arm of the 
switchover actuator was fractured.  All control rods at the lower connecting levers were 
separated from the control tube rod ends.  All middle control tubes remained attached.  All 
upper cyclic control tubes were separated.  The collective control tube was separated from the 
upper rod end.
All the main rotor blades separated near the roots.  All the blades exhibited extensive spar 
damage.
The forward cross tube was spread to a greater extent than the rear cross tube.  Both skids were 
separated from both cross tubes.  The toe portion of both skids were flattened.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was conducted on April 5, 1999, by the Clark County Coroner's Office with 
specimens retained for toxicological examination.  The toxicological test results were negative 
for alcohol and all screened drug substances with the exceptions of chlorpheniramine, 
phenylpropanolamine, and lidocaine.
According to current pharmacological literature, chlorpheniramine is a sedating antihistamine 
that is commonly found in over-the-counter cold and allergy products.
Phenylpropanolamine is a decongestant that is also commonly found in over-the-counter cold 
and allergy products.
Lidocaine is a local anesthetic used in certain over-the-counter skin preparations, and for 
minor surgical procedures.  It is also given intravenously in emergency medical settings to 
control abnormal heart rhythms.
FIRE
Evidence of a ground fire was found fanning out beyond the initial ground scars.  Witnesses 
reported that the fire did not spread and burned itself out within a few minutes.  Fire damage 
to the wreckage was confined to the initial burn area, showing some charring and sooting of 
debris.  There was no evidence of molten metal within the burn area.  
TESTS AND RESEACH
Page 8 of 10LAX99FA137
A request for the retrieval of possible radar data by the FAA Western Region Quality Assurance 
was made through the FAA coordinator.  Data was recovered that showed the pilot departing 
Valley Hospital Medical Center at 2315.  The initial return showed the pilot at 2,100 feet msl.  
Radar contact was lost 6 minutes later, with the last contact showing the aircraft proceeding 
northwest bound at 3,000 feet msl.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
There was no reported emergency locator transmitter (ELT) signal that was associated with 
this accident.  According to aircraft records, the aircraft was equipped with an ARTEX ELT110-
4; however, it was not found in the wreckage.
At the completion of the on-site portion of the investigation on April 4, 1999, the wreckage was 
transported to Phoenix, Arizona, by Air Transport, Inc., and stored in their facilities pending 
an additional examination.  The investigation continued at the Phoenix location on April 5, 
1999, with representatives of the aircraft and engine manufacturers present.
The wreckage was released to Ted Green of AIG Aviation Insurance Services, Los Angeles, 
California, a representative of the registered owner on July 26, 2000.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/21/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
10920 hours (Total, all aircraft), 187 hours (Total, this make and model), 7630 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 47 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 9 of 10LAX99FA137
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Mbb
Registration:
N105HH
Model/Series:
B0-105CBS-4 B0-105CBS-
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0339
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/10/1999, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5512 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
29 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
5763 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20B
Registered Owner:
BRUCE D. GRAY
Rated Power:
420 hp
Operator:
MIKE STANBERRY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
METRO AVIATION, INC.
Operator Designator Code:
HDNA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DRA, 3314 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1256 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
280°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
9 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 1900 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Drizzle; Small Hail and/or Snow Pellets; No Obscuration; Ice Pellets; Snow Grains
Departure Point: 
LAS VEGAS, NV 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
PAHRUMP, NV (L57)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2315 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 10 of 10
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     R CRISPIN
Adopted Date:
12/04/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
CARLOS   FLORES; LAS VEGAS, NV
DAVID   CHAPEL; PHOENIX, AZ
JOHN J SWIFT; INDIANAPOLIS, IN
ROBERT   REULAND; GRAND PRAIRIE, TX
Publish Date:
02/02/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
