National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FINLEY, ND
Accident Number: CHI97LA002
Date & Time: 10/03/1996, 0815 CDT
Registration: N185ND
Aircraft: Cessna 185
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane was parked on shore near a dock.
The flight instructor (CFI) reported that after starting the engine, the airplane began to move forward, and the wing strut and wing cleared the dock.
After the wing cleared the dock, the instructor began to lower the water rudders, and the tail of the airplane began moving toward the dock.
A right crosswind was present during the departure from the shore.
The instructor reported that full left rudder with the water rudders partially extended was ineffective in stopping the horizontal stabilizer of the airplane from hitting the dock.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the flight instructor (CFI) to ensure that clearance from the dock was maintained, while starting to taxi.
The crosswind was a related factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) Factual Information On October 3, 1996, at 0815 central daylight time (cdt), a Cessna 185, N185ND, sustained substantial damage when the airplane's horizontal stabilizer collided with a dock.
The airplane was taxiing for takeoff, on Golden Lake, near Finley, North Dakota, when the accident occurred.
The flight instructor and student pilot were uninjured in the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions, and no flight plan had been filed.
The flight instructor reported on NTSB form 6120.1/2 that the airplane was parked on the shore near the dock.
Before departing the shore the instructor reported that she and the student discussed the departure, and believed that distance between the dock and the airplane did not appear to present a problem during departure.
The instructor reported that after starting the airplane's engine the airplane began to move forward, and the wing strut and wing cleared the dock.
After clearing the dock with the wing the instructor reported that she began to lower the water rudders, and the tail of the airplane began moving towards the dock.
The diagram included with the report shows that the aircraft was experiencing a right crosswind during the departure from shore.
The instructor reported that full left rudder with the water rudders partially extended was ineffective in stopping the horizontal of the airplane from hitting the dock.
The pilot did not report any airplane or engine malfunctions.
The airplane's horizontal stabilizer required replacement, following the accident.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
