National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ALLEGAN, MI
Accident Number: CHI97LA001
Date & Time: 10/03/1996, 1410 EDT
Registration: N5393C
Aircraft: Cessna 140A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated the airplane bounced slightly during the landing on runway 10.
The airplane then ground looped and came to rest inverted off the north side of the runway.
The pilot reported local winds were from the north at 6 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain directional control during landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The pilot and passenger were not injured.
The flight originated from Coldwater, Michigan, at 1330 edt.
The pilot stated that the airplane bounced "slightly" during the landing, ground looped and nosed over.
The accident site was viewed by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector who reported the airplane came to rest inverted just off the north side of the runway near the intersection of the sod and paved runways.
The airplane came to rest on a heading of approximately 230 degrees.
The pilot reported that the local winds were from the north at 6 knots.
Winds reported at Kalamazoo, Michigan, 15 miles south- southeast of the accident site were reported as 080 degrees at 8 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 67, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
