National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: JACKSON, MS
Accident Number: MIA97LA001
Date & Time: 10/02/1996, 1212 CDT
Registration: N4178S
Aircraft: Beech 58
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis According to the pilot, he was rolling down the runway, had reached rotation speed, rotated, and started climbing.
After attaining a positive rate of climb, he selected gear up.
The pilot had stated, 'then I felt that my right shoe lace was caught on something.'
While the airplane was climbing, he bent down to fix his shoe lace.
He estimated that 1-2 seconds had past while fixing his shoe lace.
He thought that he had enough back pressure for the plane to climb, but stated, 'maybe I pushed the yoke a little forward with my chest.'
When he was getting up from fixing his shoe lace, he noticed that the plane was going down.
The airplane hit the runway, then bounced back in the air.
While in the air, the pilot tried to get the gear down, but it would not come down.
The airplane hit the runway again, and slid down the runway until it came to a stop.
The pilot had also stated to the FAA, that he did not have any mechanical problems with the airplane or engines.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane resulting in an in flight collision with the runway.
A factor in this accident was the pilot diverted his attention away from flying the airplane to fix his shoe lace.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - RUNWAY Factual Information On October 2, 1996, about 1212 central daylight time, a Beech Baron 58, N4178S, operated by Paragon Air Express Inc., crashed during takeoff from the Jackson International Airport, Jackson, Mississippi.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time, and no flight plan was filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91, positioning flight.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the airline transport-rated pilot, the sole occupant, received serious injuries.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot's statement on the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, "...I was rolling down the runway, reached rotation speed, rotated, and started climbing.
After positive rate of climb, I selected gear up.
Then I felt that my right shoe lace was caught on something.
While the plane was climbing, I bend [sic] down to fix it.
I estimate that time elapsed while fixing my shoe lace was 1-2 seconds.
I thought that I had enough back pressure for the plane to climb, but maybe I pushed the yoke a little forward with my chest.
When I was getting up from fixing my shoe lace, I noticed that the plane was going down.
I pulled back immediately, but it was to late.
The plane hit the ground, then bounced back in the air...while in the air, I tried to get the gear down, but it would not come down.
I hit the runway again, and the plane slides [sic] down the runway till it comes to a stop."
The pilot stated to the FAA that his shoe lace became untied, and became "tangled in the rudder pedals."
The pilot had also stated to the FAA that he did not have any mechanical problems with the airplane or engines.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 28, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane Single-engine; Instrument Airplane Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
