Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fort Gibson, OK
Accident Number:
FTW03FA028
Date & Time:
11/01/2002, 1150 CST 
Registration:
N8885F
Aircraft:
Hughes 269A
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During cruise flight, the helicopter experienced an in-flight breakup.  Witnesses observed what 
appeared to be tail rotor, and main rotor components separate from the helicopter as it flew 
overhead.  One of the witnesses reported that a portion of the tail rotor separated, and as 
helicopter pitched to the right, the main rotor separated.  Subsequently, the helicopter's main 
fuselage started to spin and descended vertically toward the ground.  Another witness reported 
that he heard a "pop,"  and observed the main rotor slowing, wobbling, stop turning, break 
away from the helicopter, and travel forward of the helicopter.  He reported that the helicopter 
pitched "nose forward and then fell almost vertical."   The main rotor assembly was found 
approximately 450 feet east of the main wreckage site, and the tail rotor components were 
found with the main wreckage.  Metallurgical examination revealed that the left cluster fitting 
lugs (P/N 269A2234), which attached to the left tail boom strut, failed due to fatigue.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The in-flight separation of the tail boom resulting from the failure of the fuselage to tail boom 
attachment fitting lugs, due to fatigue.
Page 2 of 7FTW03FA028
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) FUSELAGE,ATTACHMENT - FAILURE
2. (C) MISC ROTORCRAFT,TAIL BOOM - SEPARATION
3. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - FATIGUE
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
4. AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7FTW03FA028
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 01, 2002, approximately 1150 central standard time, a Hughes 269A helicopter, 
N8885F, impacted the terrain following a loss of control during cruise flight near Fort Gibson, 
Oklahoma.  The helicopter was owned and operated by Tundra Resources Corporation of 
Tulsa, Oklahoma.  The private pilot, its sole occupant, received fatal injuries, and the helicopter 
was destroyed during the impact sequence and post-crash fire.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the planned cross-country flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 flight originated from Cookson, Oklahoma, at an 
unknown time, with a planned destination of Tulsa, Oklahoma.
A witness, who was working outside in his front yard, reported that he observed the helicopter 
flying overhead in a westerly direction.  He stopped working, looked up, and watched the 
helicopter for about 8 seconds as it passed overhead.  Subsequently, he "saw a piece of the tail 
rotor fly off," and the helicopter "pitched to the right."  He added that the "entire main rotor" 
appeared to "break away," and the "cockpit of the helicopter began spinning very fast and fell 
to the ground."  The witness stated that the entire sequence from "start to finish lasted about 
five seconds."
Another witness, who was walking along a road, reported that he heard the helicopter 
approaching from the east.  He looked up and observed it pass overhead.  He continued to walk 
down the road, and then heard a "pop,"  He then "looked back up," and observed the "main 
rotor slowing rapidly and wobbling".  Subsequently, he observed that the main rotor appeared 
to "stop turning" and "broke away and forward of the windshield."  The helicopter the "pitched 
nose forward, and then fell almost vertical."  The witness observed what he described as a "red 
airfoil" piece of helicopter fall to the ground, approximately 70 yards from where he was 
standing.  He then walked toward the fallen wreckage and located a tail rotor blade, the left tail 
boom strut, the right tabulator, and the main rotor.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was issued a FAA private pilot certificate on April 10, 2001.  At the time of the 
accident the pilot held a single-engine land rating and a commercial helicopter rating.  The 
pilot was also issued a mechanic certificate on March 22, 2001, with airframe and powerplant 
ratings.  There were no restrictions or limitations listed on the pilot's second-class medical 
certificate issued on April, 10, 2001.  On the application for the medical certificate, the pilot 
reported having accumulated a total of 1,000 flight hours, of which 50 hours were in the 
previous six months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Hughes model 269A helicopter (S/N 0261) was equipped with a three-bladed main rotor, a 
two bladed tail rotor and powered by a single Lycoming HO-360-B1B reciprocating engine 
(S/N L-6272-36) rated at 180 horsepower.
A review of the maintenance records revealed that the helicopter underwent its most recent 
annual inspection on March 1, 2002, at a total airframe time of 1,456.9 hours and engine time 
since major overhaul of 627.3 hours.  The most recent airframe 100-hour inspection occurred 
on April 27, 2000, at a total airframe time of 1,426.0 hours and the most recent engine 100-
Page 4 of 7FTW03FA028
hour inspection occurred on September 19,1996, at a time since major overhaul of 543.0 hours.  
No evidence of uncorrected maintenance discrepancies was noted in the maintenance records.
The records indicated that the helicopter was placed in long-term storage between 1980 and 
1991.  The helicopter was removed from storage on October 1, 1991, at a total airframe time of 
1,258.8 hours.  Amongst many other inspections, the logbook stated that "AD 88-17-04 placard 
installed."  According to the log book AD 76-18-01 (Aft cluster fitting inspection) was first 
complied with on February 27, 1977.  AD 2001-25-52 superseded AD 76-18-01 and was listed as 
completed on February 28, 2002.  No detailed inspection sheets or dye penetrate test details 
for this inspection were provided.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1153 the Davis Field automated surface observing system (ASOS) in Muskogee, Oklahoma, 
located 8 nautical miles north of the accident site, reported the wind from 010 degrees at 7 
knots, overcast skies at 6,000 feet AGL, 7 miles visibility, temperature 43 degrees Fahrenheit, 
dew point 37 degrees Fahrenheit and altimeter 30.50 inches of Mercury.
WRECKAGE IMPACT INFORMATION
The main wreckage site was located using a global positioning satellite (GPS) receiver at 35 
degrees, 46.59 minutes north latitude and 095 degrees, 08.19 minutes west longitude.  The 
accident site was approximately 50 feet south of a country road in a wooded area of the Gruber 
State Game Management Area.
The main wreckage consisted of the cabin area, aircraft framework, engine, skids and the tail 
boom.  The helicopter impacted several trees during its decent and came to rest inverted 
against a tree.  The main rotor assembly was found approximately 450 feet east of the main 
wreckage site.  The left tail boom support strut, horizontal stabilizer and one tail rotor blade 
were found with the main rotor assembly but had been placed there by one of the witnesses.  
During questioning the witness reported recovering the strut and stabilizer about 250 feet 
south of the main wreckage site and the blade about 420 feet south of the site.  Several other 
pieces of the tail rotor assembly were found in the area south of the wreckage during the onsite 
examination.
The wreckage was recovered and moved to a hangar for a more detailed examination.  The 
engine had significant impact damage and would not rotate but disassembly revealed sings 
consistent with power generation.  Control continuity could not be established due to the 
extensive impact damage.  Two of the three main rotor blades showed major tip impact 
signatures and trailing edge buckling indicating lead-lag bending.  The third rotor blade 
showed very little tip impact damage but had a major trailing edge impact about 2 feet inboard 
of the tip.
Both tail rotor blades and the tail rotor gearbox were fractured in numerous places.  The tail 
boom exhibited several impact marks at the aft end near the location of the tail rotor.  The left 
tail boom support strut was found intact south of the main wreckage with a portion of the left 
cluster fitting still attached to the strut.  The right tail boom support strut was found attached 
to the fittings and fractured within the main wreckage.
A post impact fire destroyed the helicopter.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Page 5 of 7FTW03FA028
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Office of the Chief Medical Examiner of Tulsa, 
Oklahoma on November 2, 2002.  According to the report, "The cause of death...[was] multiple 
blunt trauma sustained during an aircraft accident."  Toxicological tests performed by the 
Federal Aviation Administration's Civil Aero medical Institute (CAMI) were negative for 
ethanol and drugs.  Tests for cyanide and carbon monoxide were not performed.
TEST AND RESEARCH
A portion of the tail boom with the remains of the saddle fitting, a portion of the saddle fitting 
with an attached portion of the left tail boom strut, the right cluster fitting with attached right 
tail boom strut, the left cluster fitting and the left tail boom strut were all sent to the NTSB 
Materials Laboratory for examination.  Metallurgical examination revealed that the left cluster 
fitting lugs (P/N 269A2234), which attaches to the left tail boom strut, failed due to fatigue.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Private
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/16/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/10/2001
Flight Time:
1000 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7FTW03FA028
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Hughes
Registration:
N8885F
Model/Series:
269A 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
730261
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
49 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1506 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
HO-360-B1B
Registered Owner:
Tundra Resources 
Corporation
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Tundra Resources 
Corporation
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MKO, 610 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 6000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.5 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Cookson, OK 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Tulsa (RVS)
Type of Clearance:
Unknown
Departure Time:
1100 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
35.776389, -95.136389
Page 7 of 7
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joyce Roach
Adopted Date:
06/30/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Carl S Keesey; FAA FSDO; Oklahoma City, OK
Jack A Mitteer; Boeing (Hughes); Mesa, AZ
Steve Gleason; Schweizer Aircraft Corporation; Horseheads, NY
Jeffrey R Poschwatta; Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
