Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Marietta, PA
Accident Number:
NYC02FA152
Date & Time:
08/01/2002, 2030 EDT 
Registration:
N81310
Aircraft:
Grumman American AA-5B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
4 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness observed the pilot was having difficulty starting the engine.  After the engine started, 
the airplane was taxied to the runway.  The witness then observed the airplane in a steep 45-
degree left bank, until it disappeared behind corn stalks.  A second witness observed the 
accident airplane depart from the airport and the engine "cut off and on five times" before 
descending to the ground.  A third witness observed the airplane in a sharp bank, with the left 
wing tipped downward and the right wing pointed towards the sky, before it disappeared below 
a tree line.  On a recent flight, the pilot was observed having difficulty starting the engine.  He 
also requested maintenance assistance for a rough running magneto.  The maintenance 
performed on the airplane included removal, cleaning, and verifying specifications of both 
magnetos, and all spark plugs.  Review of the airplane's maintenance logs did not reveal any 
entries related to magneto or spark plug malfunctions.  After the accident, neither the left or 
right magnetos could be tested due to impact and fire damage.  A review of FAA-H-8083-3, 
Airplane Flying Handbook, revealed, "...If an actual engine failure should occur immediately 
after takeoff and before a safe maneuvering altitude is attained, it is usually inadvisable to 
attempt to turn back to the field from where the takeoff was made.  Instead, it is safer to 
immediately establish the proper glide attitude, and select a field directly ahead or slightly to 
either side of the takeoff path."  There were several non-populated clear areas/fields along, and 
on either side of, the departure path.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper decision to operate an airplane with known mechanical deficiencies, his 
improper decision to return to the airport with inadequate altitude remaining, and his failure 
to maintain airspeed.  A factor related to the accident was the malfunction of the ignition 
system, which resulted in a loss of engine power.
Page 2 of 7NYC02FA152
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) IGNITION SYSTEM - MALFUNCTION
2. (C) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - CROP
4. (C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 7NYC02FA152
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 2002, about 2030 eastern daylight time, a Grumman American AA-5B, N81310, 
was destroyed when it impacted terrain, shortly after takeoff from the Donegal Springs Airpark 
(N71), Marietta, Pennsylvania.  The certificated private pilot and three passengers were fatally 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local 
personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
A witness was located about 75 feet west of the accident airplane as it was parked on the ramp 
at N71.  The airplane caught the witness's attention because the pilot was having difficulty 
starting the engine.  After the engine started, the airplane was taxied to the runway.  The 
witness then proceeded by car from the airport's parking lot, where he observed the airplane in 
a steep 45-degree left bank, until it disappeared behind corn stalks.
A second witness observed the accident airplane depart from the airport.  The airplane was 
only airborne about 45 seconds, and the engine "cut off and on five times" before descending to 
the ground.
A third witness observed the airplane in a sharp bank, with the left wing tipped downward and 
the right wing pointed towards the sky, before it disappeared below a tree line.  The witness did 
not recall hearing any sounds from the engine.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight, at 40 degrees, 05.16 minutes north 
longitude, 76 degrees, 34.97 minutes west latitude, at an elevation of 446 feet.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate for single-engine land airplanes.  His most recent 
application for a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third-class medical certificate was 
issued on July 24, 2001.
According to the pilot's logbook, he had accumulated about 275 hours of total flight experience.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather reported at an airport 7 miles east of N71, at 2053, was wind from 360 degrees at 5 
knots, clear skies, and 10 statute miles of visibility.  The temperature was 82 degrees 
Fahrenheit, and the dew point 68 degrees Fahrenheit.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The most recent annual inspection of the airplane was performed on July 17, 2002.  At the time 
of the inspection, the airplane had a total flight time of 7,777.9 hours, and the engine had 
accumulated 1,142.2 hours of operation since major overhaul.  During the inspection, the 
magneto timing was checked, and the spark plugs were cleaned and gapped.
According to personnel from N71, the pilot had recently purchased the airplane from an 
individual in Arcadia, Florida.  The pilot flew the airplane from Arcadia to N71 during the week 
of July 19, 2002.  According to the pilot's logbook, the total flight time for the trip from Florida 
was about 12.3 hours.
The airplane was then flown again on July 29, from N71, on a local flight for about 1/2 hour.  
No further entries were noted in the logbook.
Page 4 of 7NYC02FA152
According to a representative of a fixed base operator in Lake City, Florida, where the pilot 
stopped on July 24, for fuel, the pilot had difficulty starting the engine when he prepared to 
depart.  The pilot did not request, nor receive any maintenance assistance.
According to a representative of a fixed base operator in Florence, South Carolina, where the 
pilot stopped later in the day on July 24, the pilot requested maintenance assistance for a 
"rough running magneto."  The maintenance performed on the airplane included removal, 
cleaning and verifying specifications of both magnetos, and all spark plugs.
Review of the airplane's maintenance logs did not reveal any entries related to magneto or 
spark plug malfunctions.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The wreckage site was located in a cornfield, about 1/2 statute mile, and a magnetic bearing of 
approximately 211 degrees from N71.  The accident site was disturbed prior to the arrival of 
Safety Board personnel due to emergency rescue procedures.  In addition, the area had been 
doused with water and firefighting agents to contain the post crash fire.
The main fuselage was located about 65 feet from the first noted damage to the corn stalks, 
oriented on about a 330-degree magnetic bearing.  It was consumed by the post-crash fire and 
destroyed.  All crew and passenger seats were destroyed and separated from their attachment 
points.  
All major control surfaces of the airplane were accounted for at the accident scene.
The engine was separated from the main fuselage.  The propeller remained attached to the 
engine.  One propeller blade was bent rearward about 70-degrees at it's mid point, and was 
melted outboard of the bending area.  The other propeller blade remained intact, and was 
slightly twisted.
The left wing tip and left wing aileron were located about 22-feet beyond the initial impact 
point.  The aileron control stop was examined, and did not reveal any discrepancies. The left 
wing, which was separated from the main fuselage, was located about 5 feet prior to the main 
fuselage.  The wing was separated into two sections.
The right wing remained attached to the main fuselage and was consumed by the post-crash 
fire. 
The post-crash fire consumed the empennage, with the exception of a 4-foot section of right 
horizontal stabilizer and elevator, and the entire left elevator.  Flight control continuity was 
established from the cockpit area to the rudder and elevators.  The rudder and stabilator 
control stops were examined, and did not reveal any discrepancies.
All separated flight control cables exhibited frayed ends, consistent with tension overload, and 
no evidence of corrosion was noted at the separation points.
The engine was recovered from the accident site and examined.  The crankshaft was rotated via 
the propeller.  Compression and valve train continuity was confirmed to all cylinders.  The top 
and bottom spark plugs were removed and examined.  Their electrodes were intact.  The 
number 1 and 3 cylinder top and bottom sparkplugs were light gray in color, while the number 
2 and 4 cylinder top and bottom sparkplugs were oil soaked.  Both the left and right magnetos 
could not be tested due to impact and fire damage.
Page 5 of 7NYC02FA152
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to records retained by personnel at N71, the airplane was last fueled on July 29, 
2002, with 28.2 gallons of 100LL aviation gasoline.
A review of FAA-H-8083-3, Airplane Flying Handbook, revealed:
"...If an actual engine failure should occur immediately after takeoff and before a safe 
maneuvering altitude is attained, it is usually inadvisable to attempt to turn back to the field 
from where the takeoff was made.  Instead, it is safer to immediately establish the proper glide 
attitude, and select a field directly ahead or slightly to either side of the takeoff path."
There were several non-populated clear areas/fields along, and on either side of, the departure 
path.
A review of a FAA carburetor icing probability chart placed the reported temperature and dew 
point in the "serious icing at glide power" area of the chart.
The airplane wreckage was released on August 2, 2002, to a representative of the owners 
insurance company.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/24/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
275 hours (Total, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7NYC02FA152
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Grumman American
Registration:
N81310
Model/Series:
AA-5B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
AA5B0491
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/17/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
13 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7777 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360
Registered Owner:
Gerald L. Shenk
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Gerald L. Shenk
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LNS, 403 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2053 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.94 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 20°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Marietta, PA (N71)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2028 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Donegal Springs (N71)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
458 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
28
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3250 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 7 of 7NYC02FA152
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
40.087778, -76.581944
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Stephen M Demko
Adopted Date:
02/05/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Stoll; FAA; Harrisburg, PA
David Moore; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
12/16/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
