National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MT. PLEASANT, IA
Accident Number: CHI93DCD03
Date & Time: 08/01/1993, 1955 CDT
Registration: N92T
Aircraft: HOWARD W. DUTTON GLAS AIR II
RG
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Witnesses observed the homebuilt airplane  maneuvering.
They observed the nose to pitch  up and the airplane to enter a steep nosedown  attitude with counter-clockwise rotation.
Coincident with the pitch-up maneuver there  was a popping sound from the airplane and engine sounds ceased.
Just prior to impact  high level engine sounds returned.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot-in-command's not maintaining  aircraft control.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
Visual Flight Rules (VFR) prevailed at the time of the accident, and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft was destroyed and the pilot was fatally injured.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with an instrument rating and a current third class medical.
Witnesses to the accident stated that prior to impact the airplane was observed to pitch nose up, enter a near nosedown attitude and rotated counter-clockwise.
One witness stated that coincident with the pitch-up maneuver, there was a popping sound from the airplane and engine sounds ceased; however, this witness stated that just prior to impact high level engines sounds resumed.
CREW INFORMATION The pilot was a certificated private pilot holding an instrument rating and a third class medical.
He had logged approximately 700 hours total time with approximately 100 hours in this make and model.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION N92T, Dutton Glasair II RG, an amateur built aircraft manufactured and owned by Howard W. Dutton of Mount Pleasant, Iowa, was registered on 4/15/91, and received an Experimental Amateur-built Certificate of Airworthiness on 04/07/92.
The airframe had a total time of approximately 100 hours.
The aircraft empty weight was recorded as 1327 pounds.
The aircraft had a current condition inspection.
IMPACT AND WRECKAGE The aircraft initial impact with the ground was with the right wing.
Crop damage indicates aircraft was basically on a heading of approximately 100 degrees.
Approximately 24 feet further along the path, the main fuselage contacted the ground.
The aircraft began breaking up at this point continuing in a path approximately on a 120 degree heading coming to rest approximately 87 feet from initial impact of fuselage.
Approximate width of path from that point to final resting point was 21 feet.
Propeller, propeller hub, engine starter drive gear, and crankshaft were sheared off at impact of fuselage.
They were found approximately 40 feet from initial impact and about 10 feet to the right of the wreckage path.
Right wing and right horizontal stabilizer with elevator were damaged from impact.
Rudder, left horizontal stabilizer and elevator along with left wing were intact except for minor damage of skidding along the ground.
The left wing was separated from fuselage at attachment to fuselage.
All flight controls, wing structures, landing gear and major portions of fuselage structure were with the main wreckage.
The canopy was examined and appeared to still be secured at impact.
It was then separated by tearing of the fiberglass structure and was with the rest of the wreckage.
Engine was canted to the right and the fuselage bottom structure showed more crushing from impact on the right side then the left.
The aircraft made contact with the ground in a right wing low, nosedown attitude, but not inverted.
The landing gear was retracted at impact.
The engine had fuel to the distributer valve and the fuel filter was full of fuel.
All accessory drives were functional and still had mechanical integrity with the drive train.
Magnetos were sparked and functioned.
Magneto timing could not be verified.
Engine oil filter showed no metal or visible contaminants.
All fuel tanks were ruptured and fuel quantity could not be verified.
The personal restraint system consisted of a lap and shoulder belt.
The belts were still fastened but were torn loose from their attachment points.
The aircraft instruments were destroyed in the crash.
MEDICAL/PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION A toxicology mailing kit was given to De Francis Garrity, Des Moines, Iowa.
There was no evidence of significant natural disease.
ADDITIONAL DATA The wreckage was released to Mrs. Shirley Dutton after the on scene investigation on August 2, 1993.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 60, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
