Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Ashland, ME
Accident Number:
NYC03GA094
Date & Time:
05/04/2003, 0930 EDT 
Registration:
N46773
Aircraft:
Piper PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Public Aircraft
Analysis 
The pilot was maneuvering the airplane for animal tracking when it struck trees and came to 
rest inverted.  Examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any pre-impact 
mechanical malfunctions, and fuel was found in all three fuel tanks.  Tree scars and propeller 
signatures were consistent with engine power.  Review of the pilot's toxicology report revealed 
that he had recently ingested at least three different over-the-counter medications which 
contained sedating antihistamines.  The levels of substances in the pilot's blood were at least 
five times higher than the levels expected with a typical maximum single over-the-counter dose 
of the medications.  The pilot's wife stated that he was "fighting a bad cold for about a week," 
prior to the accident.  She added the pilot was taking NyQuil to "get through the night," and it 
was possible he was also taking Benadryl.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's impairment due to over-the-counter medications, which resulted in a loss of aircraft 
control while maneuvering.
Page 2 of 8NYC03GA094
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) IMPAIRMENT(DRUGS) - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 8NYC03GA094
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 4, 2003, about 0930 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-18-150, N46773, was 
substantially damaged during a collision with trees, while maneuvering near Ashland, Maine.  
The certificated commercial pilot was fatally injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the local flight that departed Houlton International Airport (HUL), Houlton, 
Maine.  No flight plan was filed for the commercial public use flight conducted under 14 CFR 
Part 91.
According to the owner of a fixed based operator at HUL, the pilot added 27.4 gallons of 100LL 
aviation gasoline prior to the flight.  The owner estimated that the pilot departed HUL about 
0800.
An employee of the Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife stated that the pilot 
was under contract to perform aerial observation flights.  Specifically, the pilot was tracking a 
lynx at the time of the accident.  The employee added that the pilot would usually fly "a couple 
of hundred" feet above the ground while tracking radio signals from a collar secured to the 
animal.  Occasionally, the pilot would fly lower to obtain visual contact with the animal.  The 
employee added that the pilot was very experienced at aerial observation flights, and had 
accumulated several thousand hours of flight time conducting similar flights.  In addition, the 
pilot had flown approximately 8 hours during the day prior to the accident.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight; located about 46 degrees, 36.27 minutes 
north latitude, and 69 degrees, 08.60 minutes west longitude. 
PILOT INFORMATION
The last entry in the pilot's logbook was dated November 7, 2001.  At that time, the pilot 
reported a total flight experience of approximately 21,810 hours; of which, about 21,586 hours 
were as pilot in command.  Approximately 21,491 hours were in single engine airplanes, and 
the majority of flight time within the preceding two years was in the accident airplane.  
The pilot's most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) second class medical certificate 
was issued on January 23, 2003, with a special restriction stating that the certificate was valid 
for six months.  At that time, the pilot reported a total flight experience of 22,510 hours.     
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane's most recent annual inspection and engine overhaul was completed on December 
12, 2002.  The airplane had flown approximately 175 hours since that inspection.  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The reported weather at an airport about 50 miles east of the accident site, at 0935, was:  wind 
from 270 degrees at 11 knots, sky clear, temperature 53 degrees F, dew point 25 degrees F, 
altimeter 30.07 inches Hg. 
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The wreckage was located in a wooded area, and examined on May 5, 2003.  The airplane was 
found intact, inverted, and oriented about a 250-degree heading.  It was located about 20 feet 
south of a logging road, which was oriented on an approximate 270-degree heading.  Two tree 
Page 4 of 8NYC03GA094
strikes were observed prior to the wreckage.  The first strike was approximately 140 feet from 
the wreckage, and the second strike observed about 100 feet beyond the first strike, on an 
approximate 260-degree heading toward the wreckage.  A freshly cut tree branch was located 
in the vicinity of the wreckage, and exhibited black paint transfer.  All major components of the 
airplane were accounted for at the scene.
Examination of the wreckage revealed no pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.  Flight control 
continuity was confirmed from all control surfaces to the cockpit controls.  The right wing had 
two fuel tanks, and fuel was found in both tanks.  The left wing had one fuel tank, and it also 
contained fuel.  The flaps were observed near the retracted position, the right aileron was 
deflected upward, and the left aileron was deflected downward.  Both wings exhibited impact 
damage at the leading edge, but the damage to the left wing was more severe.  The left wing 
had folded aft, and exhibited two leading edge bows near the wingtip, consistent with tree-
strikes.  
The fuel selector was positioned to the left tank.  The throttle was in the full forward position, 
and the mixture was about 1/4 inch from the rich position.  The cockpit area was crushed, and 
the lap belt and shoulder harness were fastened.  The flap handle was found in the first "notch" 
position.  The empennage, vertical stabilizer, and horizontal stabilator sustained minor 
damage.  The stabilator trim was in a nose down position.         
The engine remained attached to the airframe.  One propeller blade exhibited s-bending, and 
the other blade was curled at the tip.  The top spark plugs and valve covers were removed from 
the engine.  The spark plug electrodes were intact and light gray in color, except for the number 
two top plug which was coated with oil.  The propeller rotated freely by hand.  Crankshaft, 
camshaft, and valve train continuity were confirmed.  Thumb compression was attained on all 
four cylinders, and all eight ignition leads produced spark.  Oil was present throughout the 
engine, and the oil pressure screen was absent of debris.  The fuel line to the carburetor inlet 
screen contained fuel, and the inlet screen was absent of debris.  Some fibrous debris was noted 
in the gascolator.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Safety Board's Medical Officer extracted information from the pilot's FAA medical records 
and compiled a factual report of medical information.  Review of the medical records revealed 
that the FAA had monitored the pilot for a history of single-vessel coronary artery disease, 
which had been stable and asymptomatic for about 10 years.  
On June 27, 2000, the pilot's cardiologist reported to the FAA Aeromedical Certification 
Division:
"... He clinically remains asymptomatic with no symptoms attributable to angina, congestive 
heart failure or limitation in his exercise capacity.  On the basis of his exercise performance on 
his most recent treadmill stress test, he is at very low risk for cardiac event..."
On July 7, 2002, the pilot's cardiologist report to the FAA Aeromedical Certification Division:
"...In combination with his stable symptoms and his previous noninvasive evaluation and his 
most current treadmill stress performance, he is at very low risk for any cardiac events..."
The cardiovascular findings on autopsy performed on the pilot by the Office of the Chief 
Medical Examiner, Augusta, Maine were consistent with the known cardiac disease.  The cause 
of death was listed as "Blunt Injuries to Head."  
Page 5 of 8NYC03GA094
Toxicological testing was conducted at the FAA Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  According to the toxicology report:
"0.112 (ug/ml, ug/g) CHLORPHENIRAMINE detected in Blood 
CHLORPHENIRAMINE present in Urine
DEXTRORPHAN detected in Blood
DEXTRORPHAN present in Urine
DEXTROMETHORPHAN detected in Blood
DEXTROMETHORPHAN present in Urine
0.41 (ug/ml, ug/g) DIPHENHYDRAMINE detected in Blood 
DIPHENHYDRAMINE present in urine
0.165 (ug/ml, ug/g) DOXYLAMINE detected in Blood
DOXYLAMINE present in Urine
EPHEDRINE detected in Blood
EPHEDRINE detected in Urine
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE present in Blood
PSEUDOEPHEDRINE present in Urine
PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE present in Urine
168.2 (ug/ml, ug/g) ACETAMINOPHEN detected in Urine"
The findings in the toxicology report were consistent with the ingestion of at least three 
different over-the-counter medications that contained sedating antihistamines.
The pilot's wife stated that he was "fighting a bad cold for about a week," prior to the accident.  
She added the pilot was taking NyQuil to "get through the night," and it was possible he was 
also taking Benadryl.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to a relative of the pilot on May 5, 2003.
   
Page 6 of 8NYC03GA094
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
65, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/23/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/22/2001
Flight Time:
22500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5000 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N46773
Model/Series:
PA-18-150 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18-3591
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/12/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
175 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
9297 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
Macannamac Inc.
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
John McPhee
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8NYC03GA094
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PQI, 534 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
50 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0935 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.07 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / -4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Houlton, ME (HUL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (HUL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0800 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
46.604444, -69.143333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert J Gretz
Adopted Date:
03/02/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Paul W Hubbard; FAA FSDO-05; Portland, ME
George Hollingsworth; Continental Motors; Reston, VA
David Moore; Lycoming Engines; Ardsley, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8NYC03GA094
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
