The airline transport certificated pilot was departing in a tailwheel-equipped airplane.  The 
pilot reported he was aware of a left crosswind that was near the limit for his airplane.  The 
pilot indicated that he applied takeoff power and about 350 feet into the takeoff roll, the 
tailwheel lifted off the runway.  The airplane began to veer to the left and the pilot pulled the 
engine power to idle and attempted to correct the left turn by application of brakes and flight 
controls.  The airplane ground looped to the left, and the right wing struck the runway.  The 
airplane then nosed over and received damage to the propeller, right wing, the vertical 
stabilizer, and the rudder.  The wind conditions consisted of a direct left crosswind at 14 knots, 
with gusts to 21 knots.
The pilot's inadequate compensation for a crosswind condition and his failure to maintain 
directional control which resulted in an inadvertent ground loop and nose over.   A factor 
contributing to the accident was a direct crosswind.
On June 2, 2004, about 2010 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire-equipped Cessna 180E 
airplane, N5180, sustained substantial damage when it ground looped and nosed over during 
an aborted takeoff at the Kenai Municipal Airport, Kenai, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight to Fairbanks, Alaska, under 
Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred. The airplane was operated by the pilot.  The 
airline transport certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed.  No flight plan was filed, nor was one required.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on June 2, the pilot reported that he was departing on runway 19R 
in his tailwheel-equipped airplane.  He said he was aware of a left crosswind that was near the 
limit for his airplane.  The pilot indicated that he applied takeoff power, and about 350 feet 
into the takeoff roll, the tailwheel lifted off the runway.  The airplane began to veer to the left 
and the pilot pulled the engine power to idle and attempted to correct the left turn by 
application of brakes and flight controls.  The pilot said the airplane ground looped to the left, 
and the right wing struck the runway.  The airplane then nosed over and received damage to 
the propeller, right wing, the vertical stabilizer, and the rudder.
At 1953, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Kenai was reporting in part:  Wind, 
110 degrees (true) at 14 knots, gusts to 21 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky 
condition, clear; temperature, 61 degrees F; dew point, 30 degrees F; altimeter, 29.96 inHg.
