The student glider pilot was being towed by the accident tow plane for a local flight.  Shortly 
after takeoff, the student glider pilot noticed that the tow rope had "some slack" in it, and that 
the tow plane did not appear to be climbing "at the rate he should have been."  The student 
glider pilot made slight control adjustments to tighten the tow rope; however, the tow rope 
"went slack" again at 200-300 feet above the ground, and the airplane began to descend below 
the glider. The glider pilot then decided to release from the tow plane, and he turned back to 
the airport. During the turn, he observed the airplane drop its left wing slightly, and then begin 
a turn to the right. The airplane then impacted a quarry, and a post-crash fire ensued.  
Examination of the airplane and engine revealed no pre-flight mechanical deficiencies.  During 
a previous training flight with the student glider pilot and accident tow pilot, the airplane 
began to descend during a climb, when the tow pilot failed to realize that the throttle had 
vibrated back to a lower power setting when he took his hand off it.  According to the operator 
of the airplane, the tow pilot had performed approximately 70 tows during the past year; 
however, he had been "signed off" to fly without an instructor less than a month prior to the 
accident.  The student glider pilot had accumulated approximately 50 hours of total flight 
experience.  The FAA Glider Flying Handbook, states in part that "One of the most dangerous 
occurrences during the aerotow is allowing the glider to rise high above and losing sight of the 
towplane.  The tension on the towrope by the glider pulls the towplane tail up, lowering its 
nose.  If the glider continues to rise pulling the towplane tail higher, the towpilot may not be 
able to raise the nose.  Ultimately, the towpilot may run out of up elevator authority.  This 
situation can be critical if it occurs at altitudes below 500 feet AGL.  Upon losing sight of the 
towplane, the glider pilot must release immediately."
The towplane pilot's failure to maintain a climb while towing a glider for undetermined 
reasons, which resulted in the early release of the glider and the tow plane's subsequent impact 
with trees.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On June 2, 2004, at 1017 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 182C, N8681T, was destroyed when it 
impacted a gravel quarry after departure from the Kutztown Airport (N31), Kutztown, 
Pennsylvania. The certified commercial pilot was fatally injured. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local glider towing flight conducted 
under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the student glider pilot, who was being towed by the accident airplane, it was his 
third tow of the day. He stated they departed from runway 17 at Kutztown, and performed a 45-
degree left turn simultaneously, to avoid a high mound of dirt off the departure end of the 
runway. About 30 feet above the ground, the student pilot noticed that the tow rope had "some 
slack" in it. In an attempt to make the rope more taught, he made a slight right rudder 
correction and slight aft movement of the control stick. The student pilot noticed that the tow 
plane did not appear to be climbing "at the rate he should have been," the tow rope "went 
slack" again at 200-300 feet above the ground, and the airplane began to descend below the 
glider. The glider pilot then decided to release from the tow plane, and he turned back to the 
airport. During the turn, he observed the airplane drop the left wing slightly, and then begin a 
turn to the right. The airplane then impacted a quarry, and a post-crash fire ensued.
A witness, who was also a tow plane pilot, observed the accident from the Kutztown Airport.  
She stated that the takeoff of the airplane and glider appeared normal, until she observed the 
glider release at a "lower than normal altitude."  The tow plane then appeared to descend and 
the glider returned to the airport.  She then observed smoke and fire rising from the nearby 
rock quarry.  The witness additionally reported that prior to the glider's release, she did not 
observe any abnormalities of the airplane or glider.
 PILOT INFORMATION 
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land, and 
instrument airplane. He was also a certified flight instructor. His most recent Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) second class medical certificate was issued on September 11, 2003. At 
that time, the pilot reported 625 hours of total flight experience.
The pilot's logbook was not located.  According to the owner of the Kutztown Airport, the pilot 
had been employed there for about one year.  He had performed approximately 70 tows during 
that time; however, he had only been "signed off" to tow without an instructor since "a few 
weekends prior" to the accident. 
The airport owner additionally stated that the pilot also conducted flights part-time for the 
Pennsylvania Bureau of Forestry.  Examination of his most recent Bureau of Forestry Pilot 
Questionnaire, dated April 30, 2004, revealed he had accumulated 665 hours of total flight 
experience, 125 in the previous 12 months, and 15 hours in the previous 30 days.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
A review of the airplane and engine logbooks revealed the last annual inspection was 
performed on November 14, 2003, with no anomalies noted.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
The reported weather at the Lehigh Valley International Airport (ABE), Allentown, 
Pennsylvania, about 18 miles northeast of the accident site, at 0951, included wind from 250 
degrees at 10 knots, 10 miles visibility, clear skies, temperature 70 degrees Fahrenheit, dew 
point 55 degrees Fahrenheit, and altimeter setting of 29.82 inches Hg.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The accident site was located about 1/2 mile from the departure end of runway 17. The 
wreckage was examined at the accident site on June 2-3, 2004, and all components of the 
airplane were accounted for at the scene. The wreckage path measured 353 feet from the initial 
impact point, to the main wreckage, and was oriented on an approximate heading of 180 
degrees.
The initial impact point was a 50-foot tall tree at the northern edge of the quarry. The 
airplane's tow rope was located at the top of the tree, and several tree branches were located 
near the base of the tree. The tree branches were cut at an approximate 45-degree angle. 
The second impact point was a 35-foot light pole about 60 feet beyond the initial impact point, 
and slightly to the left of the wreckage path. The left landing gear assembly, and the power 
supply box from the light pole, were located near the base of the pole. An impression was noted 
on the tire, which was identical to shape of the power supply box.
The main wreckage impacted a conveyer belt, inverted, and sustained severe post-crash fire 
damage. Both wings were draped over the conveyer belt, and the exposed fuselage was oriented 
on the upward surface of the conveyer belt. Both wing fuel tanks were ruptured, and 
examination of the fuel selector revealed it was in the 'both' position. All flight control surfaces 
remained attached to their respective attachment points, and flight control continuity was 
confirmed from the cockpit to all flight control surfaces. Examination of the flap handle and 
flap surfaces revealed the flaps were in the retracted position. A measurement of the horizontal 
stabilizer trim revealed it was set near the takeoff position. Examination of the tow hook on the 
underside of the empennage section revealed it was in the open position.
The engine was located under the inverted left wing. Both propeller blades had separated from 
the propeller hub; one blade was located under the left wing, and one blade was located about 5 
feet in front of the engine, along the wreckage path. The tip of one blade was separated, and a 
2-inch deep leading edge cut was noted on the other blade, about 28 inches from the blade 
root. 
The engine was rotated by hand at the propeller flange. During rotation, thumb compression 
was obtained on all cylinders and valve train continuity was confirmed to the rear accessory 
drive. 
Examination of the spark plugs revealed their electrodes were intact and exhibited "normal" 
wear. Both magnetos were removed from the engine, and during bench testing, produced spark 
at all ignition leads.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
The Berks County Coroner's Office performed an autopsy on the pilot on June 3, 2004.
The FAA Toxicology and Accident Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma conducted 
toxicological testing on the pilot.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION 
 
In an interview with the student glider pilot, he stated that the last time he was at the airport 
on May 6, 2004, the tow pilot was still training with a certified flight instructor (CFI).  
However, when he arrived at the airport on the morning of the accident, the tow (accident) 
pilot stated he was "signed off" to tow the glider.  The pilots then performed two tows to 1,000 
feet followed by uneventful returns to the airport.  Each flight lasted approximately 6-12 
minutes.  The glider pilot stated that prior to the third (accident) flight, the tow pilot seemed 
apprehensive about the way he was towing.  He stated he had flown with the tow pilot prior to 
the accident; however, during those flights both the glider pilot and tow pilot had flight 
instructors with them.  The accident flight was the first flight in which both pilots were alone.
The student glider pilot additionally stated that during a previous training flight with the tow 
pilot, as the airplane was climbing to altitude, it began to descend when the tow pilot failed to 
realize that the throttle had vibrated back to a lower power setting when he took his hand off it.  
According to the FAA Glider Flying Handbook, FAA-H-8083-13, chapter 7, states the following 
about aerotow abnormal procedures:
"One of the most dangerous occurrences during the aerotow is allowing the glider to rise high 
above and losing sight of the towplane.  The tension on the towrope by the glider pulls the 
towplane tail up, lowering its nose.  If the glider continues to rise pulling the towplane tail 
higher, the towpilot may not be able to raise the nose.  Ultimately, the towpilot may run out of 
up elevator authority.  This situation can be critical if it occurs at altitudes below 500 feet AGL.  
Upon losing sight of the towplane, the glider pilot must release immediately."
According to the student pilot, he had accumulated approximately 50 hours of total flight 
experience in gliders.
Fueling History
Examination of airport fueling records revealed the airplane was last fueled on May 30, 2004, 
with 31.1 gallons of fuel. The airport owner stated that the day of the accident was the next time 
the airplane flew after it had been refueled.
Wreckage Release
The wreckage was released to a representative of the owner's insurance company on April 29, 
2005.
