Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Stoughton, WI
Accident Number:
CEN11LA536
Date & Time:
08/01/2011, 0920 CDT 
Registration:
N74260
Aircraft:
BELLANCA 14-13
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he performed an engine run-up prior to takeoff and everything was 
normal. He had the flaps extended 2 notches when he initiated the takeoff to the north on the 
2,500-foot-long wet grass runway. The airplane became airborne about half way down the 
runway. The pilot stated that upon reaching 65 to 70 mph, he reduced the flaps to 1 notch to 
maintain the best rate of climb. He stated that the airplane cleared the initial group of trees, 
then it began to descend. The airplane subsequently contacted the trees and sustained 
substantial damage to the fuselage and both wings. A witness said the airplane was ﬁmushyﬂ 
during the takeoff and the nose remained high prior to the right wing dropping and the 
airplane descending. The airplane was about 190 pounds under gross weight and the density 
altitude was approximately 2,600 feet. The operation of the airplane near maximum gross 
weight at a high density altitude on a wet grass runway degraded the airplane™s takeoff 
performance. A postaccident examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have precluded any normal operation. The pilot reported that he did not 
get the landing gear retracted prior to impact.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s improper preflight planning and his failure to gain proper airspeed during takeoff 
from a grass airstrip resulting in a stall, the loss of control, and subsequent impact with the 
trees.  Contributing to the accident was the pilot operating the airplane at near maximum gross 
weight and the high density altitude.
Findings
Aircraft
Loading - Not specified (Factor)
Main landing gear - Incorrect use/operation (Factor)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
High density altitude - Effect on operation (Factor)
Page 2 of 5CEN11LA536
Factual Information
On August 1, 2011, at 0920 central daylight time, a Bellanca 14-13, N74260, contacted trees 
and the terrain during takeoff from the Matson Airport (2WI6), Stoughton, Wisconsin. The 
private pilot and the passenger both received serious injuries. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage to the fuselage and both wings. The airplane was owned and operated by 
the pilot under the provisions 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The personal flight was 
operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan. The planned destination for 
the flight was the Worthington Municipal Airport (OTG), Worthington, Minnesota.
The pilot reported that he performed an engine run-up prior to takeoff and everything was 
normal. He had the flaps extended 2 notches when he initiated the takeoff to the north on the 
2,500 foot long grass runway. The airplane became airborne about half way down the runway. 
The pilot stated that upon reaching 65 to 70 miles per hour, he reduced the flaps to 1 notch to 
maintain best climb. He stated the airplane cleared the initial group of trees, then the airplane 
began to descend. The airplane subsequently contacted the trees and came to rest in a clearing. 
The pilot reported that he did not get the landing gear retracted prior to impact. 
A relative of the pilot™s who watched the takeoff reported that the airplane was about 25 to 30 
feet above his head when it passed near him at the north (departure) end of the runway. He 
stated the airplane looked ﬁmushyﬂ as it crossed the highway, and the nose remained high until 
the right wing dropped and the airplane contacted the trees. This witness reported that he did 
not hear any unusual engine noises. 
A second witness who heard the airplane for 1 ½ to 2 seconds reported hearing the engine 
sounded like it was ﬁstumblingﬂ prior to it backfiring immediately before the sound of the 
impact.
According to a FAA inspector, the runway was dew covered at the time of the takeoff.  The 
north half of the runway sloped downward, and the highway and the terrain on which the trees 
were located were higher than the elevation at the departure (north) end of the runway. The 
inspector reported that pieces of the right wing were located near the treeline and there was a 
slash in the terrain at the initial ground impact. There was a piece of broken propeller blade 
located near the slash mark. 
The winds at the time of the accident were variable at 4 knots.
A postaccident inspection of the airplane and engine revealed the left fuel tank was ruptured 
during the accident and the fuel level in the right tank was about 4 inches below the filler cap. 
Both magnetos produced spark when turned by hand. Fuel was present in the fuel pump. The 
fuel pump check valves functioned normally and the pump diaphragm was intact. The 
carburetor was partially separated from the engine due to impact and it did not contain any 
fuel. The carburetor accelerator pump functioned normally. The only anomaly noted with the 
fuel system was that the inner sleeve at one of the end fittings on the fuel line that ran from the 
fuel pump to the carburetor was crimped, which decreased the inside diameter of the fuel line 
at the end fitting. A postaccident examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have resulted in a loss of engine power. 
The field elevation at the 2WI6 is 915 feet. Density altitude at the time of the accident was 
approximately 2,600 feet. The pilot reported that the gross weight at the time of the accident 
was about 1,910 pounds and the maximum gross weight was 2,100 pounds.
Page 3 of 5CEN11LA536
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/03/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/26/2011
Flight Time:
375 hours (Total, all aircraft), 169 hours (Total, this make and model), 292 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 55 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 24 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELLANCA
Registration:
N74260
Model/Series:
14-13 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1373
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/04/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1660 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
FRANKLIN
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
6A4-165 B3
Registered Owner:
CROSS RICHARD G
Rated Power:
165 hp
Operator:
CROSS RICHARD G
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN11LA536
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MSN, 887 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
330°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.06 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 23°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Stoughton, WI (2WI6)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Worthington, MN (OTG)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0920 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Matson Airport 
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
915 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2500 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
42.919444, -89.186111
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Pamela S Sullivan
Adopted Date:
12/01/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael Piecznski; FAA-MKE-FSDO; Milwaukee, WI
Publish Date:
12/01/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=81335
Page 5 of 5CEN11LA536
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
