 The airplane's new owner was familiarizing himself with the landing characteristics of the 
1943 Howard DGA-1 in crosswind conditions, with the seller aboard, when he attempted a go-
around following a bounced landing that resulted in a loss of control, a skid off the left runway 
edge, a left wingtip strike of the ground, and collision with a tree. 
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during an attempted go-around, and the 
subsequent wing tip strike of the ground and collision with a tree. A factor in the loss of control 
was the crosswind conditions present during the landing attempt. 
 On December 1, 1999, at about 1055 eastern standard time, a Howard DGA-15P, 
N35RH, registered to a private individual, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, 
crashed on landing at the Spruce Creek Airport, Daytona Beach, Florida. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane received substantial damage and 
the commercial-rated pilot and  airline transport-rated passenger were not injured. The flight 
departed Flagler County Airport, Bunnell, Florida, about 20 minutes before the accident.
According to the pilot, he had very recently bought the airplane from the passenger, and 
was in the process of familiarizing himself with its handling characteristics. They had 
conducted airborne familiarization en route from Spruce Creek to Flagler, where they landed 
and fuelled.  They had returned to Spruce Creek, and were conducting takeoffs and landings on 
runway 05 into a "significant" left crosswind. On the second landing, intended to be a full stop, 
the airplane's left main wheel touched down first, the airplane bounced, and the pilot 
attempted a go-around that resulted in a skid off the left side of the runway into an adjacent 
tree. The pilot stated surface winds at Spruce Creek were from 360 degrees at 18 to 22 knots, 
and severe turbulence. The pilot stated that he understood that the seller's responsibility was 
not as a co-pilot or safety pilot, and was a pilot-rated passenger only.
According to FAA personnel, the pilot stated he lost control of the airplane during the 
go-around attempt, the left wing struck the ground, and the airplane impacted a large oak tree 
off the left side of the runway. The temporary registration showing the transfer of ownership 
was properly displayed, and had been properly forwarded to FAA Aircraft Registry, Oklahoma 
City. The passenger made no attempt to take over the controls. The Daytona Beach FAA ATCT, 
located 7 miles north of Spruce Creek, reported winds at 1053, were from 010 degrees at 15 
knots, gusting to 23 knots.
