The airplane collided with the terminal building at the O'Hare International Airport.  The 
captain reported he used the procedures in the BAE 146 Pilot Operating Handbook, to transfer 
fluid between the green and yellow hydraulic systems while the airplane was parked at the gate.  
He stated he then set the parking brake and checked the hydraulic system pressure.  The 
captain reported they completed the before start, starting engines, and after engine start 
checklists at which time he signaled to the ramp personnel to remove the chocks.  He reported 
the airplane then started to roll forward.  He stated the parking brake was set and all four 
engines were running.  The captain reported he tried the green braking and emergency yellow 
brake systems, however, the airplane continued to move.  He then selected the anti-skid switch 
to battery and positioned the thrust levers to fuel off.  The airplane traveled approximately 50 
feet prior to contacting the bottom of the upper level of the terminal and a lower level door at 
gate B-20C.  Postincident inspection of the brakes, hydraulic system, anti-skid system, squat 
switches, and related electrical system components failed to reveal why the airplane would 
have moved with the parking brake set.  The initiation of the rolling event was not captured on 
the DFDR.  The airplane is designed so that the DFDR does not record when the parking brake 
is set.  On December 10, 1999, the operator issued an Alert Bulletin, prohibiting flight crews 
from performing hydraulic system fluid transfers.  On August 25, 2000, the operator issued 
another Alert Bulletin, once again allowing flight crews to perform hydraulic system fluid 
transfers.  On September 1, 2000, another Alert Bulletin was issued once again prohibiting 
flight crews from performing hydraulic system fluid transfers. 
An undetermined failure in the hydraulic system, which resulted in the airplane's entire 
braking system becoming temporarily inoperative.  A factor associated with the incident was 
the airport terminal building that was contacted by the airplane. 
 On December 1, 1999, at 1431 central standard time, a British Aerospace BAE 146-200A, 
N606AW, operated by Air Wisconsin, as United Express flight 5545 collided with the terminal 
building at the O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois. One Air Wisconsin gate agent 
received minor injuries. The flight crew, 1 flight attendant, and 45 passengers on board the 
airplane were not injured. The airplane received minor damage, which was limited to the nose 
cone. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an IFR flight plan was filed. The 14 CFR 
Part 121 flight was originating at the time of the incident with a destination of Moline, Illinois.
The captain reported that while parked at the gate, prior to passenger loading, he noticed the 
green system hydraulic fluid level was lower then the yellow system hydraulic fluid level.  He 
stated he used the procedures in the Air Wisconsin BAE 146 Pilot Operating Handbook (POH) 
to transfer fluid between the two systems.  He stated he then set the parking brake and checked 
the hydraulic system pressure prior to accomplishing the before start checklist.
The captain reported they completed the Before Start, Starting Engines, and After Engine Start 
checklists at which time he signaled to the ramp personnel to remove the chocks.  He reported 
the airplane then started to roll forward.  He stated the parking brake was set and all four 
engines were running. The captain reported he switched to green braking and was still unable 
to stop the airplane.  He then switched to the emergency yellow brake system and the airplane 
still continued to move.  He continued to report that he selected the anti-skid switch to battery 
and positioned the thrust levers to fuel off.  The airplane traveled approximately 50 feet prior 
to contacting the bottom of the upper level of the terminal and a lower level door at gate B-20C.
Prior to the arrival of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigators, Air Wisconsin maintenance personnel 
performed operational checks on both the parking brake and normal brake system.  They 
reported that both systems functioned normally.  In addition, they reported that the brakes 
operated normally when the airplane was towed to the maintenance hangar ramp.  An FAA 
inspector also performed a parking brake functional test on his arrival and reported that the 
parking brake functioned normally.
On December 2, 1999, Air Wisconsin maintenance personnel, FAA inspectors, and the NTSB 
inspected N606AW.  The brakes, hydraulic system, anti-skid system, squat switches, and 
related electrical system components were tested.  In addition, functional brake tests were 
performed with the airplane on the maintenance ramp.  The airplane and its components 
functioned normally during these tests.  (See attached N606AW Inspection Notes.) 
The anti-skid control box was removed from the airplane and shipped to the manufacturer, 
Dunlop Aviation Braking Systems, Coventry, England, for testing under the supervision of an 
inspector from the Air Accidents Investigation Branch in the United Kingdom.  These tests 
revealed that Channels 1 & 2 were out of calibration.  However, this condition was not relevant 
to the events of this incident.  (See attached Anti-Skid Box test report.)
The cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and digital flight data recorders (DFDR) were removed from 
N606AW after the incident.  Both recorders were sent to the NTSB, Office of Research and 
Engineering for readout.  Examination of the CVR revealed the recording began at the first 
item of the After Start Checklist and continued for 31 minutes, 1 second.  The recording 
included the impact and subsequent troubleshooting by maintenance personnel.
The landing just prior to the incident was identified on the DFDR.  There are several areas of 
invalid data on the DFDR one of which corresponds with a power interruption on the CVR.  
The DFDR did not capture the beginning of the incident event sequence.  According to the BAE 
146 Aircraft Maintenance Manual, a mechanical linkage in the parking brake handle activates 
three microswitches.  One of these microswitches switches off the DFDR.  Therefore, the DFDR 
will not be recording when the parking brake is set.  (See attached CVR and DFDR reports.)
On December 10, 1999, another Air Wisconsin flight crew reported a temporary brake failure 
on another BAE 146, N6068W.  This occurrence took place at the Blue Grass Airport in 
Lexington, Kentucky.  The captain of N608AW reported that he performed a hydraulic fluid 
transfer while at the gate.  When the chocks were removed the airplane began to roll forward.  
The captain reported they used both the green and yellow hydraulic systems and that neither 
system would stop the airplane.  He stated he turned the airplane and the brakes began to 
function normally.  The cause of this loss of braking was not determined.
On December 10, 1999, Air Wisconsin issued Alert Bulletin #99-115, deleting the hydraulic 
fluid transfer procedures from the BAE 146 POH.  The bulletin prohibited flight crews from 
performing hydraulic fluid transfers.  On August 25, 2000, Air Wisconsin issued Alert Bulletin 
#00-07, once again allowing flight crews to perform the hydraulic fluid transfer procedures.  
On September 1, 2000, Alert Bulletin #00-08 was issued rescinding Alert Bulletin #00-07.
