During a night cross-country instructional flight, the instructor chose to divert the aircraft to 
an alternate airport.  While maneuvering in the area of the alternate airport, the aircraft 
collided with high-voltage power lines 3 miles from the airport.  The power lines are 
approximately 250 feet AGL.  Both pilots stated they were unable to recall any of the detailed 
events from the time they diverted to the alternate airport to the time of the accident.  The 
power lines are displayed on the sectional chart. 
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from power transmission lines.  Factors include dark 
night conditions. 
 On December 1, 1999, approximately 1730 Pacific standard time, a Beechcraft B-19, N4617M, 
registered to and operated by Big Bend Community College as a 14CFR91 instructional flight, 
was destroyed after colliding with power lines and terrain approximately three mile northeast 
of Grand Coulee Dam Airport, Electric City, Washington.  The certified flight instructor (CFI) 
and student pilot both sustained serious injuries.  Night visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a flight plan was filed for the cross country flight.  The flight originated from the 
Grant County International Airport (MWH), Moses Lake, Washington, approximately one hour 
prior to the accident.
In a written statement, the certified flight instructor reported that the intent of the 
instructional flight was to complete lesson 2-4 in the Training Course Outline (attached).  The 
lesson called for a cross-country flight with a diversion to an alternate airport.  After reviewing 
the weather and the student's flight planning, the two pilots departed MWH at 1625 Pacific 
standard time, with a planned destination of Anderson Field, Brewster, Washington, (S97).  
The instructor pilot stated that approximately 20 minutes after departing MWH he instructed 
the student pilot to divert to Grand Coulee Dam Airport (S97), approximately 25 miles 
northeast of their location.  The instructor pilot and student pilot both remember making a 
heading change for the new destination airport.  However, both pilots were unable to recall any 
of the detailed events between the time of the heading change and the accident.  
The aircraft's initial impact point was a series of tower-mounted, high-voltage transmission 
lines (that are displayed on the sectional chart), located approximately three nautical miles 
northeast of the airport.  According to Bonneville Power Administration, the height of the 
power lines are approximately 250 feet above ground level (2,250 feet above mean sea level 
[MSL]).
According to Douglas County Sheriff's Office, witnesses reported seeing a bright flash, in the 
vicinity of the power lines, at the approximate time of the accident.        
According to a flight navigation log recovered from the accident aircraft, the planned altitude 
for the cross country flight was 4,500 feet above MSL.  The published elevation for Grand 
Coulee Dam Airport is 1,590 feet MSL.  
Post-accident examination of the aircraft revealed no evidence of a pre-impact mechanical 
failure or malfunction.
