National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Independence, OR
Accident Number: LAX08LA025
Date & Time: 11/02/2007, 1530 PDT
Registration: N232PM
Aircraft: Interplane XJ
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Just after liftoff, the engine was not able to develop sufficient power for the initial climb.
Although the engine never fully ceased operation, it was only able to produce partial power.
The pilot stated that as the airplane reached about 2,000 feet down the runway he considered aborting the takeoff attempt, but the airplane was too high for the remaining runway.
The airplane entered a spin and the pilot attempted to recover, which resulted in the airplane impacting the ground in a flat attitude.
An examination of the engine revealed no mechanical or electrical malfunctions that would have precluded the engine from normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Also causal was the pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed, which resulted in a spin and collision with terrain Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF Findings 2.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) STALL/SPIN - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On November 02, 2007, about 1530 Pacific daylight time, an Interplane XJ experimental light- sport airplane (E-LSA), N232PM, experienced a partial loss of power during takeoff from Independence State Airport, Independence, Oregon.
The pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The private pilot, the sole occupant, sustained serious injuries; the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The personal local area flight was originating at the time of the accident.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
In a telephone conversation with a National Transportation Safety Board investigator, the pilot's spouse stated that she had spoken to her husband following the accident.
Although his physical impairment prohibited him from talking in depth with regards to the circumstances of the accident, he relayed to her that the airplane's engine was not able to develop sufficient power for takeoff.
He further indicated that although the engine never fully ceased operation, it was only able to produce partial power.
He attempted to maneuver the airplane in a level position and it hit hard in an open field remaining in the flat attitude.
The pilot submitted a written statement reporting that although the accident airplane had accumulated 80.6 hours of flight time, the accident flight was to be his first time flying it.
He had expected the flight parameters to be comparable to similar airplanes that he had a wide array of experience piloting.
Following a normal preflight inspection and run-up, the pilot aligned the airplane on the runway for takeoff.
After the application of full throttle, the airplane began down the runway, and the engine appeared to be producing full power.
The pilot noted that he did not verify the revolutions per minute (rpm) indication inside the cockpit; rather, he was focusing on the handling characteristics of the airplane.
The pilot further stated that as the airplane reached about 2,000 feet down the runway he considered aborting the takeoff attempt, but the airplane was too high.
The airplane entered a spin and the pilot attempted to recover, which resulted in the airplane impacting the ground in a flat attitude.
An examination of the Rotax 912 engine was conducted under the auspice of a Federal Aviation Administration inspector on January 10, 2008, in Independence.
The initial examination of the engine disclosed that the damage incurred during the accident was minimal, thus facilitating an attempted engine run and functional checks.
The engine started and operated as expected; no mechanical or electrical malfunctions were found that would have precluded the engine from normal operation.
The complete examination notes are contained in the public docket for this accident.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
