The engine of the agricultural airplane lost power while it was maneuvering at low altitude.  
The airplane impacted thick vegetation and terrain, causing substantial damage to the right 
wing, nose and tail. A subsequent teardown examination of the engine showed little evidence 
that the engine was operating at the time of impact, but the ingestion of vegetation into the 
combustor and the torsional failure of the torsion shaft suggests that there was some rotation 
of the engine at the time of impact. The engine examination also revealed that several turbine 
rotors had damage and missing blade material due to short term operation of the engine at an 
over temperature condition. There was evidence that the rotors had been operating for several 
hours after the over temperature event that caused the stress rupture of the blades. Further, 
the examination showed that the first stage turbine rotor and the prop pitch control cam did 
not conform to Honeywell specifications and were not authorized replacement parts, and a 
previous weld repair on the engine combustor plenum did not conform to standard practices 
for weld repairs on aerospace parts.
A total loss of engine power due to the improper use of unauthorized replacement parts in the 
engine and repeated operation of the engine in an over-temperature condition.
On September 1, 2008, approximately 1500 central daylight time (CDT), a Rockwell 
International S-2R, N8472V, registered to Farm & Ranch Aerial Service Inc., and operated by 
Rusty™s Flying Service as a 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 agricultural flight, crashed 
while maneuvering at low altitude.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and flight plan 
had not been filed. The airplane was substantially damaged by the impact forces. The 
commercial pilot, who was the only occupant, was not injured. The airplane had departed the 
Glasscock Field Airport (4TS8) D™Hanis, Texas.
The pilot reported he was half way through his third pass over a 200 acre cotton field and had 
80 gallons of chemical and 180 gallons of fuel on board when the engine surged twice and then 
completely failed.  The pilot was able to clear the bigger oak trees on the edge of the field and 
he stalled the airplane into a thick patch of brush.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that responded to the accident scene 
reported that the airplane appeared to have stalled tail first into thick vegetation, impacted 
terrain and came to rest upright. The right wing, nose and tail were crushed from the impact.  
One of the three blades on the propeller appeared to be undamaged. A second blade had a 
single bend and the third blade had a S- type bend.
The wreckage was removed from the accident scene and transported to the facilities of Air 
Salvage of Dallas (ASOD), near Lancaster, Texas. On September 19, 2008 the Board 
investigator-in-charge examined the wreckage at ASOD and the engine was removed from the 
airplane and shipped to the Honeywell Product Integrity Investigation Laboratory in Phoenix, 
Arizona.  On November 18, 2008 a teardown and examination of the engine was conducted at 
that facility under the oversight of an FAA inspector. The examination shows evidence of over 
temperature damage and missing material from turbine rotor blades. A metallurgical 
examination shows that the first stage turbine rotor and the prop pitch control cam do not 
conform to Honeywell specifications and are not authorized replacement parts. The 
configuration of the control system components on the engine do not meet the type certificate 
specifications and a previous weld repair on the engine combustor plenum does not conform to 
standard practices for weld repairs on aerospace parts.
Airplane maintenance logbooks could not be located and were not available for inspection. The 
Hobbs meter reading at the accident site was 874.4. A few selected pages of maintenance 
records for the engine were located that covered the period from June 20, 2004 at 3369.5 
engine time since overhaul (TSOH) until the last entry at 4763.4 TSOH on June 24, 2008. A 
maintenance record entry by a certified repair station on June 24, 2008, shows that a hot 
section inspection was performed; the engine was returned to service and reinstalled on 
N8472V at a Hobbs meter reading of 442.0.
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft maintenance event
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
