The pilot stated that the engine lost power while maneuvering.  According to the pilot's 
statement, 'everything was operating normal, 2500 RPM, 155 knots...2,000 [feet] MSL.' He 
then turned north and 'the engine quit abruptly...no sputtering or gradual loss of RPM.'  He 
attempted a force landing at a nearby airport 'in hopes of deadsticking [sic] it onto the runway.'  
The flight landed about 1/2 mile short of runway 14, and impacted into palmettos and pine 
trees. The airplane's engine was examined and run.  The examination and engine run did not 
reveal any discrepancies. 
a loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. 
 On February 1, 1997, about 1226 eastern standard time, a homebuilt, Velocity 173 RG, 
N525V, registered to a private owner, was substantially damaged during a forced landing, near 
Valkaria, Florida.  The private-rated pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
(VMC) prevailed in the vicinity, and no flight plan had been filed.  The local personal flight was 
being conducted in accordance with Title 14 CFR Part 91.
While maneuvering, the pilot stated the airplane's engine lost power.  The pilot 
attempted a forced landing back to the airport, and struck trees about 1/2 mile short of the 
runway.
According to the pilot's statement, after departure he turned towards a practice area 
near Valkaria Airport.  He stated that, "everything was operating normal, 2500 RPM, 155 
knots...2,000 [feet] MSL."  He then turned north and contacted the ATC Tower at Melbourne 
Airport that he was inbound for landing, when "immediately the engine quit abruptly...no 
sputtering or gradual loss of RPM."  He turned the airplane back towards Valkaria Airport, "in 
hopes of deadsticking [sic] it onto the runway."  The flight landed short of runway 14, and 
impacted into palmettos and pine trees.
The engine from N525V was examined and run at a private hangar at the Melbourne 
Airport, under the supervision of the FAA, on February 12, 1997.  The examination and engine 
run did not reveal any discrepancies.
