The passenger said that before the flight the pilot was complaining about 'not feeling well.'  
During the flight the pilot's condition got worse, he complained about 'tingling in his fingers 
and pressure on his chest.'  Several witnesses saw the airplane on final approach, about 50 to 
100 feet above the ground, flying erratically, heading towards buildings and hangers.  The pilot 
became too ill to fly the airplane, and the passenger had taken control of the airplane, and 
landed without hitting any buildings, but struck a pole with the right wing.  An autopsy was 
performed on the pilot, and according to the Autopsy Report, the pathological diagnoses were: 
'Ischemic heart disease (coronary atherosclerosis, focal, severe) and pulmonary congestion 
with focal hemorrhage.'  Cause of death: 'Ischemic heart disease.' 
pilot incapacitation as result of Ischemic heart disease. 
 On February 1, 1997, about 1148 eastern standard time, a Beech 95-B55, N70F, 
registered to Insight Talent Inc., was substantially damaged during a forced landing, near 
Monroe, North Carolina.  The commercial-rated pilot was removed from the wreckage, and 
taken to a local hospital, where he was pronounced "dead."  One passenger was not injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed in the vicinity, and no flight plan had been 
filed.  The local personal flight was being conducted in accordance with Title 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the FAA inspector's statement the passenger told him that before the flight 
the pilot was complaining about "not feeling well."  During the flight the pilot's "condition got 
worse, he complained about tingling in his fingers and pressure on his chest."  Several 
witnesses saw the airplane on final approach, about 50 to 100 feet above the ground, flying 
erratically, heading towards buildings and hangers.  The pilot became too ill to fly the airplane, 
and the passenger had taken control of the airplane, and landed without hitting any buildings, 
but struck a pole with the right wing.
The FAA inspector talked to the medical examiner, and said the medical examiner stated 
that the "pilot died instantly and was dead before the aircraft hit the ground."
An autopsy was performed on the pilot, on February 3, 1997, at the Medical Examiner's 
Office, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, by Dr. Robert L Thompson.  According to the Autopsy 
Report, the pathological diagnoses was: "Ischemic heart disease...coronary 
atherosclerosis...focal, severe pulmonary congestion with focal hemorrhage."  Cause of death: 
"Ischemic heart disease."
Toxicological tests were conducted at the Medical Examiner's Office, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, and revealed,  "...no drugs or alcohol detected...."
