The flight instructor (CFI) and private pilot had reviewed airwork, turns, stalls, slow flight, take 
off and landings. They elected to practice procedures for a simulated engine failure. According 
to the CFI, 'on go-around, engine failed to produce power, resulting in forced landing....'  The 
FAA inspector stated that during the approach, they were at a fast landing speed and high on 
the approach. At an altitude of about 100 feet above the ground, they attempted to go around 
and advanced the throttle, but the engine did not respond. Subsequently, during the forced 
landing, the airplane collided with a tree. The engine was removed from the airframe, and a 
test run was conducted under the supervision of the FAA. The engine run revealed no 
discrepancies. The private pilot did not submit a statement to explain her account of the 
events. 
loss of engine power for undetermined reason(s).  Trees in the emergency landing area were a 
related factor. 
 On February 1, 1997, about 1400 eastern standard time, a Beech V35, N599T, registered 
to a private owner, was substantially damaged while on approach, near Orlando, Florida.  The 
airline transport-rated pilot, certified flight instructor (CFI), and a private pilot were not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed in the vicinity, and no flight plan 
had been filed.  The local training flight originated at 1300, and was being conducted in 
accordance with Title 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the CFI's statement he and the private pilot had reviewed "airwork, turns, 
stalls, slow flight, take off and landings."  On the accident landing he said, "...conducting 
simulated engine failure...on go-around, engine failed to produce power, resulting in forced 
landing...."
The FAA inspector stated that on this approach they were at a "fast" landing speed, and 
"high" on the approach.  At an altitude of about 100 feet above the ground they attempted to go 
around, advanced the throttle, and landed in a tree.
The engine was removed from the airframe and shipped to Continental Motor's 
facilities, in Mobile, Alabama, where an engine test run was conducted under the supervision of 
the FAA, on March 16, 1997.   The engine run revealed no discrepancies.
The first pilot did not submit a statement pertaining to the facts in this accident, and her 
account of the events of the accident are not known.  According to the FAA they made several 
attempts to contact the pilot and were unsuccessful.
