A few minutes after takeoff, the airplane was next seen flying in the vicinity of the accident site. 
One eyewitness stated that when the airplane first flew overhead, it was just above the tree 
tops. Another eyewitness observed the airplane as the pilot made several low passes. On the 
last low pass, the pilot initiated a steep climb which terminated in what was described as a 
'hammerhead stall.'  The airplane entered a spin, descended from about 500 feet, and crashed 
adjacent to a single family dwelling, hitting a tree and utility line as it descended to the ground. 
All aircraft components were located in the immediate vicinity of the main wreckage. 
Subsequent examination of the engine assembly failed to disclose a mechanical problem. 
Examination of the airframe and aircraft systems also failed to disclose a mechanical problem. 
failure of the pilot to maintain flying airspeed, while maneuvering at low altitude, which 
resulted in a stall and subsequent collision with a tree, utility line, and the ground. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 1, 1997, at 0921 central standard time, a Cessna A150L, N50TB, collided with 
utility lines and a tree  while maneuvering over a residential area near Trinity, Alabama. The 
personal flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed. 
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane was destroyed. 
The pilot and passenger were fatally injured. The flight departed Pryor Field in Decatur, 
Alabama, at 0900. 
Friends of the pilot and passenger reported that they had planned to go flying after they got off 
work on the morning of the accident. An official of Decatur/Athens Aero Services reported that 
the pilot arrived at the airport at approximately 0900 hours, entered flight operation alone, 
and rented N50TB for about two hours. 
A few minutes after takeoff from Pryor Field, the airplane was seen flying in the vicinity of 
Trinity, Alabama. One eyewitness stated that, when the airplane first flew overhead, it was just 
above the tree tops. Another witness observed the airplane as the pilot made several low 
passes. On the last low pass, the pilot initiated a steep climb which terminated in what was 
described as a "hammerhead stall." The airplane entered a spin, descended from about 500 
feet, and collided with utility lines adjacent to a single family dwelling (see attached witness 
statements). 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Information about the pilot is included in this report under the data field labeled "First Pilot" 
on page 3 of the factual report. The pilot's flight logs were not recovered for examination, and 
Decatur/Athens Aero services did not have recorded data about the pilot's recent flight 
experience. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Information about the airplane is included in this report under the data field labeled "Aircraft 
Information" on page 2 of the factual report. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. Weather information is 
contained in this report under the data field labeled "Weather Information" on page 4 of the 
factual report. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted the ground adjacent to Mud Tavern Road in the community of Trinity. 
Examination of the accident site disclosed that the airplane wreckage was scattered over an 
area the approximate dimensions of the airframe. The horizontal stabilizer and vertical fin 
assemblies rested along the edge of the paved county road. The nose section of the airframe 
rested in the drainage ditch adjacent to the road surface. Additional debris from the damaged 
tree and downed utility lines was located in the immediate vicinity of the impact site. Despite 
the closeness of the accident site to a single family dwelling, the structure sustained minimal 
damage.
Examination of the aircraft wreckage at the accident site revealed that engine and propeller 
assemblies were buried two feet into the ground. The engine firewall was displaced aft into the 
pilot's and passenger's stations. Both aircraft seats were dislodged from their normally 
installed positions; the cockpit floor and seat tracks assemblies sustained buckling 
deformation. The leading edges of both wing assemblies sustained perpendicular crushing 
damage, and the wing assemblies were deflected aft from their normally installed positions. 
The pilot's station and the fuselage livable space sustained  crushing damage. Despite impact 
damage to the airframe, flight control cables and fittings were examined at their normally 
installed positions. All aircraft components were located in the immediate vicinity of the main 
wreckage.
The subsequent examination of the engine assembly failed to disclose a mechanical problem. 
Examination of the airframe and aircraft systems also failed to disclose a mechanical problem. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The autopsy on the pilot was conducted by Dr..Joseph Emory, on February  2, 1997 at the  
Alabama Department of Forensic Science in Birmingham, Alabama. The Toxicological 
examinations were negative for drugs and alcohol.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The aircraft wreckage was released to, Mr. Edward C. Smith, President, Decatur/Athens Aero 
Services.
