Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MERCER ISLAND, WA
Accident Number:
SEA01LA022
Date & Time:
12/01/2000, 1100 PST 
Registration:
N8551Z
Aircraft:
Aerofab Inc. LAKE 250
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot began a takeoff run to the west, planning a left step turn and liftoff to the south.  Just 
after starting the step turn, while on the step at a speed of about 40 knots in 'a normal left turn 
step attitude', and 'skidding and bouncing a bit to the right through the chop as is normal in the 
step turn', the pilot was violently thrown to the right, striking his head on the right side door 
post (despite having his seat belt and shoulder harness on.)  He reported that he was heading 
about west to southwest when this occurred.  The plane came to an instantaneous stop at this 
point.  Investigators did not find any evidence of aircraft malfunctions occurring prior to the 
sudden stoppage in the water. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during a left turning step taxi to takeoff, resulting 
in a wing contacting the water during the step turn. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: DRAGGED WING,ROTOR,POD,FLOAT OR TAIL/SKID
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 5SEA01LA022
Factual Information
 On December 1, 2000, approximately 1130 Pacific standard time, an Aerofab Lake 250 
amphibious airplane, N8551Z, registered to and operated by the pilot, was substantially 
damaged in a takeoff attempt from the surface of Lake Washington near Mercer Island, 
Washington.  The private pilot-in-command received minor injuries in the accident.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR 91 personal 
flight.  The pilot did not report the accident flight's destination.
The pilot indicated that at the time of the takeoff attempt, the wind was 3 to 5 knots from the 
south, and there was about 6 to 10 inches of chop on the water.  He reported there was no 
nearby boat traffic and no noticeable wakes or swells.  The pilot stated he began his takeoff run 
to the west, planning a left step turn and liftoff to the south.  He reported that just after starting 
the step turn, while on the step at a speed of about 40 knots in "a normal left turn step 
attitude", and "skidding and bouncing a bit to the right through the chop as is normal in the 
step turn", he was violently thrown right, striking his head on the right side door post (despite 
having his seat belt and shoulder harness on.)  He reported that he was heading about west to 
southwest when this occurred.  He stated the plane came to an instantaneous stop at this point.  
The pilot subsequently radioed for assistance.  Several boats came to the aid of the stricken 
aircraft and rescued the pilot.  The aircraft then began to sink, but the aid boats were successful 
in placing flotation gear underneath the aircraft.  This prevented the aircraft from sinking and 
enabled it to be towed to shore.
According to the pilot, the accident aircraft had 830 hours airframe total time since new, and 
the aircraft had received its last annual inspection on November 24, 2000, 1.5 flight hours 
before the accident.  The pilot reported that after the accident, he noted that the aircraft's 
engine, which is mounted on a dorsal pylon above the fuselage, had toppled onto the right 
wing.  The pilot stated that this was possibly due to a "pylon flying wire root block Uchannel 
[sic] failure", although he further stated that this was "most likely a result, not a cause of the 
accident."  A representative of Talon Aviation, Puyallup, Washington, brought a fractured 
component he reported to be this suspect component to the NTSB Northwest Regional Office 
in Seattle, Washington, for examination.  The NTSB IIC visually examined the component and 
observed that the fracture surfaces on the component displayed 45-degree shear lips.  The IIC 
did not observe any areas of scalloping or "beach marks" on the component's fracture surfaces.
Page 3 of 5SEA01LA022
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/23/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1328 hours (Total, all aircraft), 813 hours (Total, this make and model), 1228 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 34 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 17 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Aerofab Inc.
Registration:
N8551Z
Model/Series:
LAKE 250 LAKE 250
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
130
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Amphibian; 
Hull; Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/24/2000, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3140 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
2 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
830 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540-AA1AD
Registered Owner:
ROBERT J. EARLE
Rated Power:
270 hp
Operator:
ROBERT J. EARLE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5SEA01LA022
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
40°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
UNKNOWN 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
GREGG        NESEMEIER
Adopted Date:
07/17/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVE   LEHMAN; RENTON, WA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5SEA01LA022
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
