This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Chignik Lake, AK
Accident Number: ANC17FA021
Date & Time: 05/01/2017, 1350 AKD
Registration: N803TH
Aircraft: CESSNA 208B
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
On May 1, 2017, about 1350 Alaska daylight time, a turbine-powered Cessna 208B Grand 
Caravan airplane, N803TH, sustained substantial damage after impacting steep, mountainous 
terrain about 8 miles south of Chignik Lake Airport, Chignik Lake, Alaska. The airplane was 
being operated as Flight 341 by Grant Aviation, Inc, Anchorage, Alaska, as a scheduled 
commuter flight under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135 and 
visual flight rules (VFR). 
The airline transport pilot, the sole occupant, 
sustained fatal injuries. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the airplane's point of departure, and company 
flight following procedures were in effect. Flight 341 departed Port Heiden Airport, Alaska, at 
1305, destined for Perryville Airport, Perryville, Alaska.
Flight 341 originated at the King Salmon Airport, Alaska, with one passenger who disembarked 
at the Port Heiden Airport. The scheduled flight continued to the Perryville Airport, which was 
about 80 miles away, with 1,322 lbs. of mail and no passengers. According to the director of 
operations for Grant Aviation, at 1353 he received a notification from the US Coast Guard 
Rescue Coordination Center (RCC) Juneau, of a signal from a 406 megahertz (MHz) 
Emergency Locator Transmitter (ELT) that was registered to N803TH. The Director of 
Operations initiated the company's overdue aircraft procedures. 
According to the US Coast Guard District 17 Command Center, the initial ELT signal was 
received from the COSPAS/SARSAT system at 1353. RCC Juneau initiated a search mission 
that included a HC-130 airplane and MH-60 helicopter from Air Station Kodiak, which is 
located about 275 miles northeast of the initial ELT position. At 1730, the wreckage was located 
and a rescue swimmer was hoisted down to the site. The crewman determined that the pilot 
was deceased. The crew could not extricate the pilot due to limited resources, time, fuel and 
deteriorating weather.
The Alaska State Troopers coordinated a recovery mission conducted on May 4 that included a 
Coast Guard MH-60 from Air Station Kodiak, and volunteer members of the Alaska Mountain 
Rescue Group. The remains of the pilot were removed from the scene and transported to a 
secure location. The wreckage will be recovered and examined at a future date.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
According to information and photographs provided by the recovery crew, the wreckage came 
to rest in deep snow at about 2,993 feet on the west face of a treeless, steep mountain in the 
Alaska Peninsula National Wildlife Refuge of the Aleutian Range. It is located about 500 feet 
from the top of the mountain ridge and partially submerged in the snow on its left side with the 
nose section under the snow pack. The fragmented wreckage was contained in an area of about 
100 feet by 40 feet, on a heading of about 030 ° magnetic, with the right wing separated and 
located about 40 feet forward of the main wreckage. The wings and fuselage sustained 
substantial damage. 
At 1239, an aviation special weather report (SPECI) from the Chignik Airport (the closest 
weather reporting facility) reported, in part: wind variable at 4 knots; visibility 10 statute miles, 
light rain; sky condition, overcast at 1,700 feet; temperature 39 ° F, dewpoint 36 ° F; altimeter, 
29.51 inHg.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CESSNA
Registration: N803TH
Model/Series: 208B
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: GRANT AVIATION INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: Commuter Air Carrier
(135); On-demand Air Taxi 
(135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code: ENHA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Unknown
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: PAJC, 18 ft msl
Observation Time: 2039 UTC
Distance from Accident Site: 18 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 4°C / 2°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: Light and Variable / ,
Variable
Lowest Ceiling: Overcast / 1700 ft agl
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.51 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: Company VFR
Departure Point: PORT HEIDEN, AK (PTH)
Destination: PERRYVILLE, AK (PEV)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude: 56.140278, -158.805000 (est)
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Noreen O Price
Additional Participating Persons: Ryan Brinkman; FAA Denali CMO; Anchorage, AK
Austin Engebretson; Grant Aviation Inc.; Anchorage, AK
Marc Gratton; Pratt and Whitney Canada Corp.; Montreal, QC
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
