Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Poughkeepsie, NY
Accident Number:
IAD05LA029
Date & Time:
01/01/2005, 1745 EST 
Registration:
N7180Q
Aircraft:
Cessna 172L
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
After takeoff, the pilot completed one traffic pattern, performed a touch-and-go landing, and 
was on climb-out when the engine stopped producing power about 200 feet above ground 
level.  As the pilot maneuvered it back towards the airport, the airplane struck a tree and a 
fence on the airport perimeter.  Post-crash examination revealed that the gascolator drain valve 
would not actuate, and would not drain fuel.  The bowl was removed, and it contained water, 
rust, and debris, with a thin film of fuel on top.  The carburetor was drained, and the mixture 
collected was about 50 percent fuel, and 50 percent water.  The contents of the left fuel tank 
could not be examined due to impact damage and the disposition of the wreckage.  Fuel 
drained from the right tank contained water.  After the airplane was recovered, a can of 
aviation gasoline was plumbed into the airplane's fuel system.  The engine started immediately, 
and ran continuously without interruption.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inadequate preflight, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to fuel 
contamination.
Page 2 of 6IAD05LA029
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION,WATER
2. (C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO LANDING AREA (EMERGENCY)
Findings
3. OBJECT - FENCE
Page 3 of 6IAD05LA029
Factual Information
On January 1, 2005, at 1745 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172L, N7180Q, was substantially 
damaged during collision with a tree and a fence following a loss of engine power after takeoff 
from Duchess County Airport (POU), Poughkeepsie, New York.  The certificated private pilot 
was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight that originated, 
at 1740.  No flight plan was filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot was interviewed by telephone and provided a written statement.  He explained that 
the airplane belonged to a friend, and it was housed in his hangar.  The purpose of the flight 
was to check out the airplane for his friend.
The airplane was serviced with fuel about 1 week prior to the accident, and the tanks were filled 
at that time.  After fueling, the pilot "rocked the wings, and held the aircraft tail down" prior to 
drawing fuel samples.  According to the pilot, the samples contained no water.  He did not fly 
the airplane that day due to a scheduling conflict.
During the preflight inspection before the accident flight, the pilot again rocked the wings and 
lowered the tail prior to sampling the fuel.  The pilot drew two samples from each wing, and 
drained "10-12 ounces" of fuel from the gascolator.  According to the pilot, the samples 
contained no water.  After the preflight was completed, the airplane was towed outside.
The pilot stated that after engine start; he completed the before-takeoff checklist five times, 
and ran the engine for 18-20 minutes prior to the first takeoff.
After takeoff from runway 06, the pilot completed one traffic pattern, performed a touch-and-
go landing, and was on climb-out when the engine stopped producing power about 200 feet 
above ground level.
As the pilot maneuvered it back towards the airport, the airplane struck a tree and a fence on 
the airport perimeter.  The airplane came to rest upright, entangled in the fence.
On January 3, 2005, a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation safety inspector 
examined the airplane.  In a telephone interview, he said the gascolator drain valve would not 
actuate, and would not drain fuel.  The gascolator bowl could not be removed due to corrosion, 
and required two hands to "break it free from its mount."  The bowl contained water, with a 
thin film of fuel on top.  The bowl also contained rust and debris, and the gascolator plunger 
gasket/grommet was torn.
The carburetor was drained, and the mixture collected was about 50 percent fuel, and 50 
percent water.  The carburetor also contained dirt and debris.
The contents of the left fuel tank could not be examined due to impact damage and the 
disposition of the wreckage.  Fuel drained from the right tank contained water.
The auxiliary tank contained about 4 ounces of fluid.  The fluid was drained, and the mixture 
collected was about 70 percent water.  The other 30 percent was an unidentified fluid that was 
yellow in color.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single engine land.  He also 
held a commercial pilot certificate with a rating for rotorcraft helicopter.  His most recent FAA 
second-class medical certificate was issued October 15, 2003.
The pilot reported 3,446 hours of flight experience, of which, 1,869 were in single engine 
Page 4 of 6IAD05LA029
airplanes.  He reported approximately 50 hours of flight experience in make and model.
The tachometer reading at the crash site was 2,083.5 aircraft hours.  
The most recent annual inspection was completed October 10, 2004, at 2083.2 aircraft hours.
At 1753, the weather reported at Duchess County Airport included clear skies with winds from 
360 degrees at 8 knots.  The temperature was 39 degrees Fahrenheit, and the dewpoint was 27 
degrees Fahrenheit.
According to the Cessna Pilot Safety and Warning Supplements, rocking the wings, and 
lowering of the tail, should only be accomplished after contaminants have been discovered in 
routine fuel sampling.  According to the Supplements, "If contamination is observed, take 
further samples at all fuel drain points until fuel is clear of contaminants; then, gently rock 
wings and, if possible, lower the tail to move any additional contaminants to the sampling 
points.  Take repeated samples from all fuel drain points until all contamination has been 
removed."
On February 1, 2005, an FAA inspector plumbed a can of aviation gasoline into the airplane's 
fuel system.  The engine started immediately, and ran continuously without interruption.  
According to the inspector, all instrument readings and the magneto checks were "perfect."
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/15/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/20/2003
Flight Time:
3446 hours (Total, all aircraft), 504 hours (Total, this make and model), 1000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6IAD05LA029
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N7180Q
Model/Series:
172L 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17260480
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/10/2004, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2083.5 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Textron Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A4M
Registered Owner:
BROWN AVIATION LLC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
BROWN AVIATION LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
POU, 165 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1753 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
240°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.47 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
4°C / -3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
POUGHKEEPSIE, NY (POU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1530 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
DUTCHESS COUNTY (POU)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
165 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
6
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5001 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Touch and 
Go
Page 6 of 6IAD05LA029
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.626389, -73.883889
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Brian C Rayner
Adopted Date:
04/28/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Ken Symons; FAA; Teterboro, NJ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
