Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Minneapolis, MN
Accident Number:
CHI01FA129
Date & Time:
05/01/2001, 1437 CDT 
Registration:
N9333
Aircraft:
Douglas DC-9-31
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor, 42 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
The airplane was substantially damaged when it was struck by an aircraft tug during passenger 
boarding.  The aircraft was parked and was being prepared for departure. The driver of the tug 
was moving the vehicle into position in order to connect the aircraft tow bar in preparation for 
pushback.  He said that when he placed the tug into gear, it lurched forward into the parked 
aircraft.  He said that pieces of the aircraft protruded through the windshield of the vehicle and 
pinned him into his seat.  He said that he was unable to shift the vehicle into reverse and his leg 
was pinned on the accelerator pedal.  Other ground workers in the area attempted to shut off 
the tug's engine.  The driver said that the vehicle continued to drive forward until the engine 
was finally shut off.  During the event, the pilot of the aircraft had applied the brakes when he 
noticed the unplanned movement of the airplane.  The aircraft was pushed backward about 30 
feet causing damage to the nose section of the fuselage. Subsequent to the accident, the tug was 
placed on jacks and a check performed.  During the check it was found that the normal engine 
shutoff switch would not shut the engine off if the engine was operated at high throttle settings.  
It was further discovered that at high throttle settings, the brake system was not able to stop 
the rotation of the drive wheels.  No anomalies were found during this test that would explain 
the lurching described by the tug driver.  The tug had been involved in a previous incident 
where an aircraft was damaged.  A report of the previous incident showed that the tug lurched 
when the driver was attempting to move the tug into position to connect to the aircraft. The tug 
manufacturer does not have records of operational problems associated with that model tug.  
The manufacturer also said that they were not aware of a history of lurching problems 
concerning the model tug in question.  It was found that the distance from the cab of the tug to 
the nose of a DC-9 aircraft when the tow bar is attached is 4 feet 2 inches.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The partial failure of the aircraft tug for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 6CHI01FA129
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: STANDING - ENGINE(S) NOT OPERATING
Findings
1. (C) AIRPORT EQUIPMENT,GROUND SUPPORT - FAILURE,PARTIAL
2. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
Page 3 of 6CHI01FA129
Factual Information
On May 01, 2001, at 1437 central daylight time, a Douglas DC-9-31, N9333, operated by 
Northwest Airlines, Inc. as flight 682, was substantially damaged when it was struck by an 
aircraft tug during passenger boarding.  The 14 CFR Part 121 flight was parked at gate D3 at the 
Minneapolis-St. Paul International/Wold-Chamberlain Airport, Minneapolis, Minnesota and 
was bound for the Philadelphia International Airport, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.  No injuries 
were reported by the 4 crewmembers or 38 passengers that had boarded the aircraft.  The 
driver of the tug and a food service worker received minor injuries.
The aircraft was parked and was being prepared for departure by various ground workers 
including the tug driver and workers restocking the aircraft food supply. The driver of the tug 
said that he was moving the vehicle into position in order to connect the aircraft tow bar in 
preparation for pushback.  He said that when he placed the tug into gear, it lurched forward 
into the parked aircraft.  He said that pieces of the aircraft protruded through the windshield of 
the vehicle and pinned him into his seat.  He said that he was unable to shift the vehicle into 
reverse and his leg was pinned on the accelerator pedal.  Other ground workers in the area 
attempted to shut off the tug's engine.  The driver said that the vehicle continued to drive 
forward until the engine was finally shut off.  During the event, the pilot of the aircraft had 
applied the brakes when he noticed the unplanned movement of the airplane.  The aircraft was 
pushed backward about 30 feet causing damage to the nose section of the fuselage.  A food 
service worker was injured when he jumped from his vehicle which was parked next to the 
aircraft.
Subsequent to the accident, the tug was placed on jacks and a check performed.  During the 
check it was found that the normal engine shutoff switch would not shut the engine off if the 
engine was operated at high throttle settings.  It was further discovered that at high throttle 
settings, the brake system was not able to stop the rotation of the drive wheels.  No anomalies 
were found during this test that would explain the lurching described by the tug driver.  
Subsequent to the testing, the throttle system of the tug was replaced as a precautionary 
measure by the airline.
During the course of the investigation, it was found that the tug had been involved in a 
previous incident where an aircraft was damaged.  A report of the previous incident was 
obtained. The driver of the tug during the previous incident reported that the tug lurched when 
he was attempting to move the tug into position to connect to the aircraft.
The manufacturer of the tug said, during a telephone interview, that they do not have records 
of operational problems associated with that model tug.  He also stated that he was not aware 
of a history of lurching problems concerning the model tug in question.
It was found that the distance from the cab of the tug to the nose of a DC-9 aircraft when the 
tow bar is attached is 4 feet 2 inches.
Page 4 of 6CHI01FA129
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Unknown
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/22/2000
Flight Time:
9174 hours (Total, all aircraft), 6759 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Douglas
Registration:
N9333
Model/Series:
DC-9-31 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
47246
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
105
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
108000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Jet
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
JT8-9A
Registered Owner:
NORTHWEST AIRLINES INC
Rated Power:
14000 lbs
Operator:
NORTHWEST AIRLINES INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
NWAA
Page 5 of 6CHI01FA129
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MSP, 841 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1445 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 8000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.15 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 10°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
MINNEAPOLIS, MN (MSP)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
PHILADELPHIA, PA (PHL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Airport Information
Airport:
MINNEAPOLIS-ST PAUL INTL/WOLD- 
(MSP)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
841 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
Unknown
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
4 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
38 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
2 Minor
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor, 42 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John M Brannen
Adopted Date:
07/02/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Patrick Schmitz; Northwest Airlines, Dept N7180; St. Paul, MN
Bradley T Berntsen; FAA-Northwest Airlines CMO; Bloomington, MN
Mark Bauman; Aircraft Mechanics Fraternal Association; Bloomington, MN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI01FA129
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
