Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
HOPE, AK
Accident Number:
ANC97LA065
Date & Time:
05/01/1997, 1201 AKD 
Registration:
N14C
Aircraft:
Cessna U206F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The pilot reported he was starting a descent to his destination airport when the engine began to 
lose power.  He said he was unable to restart the engine, and made a forced landing into trees.  
The pilot related he had been flying the airplane with the left fuel tank selected, and he didn't 
recall if he switched to the right tank during the emergency descent.  A passenger seated in the 
right front seat stated the left fuel gauge was indicating empty, and that the right tank fuel 
gauge was indicating full.  He said the fuel selector was on the left tank, and when he told the 
pilot he should switch fuel tanks, the pilot reportedly told him to 'relax.'  The passenger stated 
that the pilot did not switch tanks.  Postaccident inspection disclosed the left fuel tank 
contained an unusable quantity of fuel, and the right tank was full. The airplane's engine was 
removed from the airplane, as well as the electric fuel boost pump.  The engine was started and 
ran on a test stand without any observed mechanical anomalies.  The fuel pump was also tested 
and found functional. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
a loss of engine power resulting from fuel starvation due to the pilot's improper positioning of 
the fuel selector, and the pilot's failure to identify and correct the deficiency during the ensuing 
emergency descent. 
Page 2 of 6ANC97LA065
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: DESCENT
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
2. (C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
4. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6ANC97LA065
Factual Information
 On May 1, 1997, about 1201 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Cessna U206F airplane, 
N14C, operated by Jay Hawk Air, of Anchorage, Alaska, under 14 CFR Part 135 as an on-
demand air taxi flight, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power and 
subsequent forced landing  to an off airport site located about 17 miles southwest of Hope, 
Alaska.  The commercial certificated pilot and one of the three passengers aboard reported 
minor injuries.  The remaining two passengers were not injured.  The flight was returning to 
Merrill Field, Anchorage, from Montague Island, Alaska.  The flight departed Montague Island 
about 1120.
In his written report to the NTSB, the pilot related he was just beginning a cruise descent from 
5,000 feet msl, when the engine "cut out" for one or two seconds.  He said he decided to enrich 
the mixture, because he thought the engine might be running lean because of the descent.  
About a minute later, the engine "...cut out again and then seemed to surge in and out.  At this 
point I commenced with emergency procedures.  I pitched for best glide speed and trimmed 
the plane.  Then I began to look for the best choice of airfields.  At this point, however, I was 
still not sure if the engine had stopped completely."  The pilot's statement notes he recalls 
reaching down to switch the fuel tanks, bringing the mixture to full rich, switching the 
magnetos, and activating the fuel boost pump.  The engine would not restart, but the propeller 
kept windmilling all the way to the ground.
The pilot reported he was attempting to reach an abandoned gasline airstrip (North Gasline), 
but was unable to reach the airstrip, and made a forced landing into spruce trees.  Prior to 
impact, he said he switched the fuel selector to the "OFF" position, and instructed the 
passengers to crack their doors open.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) on May 15, the 
pilot related essentially the same information as in his written statement.  The IIC asked him 
about his fuel management techniques, and the pilot replied he had been flying the airplane all 
of the flight with the fuel selector on the left tank.  He was asked if he remembered switching 
the fuel tank selector to the right tank following the loss of engine power.  He said he  recalled 
reaching down to move the selector, but doesn't actually remember moving it.
The NTSB IIC interviewed the right front seat passenger, Ralph S. Johnson, Yakutat, Alaska, 
via telephone on May 15.  Mr. Johnson was asked if he was familiar with a Cessna 206.  He said 
he was, and that he "flew the bush" quite a bit in Cessna airplanes, and always liked to sit up 
front when he could.  He was asked if he was familiar with where the fuel gauges, the fuel 
selector, and fuel boost pump switches were located.  He said he was, and then accurately 
described their locations.
Mr. Johnson was asked to recount the events of the flight.  He said the flight was uneventful 
until the engine started surging as they begin a descent near Hope.  He said he recalls looking 
at the gas gauges, and seeing the left tank was reading empty.  He said the right tank indicated 
full.  He remembered the pilot working the boost pump switch.  He said he told the pilot, 
"Switch your tanks, man!", and that the pilot responded by saying words to the effect, "just 
relax."  He said the fuel selector was on the left tank, and that the pilot did not switch to the 
right tank.
Postaccident inspection of the accident airplane's fuel tanks disclosed a full right tank, and 
Page 4 of 6ANC97LA065
residual fuel, estimated at less than one gallon, in the left tank.
The engine was removed from the airplane and inspected.  It displayed no obvious signs of 
malfunction.  The engine was placed on  a test stand at Sea Air, Inc., on May 30.  The engine 
started and ran without observed malfunction.
The electric boost pump was removed from the airplane and tested.  It performed within the 
factory specified parameters.
No parts of the airplane were retained by the NTSB. 
Parties to the investigation were Jay Hawk Air, and the FAA.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
23, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/23/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 350 hours (Total, this make and model), 700 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 150 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N14C
Model/Series:
U206F U206F
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
U20602803
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/12/1997, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
37 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
9475 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-F
Registered Owner:
JAY HAWK AIR
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
JAY HAWK AIR
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Page 5 of 6ANC97LA065
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ANC, 144 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
23 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1205 ADT
Direction from Accident Site:
335°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 6000 ft agl
Visibility
70 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / -4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
MONTAGUE ISLAND, AK 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
ANCHORAGE, AK (MRI)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1120 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor, 2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JAMES      D LABELLE
Adopted Date:
11/10/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVID   CAMPBELL (FAA); ANCHORAGE, AK
TIM J KARLOVICH; ANCHORAGE, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC97LA065
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
