The airline transport pilot was performing touch-and-go landings. The preflight, run-up, and 
takeoff were all normal. The pilot reported that, after the first landing, she added power to take 
off, and once there was no usable runway remaining, she raised the landing gear. At 100 ft 
above ground level, the engine went silent. The pilot picked a clear area to fly toward and 
lowered the landing gear. Witnesses stated that the airplane landed hard, bounced, and then 
landed again. The airplane subsequently impacted a trailer and a large pole and then came to 
rest inverted. During the accident sequence, the right wing was separated from the fuselage. 
Postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies that would 
have precluded normal operation.
The total loss of engine power during takeoff following a touch-and-go landing for reasons that 
could not be determined because postaccident examination of the engine did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
On December 2, 2014, at 1630 mountain standard time, a Nanchang CJ-6A, N4350D, lost 
engine power and landed hard at Falcon Field Airport, Mesa, Arizona. The airplane was 
registered to Lang Aviation Support Services, LLC, and was operated as a 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 local personal flight. The airline transport pilot and single passenger 
received minor injuries, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot stated that she intended to perform touch-and-goes in the landing pattern. The 
preflight, run up, and takeoff were all normal. After the first landing, she added power to 
takeoff, and once there was no usable runway remaining, she raised the landing gear. At 100 
feet above ground level, the engine went silent. The pilot picked a clear area to fly towards and 
lowered the landing gear. Witnesses stated that the airplane landed hard, bounced, landed a 
second time, impacted a trailer, a large pole, and then came to rest inverted. During the 
accident sequence the right wing was separated from the fuselage. First responders shut off the 
fuel and magneto switches.
On December 16, 2014, a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector and a certified 
airframe and power plant mechanic examined the airplane and engine. The engine crankshaft 
was rotated, and the carburetor, fuel pump, and spark plugs were examined. The fuel pump 
and carburetor contained fuel. Nothing that would have precluded normal engine operation 
was identified.
