Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Wayne, NE
Accident Number:
CEN16FA073
Date & Time:
01/03/2016, 1840 CST 
Registration:
N5104D
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172N
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
VFR encounter with IMC
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The noninstrument-rated pilot planned to conduct a cross-country flight. Before departure on 
the second leg of the flight, the pilot obtained a weather briefing, which noted areas of 
instrument flight rules (IFR) conditions along his route of flight, including his destination 
airport. During the briefing, the pilot indicated that his vehicle and work was at his destination. 
The briefer and pilot discussed flying visual flight rules (VFR) over the cloud layer and possible 
alternate destination airports. The briefer suggested maintaining VFR flight and making an 
intermediary stop to again check the weather. The pilot elected to fly direct to his destination. 
During the flight, the pilot flew above the cloud layer and received VFR flight-following from 
ATC. The controller advised him that his preferred destination airport was currently under IFR 
conditions, but another airport was reporting VFR. The pilot elected to continue to the 
alternate destination airport. The pilot notified the controller he did not have visual contact 
with the ground and continued his descent. Shortly thereafter, the controller lost radar and 
radio communication with the pilot. About the time of the accident, a person in the area 
reported the weather conditions as, "clouds on the ground," with low ceilings, and freezing fog 
and added that the visibility had changed from about 6 miles to less than ¼ mile in seconds. 
The airplane wreckage was located about 8 miles from the airport. Examination of the 
wreckage did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operations. A review 
of the pilot's logbook revealed he had a total of about 111 flight hours. The accident is consistent 
with controlled flight into terrain in instrument meteorological conditions as the pilot 
continued the descent without the ground in sight.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 10CEN16FA073
The noninstrument-rated pilot's improper decision to continue visual flight into instrument 
meteorological conditions, which resulted in a collision with terrain.
Findings
Personnel issues
Flight planning/navigation - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Below VFR minima - Decision related to condition (Cause)
Below VFR minima - Effect on operation (Cause)
Page 3 of 10CEN16FA073
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Other weather encounter
Enroute-descent
VFR encounter with IMC (Defining event)
Approach
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On January 3, 2016, about 1840 central standard time, a Cessna 172N airplane, N5104D, 
impacted terrain near Wayne, Nebraska. The airplane sustained substantial damage and the 
private rated pilot was fatally injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by a private 
individual under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. 
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the destination airport and the airplane was 
not on a flight plan. The flight originated from the Columbia Regional Airport (KCOU), 
Columbia, Missouri about 1540 and was en route to Sioux Gateway Airport/Col. Bud Day Field 
(SUX), Sioux City, Iowa.
The pilot had flown from the McKellar-Sipes Regional Airport (KMKL) Jackson, Tennessee, to 
KCOU. According to KCOU personnel, the pilot requested the airplane be "topped off" and the 
airplane was fueled with about 26 gallons of fuel. While there, the pilot contacted Flight Service 
Station (FSS) via telephone, for a weather briefing. The pilot stated that he wanted to conduct a 
visual flight rules (VFR) flight from KCOU to KSUX. He indicated that his vehicle and work 
was there in Sioux City. During the conversation with the briefer, the pilot was informed that 
the weather at KSUX was instrument flight rules (IFR) conditions and was expected to remain 
that way. The conversation continued with alternatives, such as flying VFR over the cloud 
layer, and then descending into the Wayne Municipal Airport (LCG) Wayne, Nebraska, and 
renting an automobile. The cloud tops en route were reported as 2,500 to 4,500 ft. above 
ground level (agl). The briefing also noted general areas where weather conditions were IFR 
and VFR.
As the pilot neared Sioux City, the air traffic controller reported IFR conditions at the Sioux 
City airport. The reported weather conditions at KLCG were 10 miles visibility with scattered 
clouds at 200 ft. agl, so the pilot decided to land at KLCG. Shortly after the pilot started his 
descent to KLCG, radar and radio communications were lost with the pilot.
A search located the airplane wreckage in a field, about eight miles east of KLCG. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with rating for airplane single-engine land; there was 
no record of him holding an instrument rating. The pilot was issued a third class medical 
certificate and student pilot certificate on August 13, 2014.
Page 4 of 10CEN16FA073
A review of the pilot's logbook revealed the last entry was dated November 11, 2015, and he had 
accumulated 111.7 total flight hours, with 109.2 in the accident airplane.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Cessna 172 is a high-wing, single-engine airplane, with fixed landing gear, powered by a 
reciprocating Lycoming four-cylinder O-320 engine and a fixed pitch propeller. A review of the 
airplane's maintenance records revealed the last annual inspection was completed on January 
1,2015, with an airplane total time of 11,925.8 hours, an engine total time of 7,868.2 hours, and 
1,487.7 hours since overhaul. The panel Hobbs meter read 1,251.3 hours. A review of Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA records revealed the pilot purchased the airplane on August 25, 
2014; however, he had not updated the airplane's registration. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1815, the automated weather observing system (AWOS) located at KLCG, about 7 miles 
northwest of the accident site recorded; wind calm, 10 miles visibility, a clear sky below 12,000 
ft., temperature 9 degrees Fahrenheit (F), dew point 7 degrees F, and a barometric pressure of 
30.42 inches of mercury.
At 1855 the station recorded wind from 010 degrees at 4 knots, 10 miles visibility an overcast 
sky at 200 ft, the temperature10 degrees (F), and the dew point 9 degrees F.
No Significant Meteorological Information (SIGMET or Center Weather Advisories (CWA) 
were valid for the accident site at the accident time. 
Airmen's Meteorological Information (AIRMET Sierra issued at 1445 was valid at the accident 
time. The AIRMET Sierra forecasted IFR conditions with a ceiling below 1,000 ft. agl and 
visibility below 3 miles in mist. Conditions were forecast to continue through 2100 to 0300 the 
following day.
A pilot rated witness to the weather conditions about the time of the accident was located about 
one half mile west of the accident location. He stated that the temperature was 15 degrees F 
and the fog was freezing. The clouds appeared to be of the cumulus variation and were on the 
ground as he drove through them. The visibility quickly reduced from more than 6 statute 
miles to less than ¼ statute miles. 
The pilot received a weather briefing from FSS. The briefing advised the pilot of IFR 
conditions, near his destination airport, along with forecast for IFR conditions. The 
opportunity to fly VFR over the cloud layer was discussed, along with monitoring weather en 
route. 
Page 5 of 10CEN16FA073
A Weather Study Report was prepared for this investigation; the Group Chairman's factual 
report is located in the docket for this accident.
COMMUNICATIONS
A review of air traffic control communications with the pilot revealed that shortly after 
departing KCOU, the pilot requested and received VFR flight following. As the flight neared his 
destination the pilot was in contact with the Sioux City approach controller. The conversation, 
over several minutes, between the controller and pilot:
Controller: How are your flight conditions?
Pilot: Flight conditions are clear above the clouds, I have, probably have easily 15 to10 miles 
visibility above the clouds
Controller: Roger, let me know when you get ground contact
Pilot: Will do
Pilot: What are the actual ceilings of this cloud coverage?
Controller: We're showing both at Wayne and Norfolk that they are VFR with extended clear, 
and Sioux City IFR, right now 700 ft. overcast.
Pilot: Thank you
Pilot: I have good line of sight on appears to be West Point
Controller: Roger, just let me know when you get ground contact
Pilot: Will do, sir
Controller: I'm showing you losing altitude; do you see the ground yet?
Pilot: Descending towards the south. Not yet, I'm sure getting fairly close 
There was a conversation between the pilot and controller, about runways at the Wayne 
airport.
Pilot: ok, sounds good, I'll do the 36, and can't see the ground yet, but will let you know, just as 
soon as I do
Controller: Roger
Pilot: "At 2,000 ft. and have not identified the ground yet"
Page 6 of 10CEN16FA073
Controller: Roger, We're now showing a scattered layer at Wayne, at 200 ft.
Pilot: You're not saying the ceiling is at 200 ft. are you?
Controller: No, it's a scattered layer at 200, that was as of 10 minutes ago.
Pilot: Okay
Controller: I'm starting to lose you on radar, what's your current altitude?
Pilot: current altitude is 1,800; no ground in sight
Controller: Roger, maintain VFR
Controller: Radar contact lost
Pilot: Roger, on radar contact lost
About a half a minute later, the controller asked if the pilot was still on frequency. The pilot did 
not respond to the controller, and there were no additional communications with the pilot.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The Wayne Municipal Airport / Stan Morris Field (KLCG), is a public-use, non-towered 
airport, located 2 miles east of Wayne, Nebraska. Pilots are to use the Common Traffic 
Advisory Frequency (CTAF) for communications. The airport featured a concrete runway 5/23, 
3,406 ft. by 60 ft. asphalt runway 18/36, 4,201 ft. by 75 ft., and a turf runway. The airport is at 
an elevation of 1431.7 ft. and has an AWOS located on the field. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The on-site examination of the wreckage revealed the airplane's right wing impacted an open 
area of a snow covered, harvested, corn field. From the initial impact point, the wreckage path 
consisted of a large crater, then several small fragments of airplane. The wreckage path then 
continued to the main fuselage. The wreckage came to rest inverted, facing the direction of the 
wreckage path. Both wings had heavy leading edge damage; the main cabin was severely 
crushed; the empennage sustained minimal damage, and was nearly severed just aft of the 
baggage area. The engine and front cowling also had heavy impact damage; the two-bladed 
propeller remained attached to the engine. There was not a post-crash fire.
Aileron continuity was established at each of the wing bellcranks; however, the cables were 
bound by the amount of damage to the airframe. Control continuity for the elevators and 
rudders was established to their respective control surfaces. The flap actuator was measured at 
Page 7 of 10CEN16FA073
1.25 inches extended, which corresponded to a flaps retracted position. The carburetor was 
broken from its mount, but remained attached by the controls. Residual fuel was found in the 
carburetor and gascolator; the fuel appeared clear of any contaminants. The gasolator screen 
was also clear of debris and contaminants.
The instrument panel had heavy impact damage. The attitude indicator was partially crushed; 
the unit was disassembled and scoring was noted on the gyro and its housing.
The Hobbs meter on scene read 1,311.5 hours.
The airplane was recovered to a salvage yard; an examination of the engine conducted by the 
NTSB, along with technical representatives from the engine and airframe manufacturers.
The engine, firewall, and part of the instrument panel had been separated from the airframe 
for recovery. The firewall, panel, and baffling were removed to facilitate the examination. The 
engine was rotated by hand; continuity was established to the accessory section of the engine 
and through the crankshaft and valve train. Pieces of the duel magneto were recovered; 
however, impact damage prevented a complete examination. 
The top spark plugs exhibited light colored combustion deposits and the electrodes exhibited 
worn out Œ normal signatures, in accordance with the Champion aviation check-a-plug chart. 
The oil pump screen was clear. The carburetor, which had separated from the engine during 
the accident was disassembled. The carburetor's floats had signatures, consistent with 
hydraulic compression. The fuel filter screen was absent debris and contamination. 
No pre-impact abnormalities were noted during the airframe or engine examinations.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
31
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/13/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
111.7 hours (Total, all aircraft), 109.2 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 8 of 10CEN16FA073
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N5104D
Model/Series:
172N 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1979
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
17272424
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/01/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2299 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
11925.8 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91A installed, activated, 
aided in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
0-320 SERIES
Registered Owner:
LYONS KENNETH L
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Unknown
Condition of Light:
Not Reported
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KLCG
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1835 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 200 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Unknown 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
30°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.43 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-14°C / -15°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Columbia, MO (KCOU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Sioux City, IA (KSUX)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
1540 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Page 9 of 10CEN16FA073
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
42.167778, -96.846111
Medical And Pathological Information
The Pathology Medical Services of Siouxland, PC, Sioux City, Iowa conducted an autopsy on 
the pilot. The cause of death was determined to be, "multiple acute blunt force traumatic 
injuries".
The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, conducted 
toxicological testing on the pilot. The specimens were not tested for cyanide. The test was 
negative for carbon monoxide and tested drugs. 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Craig Hatch
Adopted Date:
10/24/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Darin Divis; FAA FSDO; Lincoln, NE
Jonathon Hirsch; Textron Aviaton; Wichita, KS
Troy Helgeson; Lycoming Aircraft engines; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
10/24/2016
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92512
Page 10 of 10CEN16FA073
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
