National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Clearwater, FL
Accident Number: MIA03LA116
Date & Time: 06/01/2003, 1032 EDT
Registration: N9758G
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the takeoff roll the airplane started to yaw to the left.
The pilot applied right rudder, but the airplane continued to the left, departed the runway and impacted with an airport sign.
An examination of the brakes and the rudder cables revealed no discrepancies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain directional control during the takeoff roll, which resulted in the airplane departing the runway, and impacting with trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On June 1, 2003, about 1032 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172N, N9758G, registered to Four Fox Air Inc., and operated by an individual, impacted with an airport sign during the takeoff roll at the St. Petersburg/Clearwater International Airport, Clearwater, Florida.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The private-rated pilot-in- command and three passengers reported no injuries.
The flight was originating at the time.
According to the pilot he was departing runway 22, had started the takeoff roll, and the airspeed indicator had just started to move, when the airplane started to yaw to the left.
He applied right rudder, but the airplane continued to the left, departed the runway and impacted with an airport sign.
According to the FAA inspector, during an interview with the pilot, the pilot told him that he did not recall why the airplane yawed to the left, even after applying full right rudder.
The inspector stated that an inspection of the brakes and the rudder cables revealed that they all checked out "satisfactory."
In addition, the inspector stated that the pilot was 5 feet 3 inches tall, and that the seat may not have been close enough to get full deflection of the pedal.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 35, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2400 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 15 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 7371 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-320-D2J Registered Owner: Four Fox Air Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
