National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Gatlinburg, TN
Accident Number: ATL03LA101
Date & Time: 06/02/2003, 1645 CDT
Registration: N60BR
Aircraft: Beech 58P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot's altitude was low during the approach to land and he stated that he did not realize that there was a hill at the approach end of runway 28.
The nose gear of the airplane collided with the hill 120 feet short of the runway.
The airplane slid down the hill and came to rest on the runway, approximately 30 feet beyond the approach end.
Review of the Gatlinburg-Pigeon Forge Airport runway 28 information states "displaced threshold 339 feet" and "steep rise in ground 50 feet, from threshold east end of pavement".
No mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by the pilot prior to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's misjudgment of altitude and distance to the runway during final approach, and his failure to attain the proper touchdown point for landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: UNDERSHOOT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) ALTITUDE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) DISTANCE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 3.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY Factual Information On June 2, 2003, at 1645 central daylight time, a Beech 58P, N60BR, registered to Hallmark Aircraft Incorporated and operated by a private pilot, collided with the ground 120 feet short of runway 28 at Gatlinburg-Pigeon Forge Airport, Gatlinburg, Tennessee.
The business flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and an instrument flight plan was filed.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the pilot and two passengers reported no injuries.
The flight departed Orlando Executive Airport, Orlando, Florida, on June 2, 2003 at 1441 eastern daylight time.
The pilot stated that his altitude was low during the approach to land and he did not realize that there was a hill at the approach end of runway 28.
The nose gear of the airplane collided with the hill 120 feet short of the runway.
The airplane slid down the hill and came to rest on the runway, approximately 30 feet beyond the approach end.
No mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by the pilot.
Examination of the airplane showed the skin of the right wing, the fuselage underneath the pilot's seat, and the firewall were buckled.
The nose of the airplane had crush damage, and the nose gear was pushed up into the wheel well.
Both engines and propellers were damaged, with the left propeller blades bent aft, and the right propeller blades broken from the engine.
Review of the Gatlinburg-Pigeon Forge Airport runway 28 information states "displaced threshold 339 feet" and "steep rise in ground 50 feet, from threshold east end of pavement".
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 72, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
