National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Jenison, MI
Accident Number: CHI03LA145
Date & Time: 06/01/2003, 2000 EDT
Registration: N8278K
Aircraft: Stinson 108-1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane sustained substantial damage when the right landing gear collapsed while landing on a 49-foot wide asphalt runway.
The pilot stated that upon touchdown the airplane instantly veered to the left.
The pilot reported that he applied full right rudder and the brakes, but could not regain control of the airplane.
The pilot stated that the right wing came in contact with the runway and the right landing gear collapsed.
The airplane then veered off the side of the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot not maintaining directional control of the airplane during landing.
A factor to the accident was the overload of the right main landing gear.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
(F) LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - OVERLOAD ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.
The pilot and two passengers reported no injuries.
The flight departed from a private airstrip near Hudsonville, Michigan.
The pilot stated that upon touchdown the airplane instantly veered to the left.
The pilot reported that he applied full right rudder and the brakes, but could not regain control of the airplane.
The pilot stated that the right wing came in contact with the ground, and the right landing gear collapsed.
The airplane then "slid" off the left side of the runway, and the propeller struck the ground twice before the airplane came to a full stop.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
