National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Cottage Grove, MN
Accident Number: CHI03LA147
Date & Time: 06/02/2003, 2007 CDT
Registration: N52461
Aircraft: Aerostar S-77A
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 8 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis A passenger was seriously injured during a hard landing in a balloon ride .
The pilot released a line to his chase crew, who were unsuccessful in slowing the balloon down.
The pilot then climbed to clear obstacles and deployed the parachute top vent to descend onto a baseball field.
The pilot deployed the aero chute vent during flare.
The balloon bounced three to four times before stopping.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The inadequate touchdown by the pilot.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) TOUCHDOWN - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On June 2, 2003, at 2007 central daylight time, an Aerostar S-77A, N52461, operated by Wiederkehr Balloon International, Inc., experienced a hard landing after a steep approach to a field near Cottage Grove, Minnesota.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot and seven passengers reported no injuries, and one passenger reported serious injuries.
The 14 CFR Part 91 balloon ride flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The local flight departed about 1900.
The pilot reported that he attempted to land in a hay field.
A line was dropped to the chase crew, who were unsuccessful in slowing the balloon down.
The crew released the line allowing the balloon to climb over obstacles.
The pilot stated he deployed the parachute top vent to descend onto a baseball field.
He deployed the aero chute vent to flare the balloon before touching down.
The balloon bounced "three or four times" before coming to a stop in the upright position.
A passenger sustained a broken rib.
The ride balloon was undamaged.
: 2700 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 0 Hours Engines:  Airframe Total Time: 150 Hours Engine Manufacturer: ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: Registered Owner: Wiederkehr Ballooons International Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
