The airplane entered the downwind leg of the traffic pattern high, and, in an effort to descend, 
the pilot extended the landing gear and deployed full flaps. About the time the flaps reached 
their maximum extension, the right flap experienced an instantaneous retraction, and the 
airplane simultaneously rolled about 80 degrees to the right. The pilot countered with almost 
full left aileron control input for the remainder of the flight. He began troubleshooting steps, 
but was unable to extend the right flap or retract the left flap. He diverted to another airport 
and, for the remaining 35 minutes of flight, employed the assistance of a passenger to help with 
maintaining left aileron control deflection. The landing was made without further incident.
Postincident examination of the flap control system revealed that the right wing flap extend 
cable had failed in the area where it made contact with the inboard flap pulley, an area where 
the cable had experienced multiple bending cycles throughout its life. The failed cable strands 
exhibited fatigue signatures, and similar frays and failures were observed in the area of the 
outboard pulley. The corresponding left flap cable also exhibited similar strand failure features 
in the inboard and outboard pulley contact areas. The cables were installed when the airplane 
was manufactured, 36 years prior to the incident. Over this period, the airplane had 
accumulated 4,832.1 total flight hours.
The flap cable was not life limited, and the airplane manufacturer's maintenance manual did 
not require the removal of flight control cables during inspection. The mechanic who 
performed the most recent inspection reported that he examined the cables utilizing the 
methods prescribed in the manufacturer's service manual but did not detect any damage. He 
further stated that the damage was only obvious once the cables had been removed and 
subsequently flexed and looped by hand.
A review of Federal Aviation Administration Service Difficulty Reports for the airplane series 
revealed 33 instances of similar flap cable wear or failure on 25 separate airplanes. About half 
of the reports indicated flap cable failures occurring during flight; all were during the critical 
landing approach phase. The failures resulted in asymmetric flap deployment, and some 
resulted in a violent departure from controlled flight. In a few instances, the damage caused by 
Page 2 of 8WPR11IA213
the cable separation prevented the retraction of the remaining extended flap, and, therefore, 
the pilot had to maintain very high opposing aileron control inputs in order to control and land 
the airplane. A common finding noted in the reports was that the cable damage could not be 
readily observed unless the cables were removed.
A service bulletin is in development by the airplane manufacturer concerning the inspection 
procedures and replacement criteria for the flap cables in the airplane series.
Fatigue failure of the right flap extend cable during the landing approach.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 2, 2011, about 1440 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 421B, N270CS, experienced an 
uncommanded retraction of the right flap during the downwind leg for landing at Truckee-
Tahoe Airport, Truckee, California. California Shock Trauma Air Rescue (CALSTAR) was 
operating the airplane under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a 
repositioning flight. The commercial pilot and two medical flight crewmembers were 
uninjured, and the airplane was undamaged. The flight departed McClellan Airfield, 
Sacramento, California, at 1412, with a planned destination of Truckee. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed.
The pilot reported entering the left downwind leg for runway 28 about 8,500 feet mean sea 
level (msl). He stated that the pattern altitude was 7,500 feet, so in an effort to descend, he 
reduced airspeed to 140 knots, extended the landing gear, and incrementally deployed the flaps 
to 45 degrees. About the time the flaps reached their maximum limit, he heard a popping 
sound, and the airplane simultaneously rolled about 80 degrees to the right. He countered with 
full left aileron control input, retracted the flaps, and applied full engine power. Once he had 
attained a positive rate of climb, he retracted the landing gear.
The pilot stated that he was only able to maintain wings-level with full left aileron control 
input, and full left roll trim, and as such, assumed the airplane had experienced a failure of the 
right flap. He circled Truckee airport to troubleshoot further, but was unable to extend the 
right flap, or retract the left. He checked the flap motor circuit breaker, and it was in the closed 
position. The flap indicator needle was in the zero flap position, and the flap drive motor would 
not engage, regardless of the flap handle position.
He assessed the possibility of landing at Truckee, Reno, or South Lake Tahoe airports, but due 
to terrain and wind concerns, he elected to divert back to McClellan. He was able to accomplish 
left turns with about 5 degrees of bank, and although right turns could be performed, recovery 
to wings level was slower than normal. In this configuration he was able to maintain a climb 
rate of about 300 feet per minute, and once the airplane reached 13,000 feet msl, he was able 
to maintain wings-level by slightly relaxing the control input to about 90 percent deflection.
For the remaining 35 minutes of flight, the pilot employed the assistance of a medical 
crewmember to help with maintaining left aileron control deflection. The pilot subsequently 
landed the airplane at McClellan without incident, after making a left downwind approach.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Flap Control System
The flap control system for the 421B series airplane is operated by an electric motor, which 
drives a gear reduction unit. Two sprockets, connected in tandem to the reduction unit output 
shaft, drive four chain-connected cables, which actuate bellcranks in each wing. The flaps are 
then driven by push-pull tubes connected to the bellcranks. A cam, driven by a gear attached to 
the aft output shaft of the reduction unit, operates two limit switches. The flap preselect system 
is comprised of a preselect lever assembly, mounted on the instrument panel; a flap preselect 
control cable, attached to the preselect lever assembly and routed to the upper right wing flap 
extend cable; and associated microswitches and electrical wiring. When the preselect lever is 
moved to a flap position, the microswitches in the lever assembly are energized, and actuate 
the flap motor. As the flaps reach the preselected position, the preselect lever assembly 
microswitches are de-energized.
Initial Flap System Examination
During a cursory inspection of the flap system by the operator, it was discovered that the right 
wing upper flap extend cable, part number 5000008-62, had separated about 11 inches from 
the end of the inboard turnbuckle and chain fitting, inboard of the preselect cable clamp. 
Additionally, a steel braided oxygen system line had come loose, and had fallen into the path of 
the flap cable in the area of the failure. Based on this finding, and with the permission of the 
NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), the operator removed all the flap cables and their 
associated pulleys for examination. Examination of the cables and oxygen line revealed that 
they had not made contact, and in fact, the location of the separation was adjacent to the 
contact area of the inboard fuselage pulley. Additionally, the corresponding left wing lower flap 
extend cable, part number 5000008-63, exhibited frays to multiple strands in the area 
adjacent to its corresponding inboard fuselage pulley.
The airplane's flap system was subsequently examined by the IIC. The flap actuator motor 
assembly was free of damage. When the upper and lower limit switches were triggered by hand, 
they produced an audible click, and disengaged the motor appropriately when power was 
applied to the system.
The flap preselect cable remained intact, and was continuous from its connecting clamp 
through to the preselect assembly on the instrument panel. The preselect assembly appeared 
intact, with its limit switches and electrical wires firmly in place. The switch produced an 
audible click when engaged utilizing the flap lever.
The upper right, and lower left, flap extension cables, along with their associated inboard 
pulleys, were sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for examination.
Materials Laboratory Examination
Both cables were similar in construction, with 1/8-inch diameter 7X19 wire ropes with a 
turnbuckle fitting on one end, and swiveling clevis fittings on the other. Both cables were 
approximately 63 inches in length.
The right-hand extend cable had separated at a location approximately 11 inches from the end 
of the turnbuckle fitting. Examination revealed that most of the individual wire fractures were 
within a 0.5-inch-long portion of the cable, with the remaining wires separated 2 inches further 
away. High magnification imaging of individual wire fractures revealed fatigue cracking on 
more than half of the approximately 24 individual wires that were examined. The other wires 
displayed necking fracture features consistent with overstress separations.
No external wear was noted along the entire length of the cable, and diameter measurements 
did not indicate any significant internal wear. Fraying was detected in one region, about 20 to 
25 inches from the clevis end, in a region adjacent to the outboard wing stub pulley. Magnified 
examinations revealed at least 24 individual broken wires within that region.
The left-hand extend cable was visually examined, and about 20 individual wire fractures were 
present and concentrated in an area between 51 and 53 inches from the outboard clevis end.
Both inboard pulleys were free of obvious wear, and turned smoothly on their bearings. Refer 
to the Materials Laboratory Report within the docket for specific examination details.
Maintenance
The airplane had accrued 4,832.1 total flight hours at the time of its last annual inspection, on 
March 19, 2011. Examination of the maintenance records revealed that the flap extend cables 
had not been replaced since the airplane's manufacture in 1975. No life limits exist for the flap 
cable.
The Cessna 421B service manual does not require the removal of flight control cables during 
inspection. Rather, the inspection calls for visual examination along the entire cable length, 
and physical examination with a cloth over cables at pulleys, fairleads, pressure seals, and 
other areas the cable may be subject to chafing or wear. The manual states that individual 
broken wires are acceptable, provided no more than three individual wires are broken in any 
given 10-inch cable length.
The mechanic who performed the most recent inspection reported that he examined the flap 
cables utilizing the methods prescribed in the Cessna service manual, but did not detect any 
damage. He further stated that the frays in the cables were only noticeable after they were 
removed, and then flexed and looped by hand.
Service Difficulty Reports
A review of FAA Service Difficulty Reports (SDR's) for the Cessna 401 through 425 series 
airplane revealed 33 instances of flap cable wear or failure on 25 separate airplanes. Fourteen 
of the SDR's documented cable failures, all of which occurred during the landing approach 
phase, and resulted in an asymmetric flap condition. Some of the reports documented that the 
airplanes entered unusual attitudes just after the cables failed. The majority of these reports 
did not specify whether the flaps could be retracted, however, four reports specifically stated 
that the extended flap could not be retracted, and that the pilot landed the airplane with an 
asymmetric flap condition. In these instances, the reports sited various  reasons for the flap not 
retracting. These included damage to the gearbox assembly caused by the forced retraction of 
the flap, the failed cables becoming entangled in the retraction mechanism, or the preselect 
cable being driven to the zero flaps position, thereby interfering with the electrical logic of the 
flap system.
None of the reports documented a separation of any left flap cables in flight, rather the 
separated cables were either the right extend type, or not specified. The separations all 
occurred in the area of the inboard fuselage pulley and preselect cable clamp.
Of the reports that did not describe an asymmetric flap condition in flight, four stated that 
frayed flap cables were observed during routine inspections. Fourteen of the remaining reports 
indicated that frayed cables were observed either during rigging procedures, or after the flap 
cables were removed, and that the position and nature of the damage prevented detection 
during routine inspections.
The total flight time for each of the damaged cables varied between 3,049 and 13,636 hours.
