The aerial-application helicopter was operating from an uncultivated area of the wheat field 
being sprayed. The pilot stated that, shortly after takeoff, while accelerating through 
translational lift, the helicopter encountered a momentary loss of lift, consistent with an 
encounter with a wind gust, and settled into the wheat crop. The helicopter pitched down 
suddenly as the spray booms made contact with the crop and subsequently collided with 
terrain. The pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures 
that would have precluded normal operation of the helicopter. 
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate clearance from the wheat crop during takeoff.
On May 3, 2011, at 1830 central daylight time, a Texas Helicopter Corporation model OH-
13E/M74 helicopter, N38096, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain during 
takeoff near New Columbia, Illinois. The pilot was not injured. The helicopter was registered to 
and operated by Hendrickson Flying Service Incorporated, under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 137. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, 
which was operated without a flight plan. The local aerial-application flight was originating at 
the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that the helicopter was operating from an uncultivated area of the wheat 
field being sprayed. The helicopter had been refueled and loaded with fungicide immediately 
before the accident takeoff. The pilot stated that shortly after takeoff, while accelerating 
through translational lift, the helicopter encountered a momentary loss of lift consistent with a 
wind gust and settled into the wheat crop. The helicopter pitched down suddenly as the spray 
booms made contact with the crop, and subsequently collided with terrain. The helicopter 
came to rest on its right side about 75 yards from the takeoff position. The engine continued to 
run after impact and was subsequently turned-off by the pilot using the magneto switch. The 
helicopter sustained substantial damage to the main rotor system, fuselage, and tailboom. The 
pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures that would 
have precluded normal operation of the helicopter.
The nearest aviation weather observation station with recorded historical weather information 
was at Barkley Regional Airport (KPAH), about 19 nm south of the accident site, which was 
equipped with an automated surface observing system (ASOS).
At 1853, the KPAH ASOS reported the following weather conditions: Wind 320 degrees at 6 
knots; visibility 10 miles; sky clear; temperature 16 degrees Celsius; dew point 1 degrees 
Celsius; altimeter setting 30.22 inches of mercury.
