The pilot of the experimental, amateur-built, tailwheel-equipped airplane reported that he 
performed a straight-in approach and subsequent landing with a gusting crosswind. As the 
airplane slowed, and the tail dropped, he applied full aft elevator control input. The pilot 
applied brakes and then initiated a turn onto the taxiway. He stated that during the turn a gust 
of wind caught the right wing, tipping the airplane onto the left wing and causing the left 
aileron hinge to scrape on the runway. The airplane then bounced two times on the left main 
landing gear. The airplane came to a stop after the pilot applied corrective control inputs. 
Postaccident examination revealed that the left landing gear mounting box and the adjacent 
fuselage structure was bent. Additionally the left wing sustained buckling damage to its leading 
edge, adjacent to the fuselage mounting point and landing gear box. The damage was 
consistent with the left main landing gear being subjected to an excessive side load. The pilot 
reported no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airframe or engine that 
would have precluded normal operation. He further stated that the accident could have been 
prevented by either slowing the airplane down prior to exiting at the chosen taxiway or 
continuing to the next available taxiway. 
The pilot's decision to exit the runway while still traveling at an excessive speed and his 
subsequent loss of directional control.
On May 1, 2011, about 1630 Pacific daylight time, a Dralle (Van's Aircraft) RV-8, N998RV, 
sustained substantial damage during the landing roll at Livermore Municipal Airport, 
Livermore, California. The pilot was operating the experimental amateur-built airplane under 
the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The private pilot was not 
injured. The cross-country personal flight departed Los Banos Municipal Airport, Los Banos, 
California, about 1600. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
The pilot of the tailwheel equipped airplane performed a straight-in approach and subsequent 
wheel landing on runway 25R. He reported a direct 8-knot crosswind, gusting to 15. As the 
airplane slowed and the tail dropped, the pilot applied full aft elevator control input. His 
intention was to exit to the right onto taxiway E, and as he approached the taxiway he applied 
brakes. He reported that as he initiated the turn, a gust of wind caught the right wing, tipping 
the airplane onto the left wing and causing the left aileron hinge to scrape on the runway. The 
airplane then hopped two times on the left main landing gear. The pilot applied left rudder, 
realigning the airplane with the runway centerline, and the airplane came to a stop. He 
assessed the situation, and not perceiving any damage, continued to taxi back to his hangar.
Post accident examination revealed that the left landing gear mounting box and the adjacent 
fuselage structure was bent. Additionally, the left wing sustained buckling damage to its 
leading edge adjacent to the forward fuselage mounting point and landing gear box.
The pilot reported no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airframe or 
engine that would have precluded normal operation. He further stated that the accident could 
have been prevented by either slowing the airplane down prior to exiting at the chosen taxiway, 
or continuing to the next available taxiway. He additionally cited gusty wind conditions as 
aggravating the situation.
