The student pilot finished building the helicopter and this was its first flight.  He had received 
11 hours of flight instruction and was endorsed for hover only solo.  The pilot reported that he 
was 1-2 feet in the air and as he began backing the helicopter the tail rotor guard struck the 
ground, the main rotor struck the tail boom, and the left skid struck the ground.  The skid 
collapsed and the helicopter rolled over.  After exiting, the pilot attempted to right the 
helicopter, but fuel leaking from the fuel cap ignited when it contacted the exhaust.  The 
helicopter was destroyed in the subsequent fire.
The failure of the student pilot to maintain adequate ground clearance while hovering.
On January 1, 2001, at 1529 hours Pacific standard time, a Wallace Rotorway Exec 152 
amateur-built helicopter, N94LW, was destroyed when it rolled over from a hover and 
subsequently caught fire at a private airstrip near Placerville, California.  The helicopter was 
operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The student pilot, the sole 
occupant, was not injured.   Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed for the local solo instructional flight, which was departing at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated to a deputy sheriff, who responded to the scene, that he had just finished 
building the helicopter and this was its "maiden voyage."  He had been receiving instruction 
towards his private pilot certificate and was endorsed for hover only solo.
He reported that he was hovering in a dirt field and as he started to back the helicopter the tail 
rotor guard struck the ground, the main rotor flapped down striking the tail boom, and the left 
skid hit the ground and collapsed.  The helicopter then rolled over.
After exiting the helicopter the pilot attempted to roll the helicopter upright but fuel leaking 
from the fuel cap ignited when it contacted the engine exhaust.  The helicopter was destroyed 
in the subsequent fire.
