The student pilot lost directional control of the aircraft during a takeoff run while practicing 
solo touch-and-go landings.  The pilot stated that after a successful landing he initiated a 
takeoff and, "as I added power the airplane seemed to shimmy at which time I tried to correct 
the plane.  As I was unable to correct I powered back to idle and tried to stop which is when the 
plane went off the left side of the runway and hit a windrow of snow."  The pilot reported, 
"Hitting the snow made the planes [plane's] tail lift and spin around which made the right wing 
hit the ground causing damage."  The pilot stated that his total time in all aircraft was 24.1-
hours and all hours were flown in the accident airplane make and model.  The pilot reported 
that he had accumulated 1.4-hours of pilot-in-command time.
Aircraft directional control not being maintained by the student pilot during the takeoff roll.  
Factors to the accident were the snow bank and the student pilot's lack of total experience.
On January 4, 2001, at 1046 central standard time, a Cessna 172S, N727SP, piloted by a 
student pilot, sustained substantial damage during an on-ground collision with the terrain 
following a loss of directional control during takeoff roll on runway 33 (6,670 feet by 150 feet, 
frost covered/asphalt), at the Joe Foss Field Airport, Sioux Falls, South Dakota.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The solo-instructional flight 
was being conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.  The 
student pilot, the sole occupant, reported no injuries.  The local flight was departing at the time 
of the accident.
According to the pilot's written statement, he was practicing solo touch-and-go landings at the 
time of the accident.  The pilot stated that after a successful landing he initiated a takeoff and, 
"as I added power the airplane seemed to shimmy at which time I tried to correct the plane.  As 
I was unable to correct I powered back to idle and tried to stop which is when the plane went 
off the left side of the runway and hit a windrow of snow."  The pilot reported, "Hitting the 
snow made the planes [plane's] tail lift and spin around which made the right wing hit the 
ground causing damage."  The pilot reported that his total time in all aircraft was 24.1-hours 
and all hours were flown in the accident airplane make and model.  The pilot reported that he 
had accumulated 1.4-hours of pilot-in-command time.
