The certificated commercial pilot stated that while on final approach to runway 33, he 
inadvertently allowed the airplane to descend below his intended glide path.  In an attempt to 
arrest the descent he applied full engine power, but the airplane continued to descend.  The 
airplane inadvertently touched down on the snow-covered approach end of the runway, about 
15 yards short of the runway surface.  As he attempted to abort the landing, the airplane 
become airborne, drifted to the left of the runway, and settled into an area of soft snow.   
During the second touchdown, the nose wheel collapsed at the firewall bulkhead.  The airplane 
sustained substantial damage to the engine firewall.
The pilot's failure to maintain a proper glidepath during final approach.  A factor associated 
with the accident was soft terrain.
On January 3, 2001, about 1740 Alaska standard time, a wheel-equipped Cessna 172 airplane, 
N19771, sustained substantial damage during landing at the Atmautluak Airport, Atmautluak, 
Alaska. The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger 
flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was registered to, 
and operated by, Village Aviation, Inc., Bethel, Alaska.  The certificated commercial pilot, and 
the two passengers aboard, were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and 
VFR company flight following procedures were in effect. The flight originated at the Bethel 
Airport, Bethel, about 1730.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on January 4, the pilot stated that while on final approach to runway 33, he 
inadvertently allowed the airplane to descend below his intended glide path.  He said that in an 
attempt to arrest the descent he applied full engine power, but the airplane continued to 
descend.  The airplane inadvertently touched down on the snow-covered approach end of the 
runway, about 15 yards short of the runway surface. He said that as he attempted to abort the 
landing, the airplane become airborne, drifted to the left of the runway, and settled into an area 
of soft snow.   During the second touchdown, the nose wheel collapsed at the firewall bulkhead.  
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the engine firewall.  The pilot reported that wind 
conditions at the time of the accident were from the northeast at 5 knots.
The pilot indicated that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
