The airplane contacted a snow bank on the side of the runway during landing.  The landing was 
being made on runway 04 (5,103 feet by 100 feet).  The pilot reported the winds were from the 
northwest at 10 knots and that a "minimal" crosswind correction was required on final 
approach.  He continued to report that just prior to touchdown while 2 feet above the runway 
"–a significant gust ballooned the aircraft 5-6 ft. above the runway where the aircraft stalled 
and began to settle abruptly with a nose high attitude."  The pilot added power in an attempt to 
recover, however, the airplane traveled to the right side of the runway where it contacted a 
snow bank and spun around prior to coming to rest.  The local weather observation, taken 5 
minutes prior to the accident, reported winds from 270 degrees at 11 knots, gusting to 18 knots.
T
The pilot failed to maintain directional control of the airplane and the runway selected resulted 
in a tailwind condition.  Factors associated  with the accident were the gusty crosswind and the 
snow bank.
On January 1, 2001, at 1245 eastern standard time, a Mooney M20S, N2184N, operated by a 
private pilot collided with a snow bank while landing on runway 04 (5,103 feet by 100 feet) at 
the St. Clair County International Airport, Port Huron, Michigan.  The pilot was not injured 
and the airplane was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual 
meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  The flight originated from Detroit, Michigan, 
at 1200 eastern standard time.
The pilot reported he flew a practice ILS approach to runway 04.  The approach was 
terminated in a go-around followed by VFR traffic pattern and full stop landing on runway 04.  
He reported the winds were out of the northwest at 10 knots.  He then departed on runway 04 
and made a left hand traffic pattern for another landing.  The pilot reported, "Final approach 
required minimal crab to correct for crosswind and then mild slip to maintain the centerline."  
He reported that just prior to touchdown while 2 feet above the runway "–a significant gust 
ballooned the aircraft 5-6 ft. above the runway where the aircraft stalled and began to settle 
abruptly with a nose high attitude."  He reported he applied power to recover, but could not 
gain enough airspeed.  The airplane veered to the right and the right main landing gear 
contacted the snow on the side of the runway.  According to the pilot, the airplane spun around 
clockwise into the snow where it came to rest.
The local weather observation, taken 5 minutes prior to the accident, reported winds from 270 
degrees at 11 knots, gusting to 18 knots.
