The pilot said he performed a normal landing to runway 03 (4000 feet by 75 feet, dry asphalt), 
at the Lincoln-Logan County Airport, Lincoln, Illinois.  He said the airplane settled on the 
runway approximately 1,000 feet down from the runway threshold.  The pilot raised the flaps 
and applied full power.  The airplane lifted, came back down, and veered to the right.  The pilot 
said the airplane plowed into the snow, nosed over, and came to rest upside down.  An 
examination of the airplane revealed no anomalies.
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control on the runway.  Factors relating to this 
accident were the aborted takeoff attempt, the pilot's improper in-flight planning/decision, and  
the snowbank.
On January 1, 2001, at 1740 central standard time, a Cessna 172N, N737WQ, operated by a 
private pilot, was substantially damaged when it struck a snow bank and nosed over during a 
practice landing and takeoff, from runway 03 (4000 feet by 75 feet, dry asphalt) at the Lincoln-
Logan County Airport, Lincoln, Illinois.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time 
of the accident.  The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 
91.  There was no flight plan filed.  The pilot and passenger on board the airplane reported no 
injuries.  The local flight originated at Springfield, Illinois, at 1715.
In his written statement, the pilot said that he performed a normal approach to runway 03.  He 
said that approximately 800 feet from the runway's threshold, the airplane bounced and 
floated for about 200 feet.  "We settled back onto the runway and started the rollout.  I feared 
not having enough runway and raised the flaps and applied full power.  The airplane lifted and 
came back down to the runway and began to veer to the right.  The aircraft did not respond to 
control input and plowed into snow, nosed over and came to rest upside down."  
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector examined the airplane at the Lincoln-Logan 
County Airport.  The airplane was found resting inverted in a snow-covered field, off the right 
side of runway 03, approximately half-way down the runway.  The airplane's nose gear was 
broken off.  The cowling, engine mounts and firewall were crushed inward and bent aft and 
upward.  Both wings were bent downward, outboard of the wing struts.  The airplane's vertical 
stabilizer and rudder were crushed downward.  The propeller was torsionally bent and showed 
chordwise scratches.  Flight control continuity was confirmed.  An examination of the engine, 
engine controls, and other airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
