Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
LINCOLN, IL
Accident Number:
CHI94FA307
Date & Time:
09/01/1994, 1911 CDT 
Registration:
N4362F
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-46-310P
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
WITNESSES STATED THAT THE AIRPLANE WAS ON FINAL APPROACH TO RUNWAY 3 
WITH THE LANDING GEAR AND FLAPS EXTENDED. ONE WITNESS REPORTED THAT 
WHEN THE AIRPLANE WAS ABOUT 50 TO 100 FEET ABOVE THE GROUND, HE HEARD 
THE ENGINE GO TO FULL POWER, AND THE AIRPLANE ENTERED A STEEP CLIMBING 
RIGHT TURN. THE WITNESS STATED THAT THE AIRPLANE LOOKED VERY SLOW 
DURING THE STEEP CLIMB.  WHILE IN THE CLIMB, THE AIRPLANE'S WINGS LEVELED 
AND THEN THE AIRPLANE BANKED LEFT AND NOSED DOWN INTO THE GROUND. A 
NO-RADIO GYROCOPTER HAD JUST TAKEN OFF ON RUNWAY 3. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain airspeed while performing a go-around. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR)
Findings
1. (F) GO-AROUND - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 2 of 6CHI94FA307
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF THE FLIGHT
On September 1, 1994, at 1911 central daylight time, a Piper PA- 46-310P "Malibu", N4362F, 
operated by a private pilot on a pleasure flight, collided with terrain during an attempted go-
around at the Logan County Airport (3LC) in Lincoln, Illinois. The airplane was destroyed.  The 
pilot and one passenger received fatal injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for 
the flight.  An IFR flight plan was filed, and was in effect until the pilot cancelled IFR at 1840.  
The flight operated under 14 CFR Part 91, and originated from Alamosa, Colorado at 1540.
According to family members, the pilot and the passenger flew the accident airplane to 
Alamosa, Colorado for an annual hunting trip.  The passenger's wife reported both men 
seemed relaxed when they telephoned home before their departure from Alamosa. She 
indicated that the pilot intended to land at Lincoln, Illinois to drop off the passenger, and 
would then return to the airplanes home base at Bloomington, Illinois.  
Air Traffic Control (ATC) records indicated that the accident airplane was radar identified and 
received an IFR clearance at 1552.  ATC personnel reported that all services and 
communications with the accident flight were routine, and the pilot cancelled the IFR 
clearance at 1840.  There were no further recorded communications with the accident airplane.  
The passenger's wife reported that when the airplane reached Lincoln, the pilot flew overhead 
to signal the family to come to the airport to greet them.  Witnesses observed the accident 
airplane approaching the airport with landing gear and flaps extended.  They reported that 
they heard steady, strong engine noise throughout the time that the airplane was within 
earshot.  
One witness reported that he had just put his airplane away after a local flight and was walking 
towards runway 3 to observe traffic pattern operations.  He stated that he observed the 
accident airplane when it was established on final approach for runway 3.  He reported that 
when the airplane was about 50 to 100 feet above the ground (AGL), he heard the engine go to 
full power, and observed the airplane pitch up and bank right as if to perform a go-around.  He 
stated that he saw the airplane in profile as it climbed steeply, and it "...looked like he was 
going real slow."  The witness observed the wings level, then the airplane banked entered a 
steep left bank and descended into the ground.  
The witness stated that the airplane appeared to be in a good position and configuration for 
landing on runway 3, and he did not know why the pilot initiated a go-around, unless it was to 
avoid traffic in the pattern.  He reported that a no radio gyrocopter was performing takeoffs 
and landings in the traffic pattern, and had just lifted off of runway 3.  The witness estimated 
the gyrocopter was at 100 feet AGL, near the midpoint of runway 3 when the pilot of the 
accident airplane added power.  The gyrocopter pilot stated he was not aware of the accident 
airplane until after the accident.  
CREW INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with single engine land and instrument airplane 
ratings. He also held a Third Class Medical, with no limitations, issued February 2, 1993.  The 
pilot's flight logbook records indicated that he satisfactorily completed a Biennial Flight Review 
and a "Malibu" Refresher Course in the accident airplane on April 14, 1994.  The pilot's 
Page 3 of 6CHI94FA307
insurance company flight record, dated August 11, 1994, indicated that he had 410 hours in the 
accident make and model aircraft, of which 200 hours and 25 hours were flown in the 
preceding 12 months and 90 days, respectively.  The most recent entry in the pilot's flight 
logbook was dated June 6, 1994, at a total flight time of 1,555.4 hours.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane's maintenance logbooks indicated that an annual inspection was completed on 
August 4, 1994, at an airplane total time of 2,316 hours, with a corresponding Hobbsmeter 
reading of 436 hours.  Logbook records indicated that the rebuilt/zero timed engine was 
installed on the airplane on October 28, 1993, at an airframe total time of 1912 hours.    
WRECKAGE/IMPACT INFORMATION
A witness observed the airplane impact the ground on the east side of runway 3 in a nose and 
left wing low attitude, and saw dirt and debris fly.  Postaccident examination revealed the 
airplane impacted terrain near the top of an embankment/gulley located about 425 feet east of 
runway 3, approximately at the runway midpoint. The fuselage came to rest on an approximate 
heading of 290 degrees, with the nose section at the rim of the embankment.  The nose section 
and engine compartment exhibited extensive crush, with compression evident on both sides of 
the fuselage from the nose section to aft of the wing attach points.  The propeller assembly was 
attached to the engine.  The two propeller blades were bent and twisted aft, and exhibited 
chordwise scratches.  The tail section was located in the bottom of the gulley, with the right 
horizontal stabilator embedded in soil.   
The right wing was angled away from the main wreckage at the wing root, with the leading 
edge jammed into the lower fuselage.  The wing flap and aileron were still attached to the 
inboard section of the right wing.  The outboard section of the right wing had separated, and 
was located forward of the main wreckage at the top of the embankment.  The left wing had 
separated, and was located behind and below the main fuselage in the gulley.  The left aileron 
separated from the outboard section of the left wing, and was located in the bottom of the 
gulley, about 10 feet behind the remainder of the left wing.  Pieces of plexiglass and green lens 
were located in some concrete rubble along the rim of the embankment, about 75 feet south of 
the main wreckage.  Although both wing fuel tanks were compromised as a result of the 
accident, postaccident examination revealed that there was fuel present in the fuel tanks, fuel 
lines, and the fuel manifold.  
Examination of the wreckage revealed that all three main landing gear were in the extended 
position at impact.  The landing gear position selector handle in the cockpit was located at the 
top of the neutral detent, in a transit position, and there was milled metal at the right side of 
the detent.  The wing flaps were located in a partially (about 20 degrees) extended position.  
The wing flap selector handle was in the retracted position; however the wing flap position 
indicator showed flaps fully extended.  Flight control continuity was established to the extent 
possible given the impact-related damage.  The engine and engine accessories were examined, 
and compression and continuity were established.  There was no indication of preimpact 
mechanical malfunction or anomaly.
MEDICAL/PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Autopsy examination of the pilot was performed at the Memorial Medical Center, Department 
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, in Springfield, Illinois, by John G. Dietrich, M. D., 
Coroner's Physician (Autopsy Report Number CC-98-94, Logan County).  
Page 4 of 6CHI94FA307
Toxicological examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. Dennis V. Canfield at the Civil 
Aeromedical Institute in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  This examination revealed no evidence of 
drugs, ethanol, cyanide, or carboxyhemoglobin.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The aircraft wreckage was released to the owner's representative, Mr. Dave Kocher, of Aviation 
Accident Investigation and Management, on September 20, 1994.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
37, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/02/1993
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1560 hours (Total, all aircraft), 410 hours (Total, this make and model), 1440 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N4362F
Model/Series:
PA-46-310P PA-46-310P
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
46-8408055
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/04/1994, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
40 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2356 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONTINENTAL
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-BE1G
Registered Owner:
BMI ENTERPRISES
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
BMI ENTERPRISES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI94FA307
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SPI, 597 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
25 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1951 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
210°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
ALAMOSA, CO (ALS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1540 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
LOGAN COUNTY 
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
3
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4000 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Go Around; Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JODI       L REEVES
Adopted Date:
02/27/1996
Additional Participating Persons:
GARY W HAMLIN; SPRINGFIELD, IL
GEORGE M BALLARD; SPRINGFIELD, IL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI94FA307
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
