Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
PAYSON, UT
Accident Number:
DEN99LA062
Date & Time:
04/01/1999, 1700 MST 
Registration:
N80287
Aircraft:
Sly RV-6A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
After being airborne for 15 minutes, the aircraft's engine began to lose power.  The pilot 
initiated an emergency landing along a county road but switched to another road to avoid 
power lines.  Upon touchdown, the aircraft departed the side of the road and struck a fence 
post.  The engine was examined and test run, and no discrepancies were observed.  The pilot 
stated that 'other pilots at the scene agreed the conditions could cause carburetor icing.' 
According to the FAA inspector present at the accident scene, 'the conditions were a classic 
setup for carburetor icing.'  The Van's Aircraft construction and operating manual states that 
one method of building the carburetor heat system is to 'run a 2-inch air hose from a heat muff 
and position it to feed into the alternative air inlet of the carb[uretor] air box,' which is the 
method by which the pilot constructed the airplane.  According to the inspector, the 2-inch 
hose is not large enough to adequately supply enough heat to the carburetor to sufficiently melt 
the ice. The aircraft was issued an airworthiness certificate by the FAA on August 24, 1995. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The development of carburetor ice resulting in a loss of engine power, and the inadequate 
carburetor heat shroud. Factors were the carburetor icing weather conditions, the kit 
manufacturer's inadequate carburetor heat shroud design, the FAA's inadequate certification 
of the aircraft, the snow covered, unsuitable terrain on which to perform a forced landing, and 
the fence post. 
Page 2 of 6DEN99LA062
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - ICE
3. (C) CARBURETOR HEAT,SHROUD - INADEQUATE
4. (F) ACFT/EQUIP,INADEQUATE DESIGN - KIT MANUFACTURER
5. (F) INADEQUATE CERTIFICATION/APPROVAL,AIRCRAFT - FAA(ORGANIZATION)
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
6. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED
7. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
8. (F) OBJECT - FENCE POST
Page 3 of 6DEN99LA062
Factual Information
 On April 1, 1999, approximately 1700 mountain standard time, a Sly RV-6A homebuilt aircraft, 
N80287, owned and operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged after impacting terrain 
following a loss of engine power while in cruise flight near Payson, Utah.  The airline transport 
rated pilot and one passenger were not injured.  The local area personal flight was being 
operated under Title 14 CFR Part 91, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight originated from 
the Spanish Fork-Springville Airport, Spanish Fork, Utah, at 1645.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.
According to the pilot, after being airborne for approximately 15 minutes, the aircraft's engine 
began to lose power.  He stated that he applied carburetor heat and switched the fuel tanks, but 
observed no change in power.  The loss of engine power was gradual, with no sudden stoppage, 
backfiring or surging.  Unable to restore power to the engine, he initiated an emergency 
landing along a county road 6 miles south of the airport.  During landing, he switched to 
another road to avoid power lines.  Upon touchdown, the aircraft departed the side of the road 
and struck a fence post, damaging the nose gear, ailerons and rudder.
At the request and in the presence of a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the 
engine was examined and test run at the Spanish Fork Flying Service on April 16, 1999.  During 
the inspection, the fuel was clear and free of contaminates.  The engine ran with and without 
the fuel pump turned on, and no discrepancies were noted.    
The pilot stated in his accident report that "other pilots at the scene agreed the conditions 
could cause carburetor icing."  According to the FAA inspector present at the accident scene, 
weather conditions were partly cloudy and cold with calm wind.  According to the inspector, 
"the conditions were a classic setup for carburetor icing."
According to the Van's Aircraft construction and operating manual, one method of building the 
internal carburetor heat system is to "run a 2-inch air hose from a heat muff and position it to 
feed into the alternative air inlet of the carb[uretor] air box without being attached and closed."  
According to the FAA inspector who examined the aircraft following the accident, this is the 
method by which the pilot constructed the airplane.  According to the inspector, the 2-inch 
hose is not large enough to adequately supply enough heat to the carburetor to sufficiently melt 
the ice.  
The aircraft was issued an airworthiness certificate by the FAA on August 24, 1995.
Page 4 of 6DEN99LA062
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial; 
Flight Engineer; Military
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/13/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
9183 hours (Total, all aircraft), 198 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Sly
Registration:
N80287
Model/Series:
RV-6A RV-6A
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
22902
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/22/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
8 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
198 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A1A
Registered Owner:
RUSSELL M. SLY
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
RUSSELL M. SLY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6DEN99LA062
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
30 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
4°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
SPANISH FORK, UT (U77)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1645 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
B. BEACH     SCOTT
Adopted Date:
05/08/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
JAMES E GILCHRIST; SALT LAKE CITY, UT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DEN99LA062
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
