National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Alabaster, AL
Accident Number: ERA14LA083
Date & Time: 01/01/2014, 1420 CST
Registration: N351AE
Aircraft: BELLANCA 17-30A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that, while en route on the approximate 11-mile flight, the engine began to ﬁstumbleﬂ and run roughly.
The pilot activated the fuel boost pump, but, shortly thereafter, the engine experienced a total loss of power.
The pilot subsequently maneuvered the airplane toward the backyard of a residence.
The airplane impacted trees and came to rest inverted, which resulted in substantial damage to the airplane.
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that the right main fuel tank contained about 10.5 gallons of fuel.
About 0.5 gallon of fuel was drained from the left main fuel tank.
The auxiliary fuel tank contained no fuel, and the gascolator was absent of fuel.
The engine-driven fuel pump line and return fuel line were absent of fuel.
Postaccident examination of the engine revealed no anomalies.
During a test run, the engine started on the first attempt, accelerated smoothly, and advanced through all power settings with no anomalies observed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot™s improper fuel management, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.
The private pilot sustained minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the flight, which departed Bessemer Airport (EKY), Bessemer, Alabama, approximately 1405, and was destined for  Shelby County Municipal Airport (EET), Alabaster, Alabama.
The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The pilot departed on the approximate 11-mile flight between EKY and EET, and climbed to a cruise altitude of 2,600 feet.
He stated that while enroute, the engine began to "stumble" and run rough.
The pilot responded by activating the fuel boost pump; however, the engine continued to run rough, and subsequently experienced a total loss of power.
The pilot stated he did not have time to attempt to restart the engine, and he maneuvered the airplane toward a row of trees in the backyard of a residence.
The airplane impacted the trees and came to rest inverted, resulting in substantial damage.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector who responded to the scene revealed that the airplane's fuel selector was set to the right wing tank position, and that the right wing tank contained an undetermined amount of fuel.
A sample taken from the tank was absent of contamination.
The airplane was removed from the site for further examination.
About .5 gallons of fuel was drained from the left main fuel tank, and about 10.5 gallons were drained from the right main fuel tank.
The auxiliary fuel tank contained no fuel, and the gascolator was absent of fuel.
The engine-driven fuel pump line and return fuel line were absent of fuel.
The engine was removed from the airplane and sent to the manufacturer's facility for examination.
The pilot reported to the FAA that he departed from EKY with 19.5 gallons of fuel, but indicated on the NTSB Accident Report Form that the airplane contained 13 gallons of fuel at the time of departure.
The pilot did not state which fuel tank was selected at the time of departure, nor did he state whether he attempted to switch the fuel selector to another tank upon experiencing the engine roughness.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land.
He reported 656 total hours of flight time, of which 120 hours were in the accident airplane make and model.
His most recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued in February 2013.
The airplane was manufactured in 1973, and was equipped with a Continental Motors Inc., IO- 520 series 285-hp reciprocating engine.
The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on June 3, 2013 at a total airframe time of 2,234.6 hours.
Maintenance records indicated that the engine was rebuilt at the manufacturer's facility in April 1994 at a total airframe time of 1,955.1 hours.
Maintenance logs also indicated that the #5 cylinder was replaced on November 25, 2013, at a time since engine overhaul of 304.3 hours.
Examination of the engine at the manufacturer's facility revealed impact damage to the #5 cylinder cooling fins, as well as the fuel injection line.
The #5 top sparkplug and ignition lead were replaced to facilitate a test run of the engine.
Borescope inspection of each of the cylinders, including their pistons, exhaust valves, and intake valves revealed normal operating signatures.
The engine started on the first attempt, accelerated smoothly, and advanced through all power settings with no anomalies observed.
Several rapid advancements of the throttle from the idle to full power settings also revealed no anomalies.
According to the manufacturer's pilot operating handbook, at a cruise altitude of 2,500 feet in standard atmospheric conditions, the airplane consumed between 10 and 16 gallons of fuel per hour, depending on the engine power setting.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88614
