WITNESSES SAW THE HELICOPTER STRIKE ITS TAIL ROTOR ON A TREE WHILE 
ATTEMPTING TO LIFT A 3,000 POUND LOG SECTION USING A 150-FOOT LIFT LINE.  
THE TREE STRIKE DISABLED THE TAIL ROTOR, RESULTING IN LOSS OF DIRECTIONAL 
CONTROL.  THE HELICOPTER SUBSEQUENTLY IMPACTED AT THE TOP OF A 150-FOOT-
HIGH ROCK BLUFF, THEN SLID OFF THE BLUFF, COMING TO REST IN AN INVERTED 
ATTITUDE ON A 50 TO 60 PERCENT SLOPE ABOUT 250 FEET BELOW THE INITIAL 
IMPACT POINT. 
THE PILOT'S FAILURE TO MAINTAIN CLEARANCE WITH A TREE, RESULTING IN A TAIL 
ROTOR BLADE STRIKE ON THE TREE WHICH DISABLED THE TAIL ROTOR.  
CONTRIBUTING TO THE ACCIDENT WAS THE 150-FOOT-HIGH ROCK BLUFF. 
 On June 1, 1995, approximately 0905 Pacific daylight time (PDT), N27FL, a Garlick-converted 
TH-1L former military helicopter, received substantial damage in an inflight collision with a 
tree and subsequent collison with terrain approximately 6 miles northwest of Umpqua, OR.  
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant of the restricted-category helicopter, was fatally 
injured.  The helicopter was owned by Garlick Helicopters, Inc. and operated by 
Intermountain, Inc.  The flight was an external-lift logging operation conducted under 14 CFR 
133, originating from Myrtle Creek, OR.  Visual meteorolgical conditions existed at the time of 
the accident, and no flight plan had been filed.
The operator stated in his report of the accident:
     We started logging [at] approximately 5:30-6:00 AM....      After about 2 hours we shut the 
helicopter down to fuel and      make a maintenance inspection.  The fueling and walk around      
lasted about 30 minutes.  We lifted off about 9:00 AM and       resumed logging operations.  
Before the pilot made one lift      (a log) the accident occurred.
     ...The terrain was very steep with rock outcroppings and       50-100 [foot] bluffs, slopes 
average 50-100 [percent].
The logging supervisor, who was working under the helicopter at the time of the accident and 
who hooked the choker (lifting harness) to the helicopter's 150-foot-long lift line, stated the 
following to the responding deputy:
     ...he had just rehooked the choker to the long line and       started to move out of the way 
when the long line started       falling out of the sky.  [He] said he thought the pilot had      
accidentally released the long line.  [He] said he heard a      loud pop.  He looked up and noticed 
that the helicopter was      going into a spin.  The helicopter rotated approximately 1/2      of a 
turn before impacting the ground.  [He] said pieces       flew everywhere as the helicopter slid 
over the bluff      backwards.
Three witnesses who saw the accident from a vantage point approximately 3/4 to 1 mile east of, 
and several hundred feet below, the crash site reported the following to Douglas County 
sheriff's deputies:
     ...They saw the helicopter hovering near the trees.  The      tail rotor ran into the trees and 
sheared off.  [They] saw      the blades shear off and the helicopter went toward the      river, 
slamming into the ground...The helicopter had started      spinning, then went left side into the 
cliff.
     The helicopter had been working on both sides of a large fir      tree that was near the log it 
was trying to [lift.]
Investigators at the scene found the main wreckage on the slope approximately 250 feet below 
the point of initial ground impact (the top of a 150-foot-high rock bluff.)  The wreckage was 
inverted and pointing downhill.  The on-scene investigators spotted a section of tail rotor, 
along with freshly cut bare wood scars, in the tree adjacent to the pickup site.  They also 
discovered sections of main rotor blade tip at the site of initial ground impact.  The helicopter's 
lift line was hung up in the tree and was not attached to the helicopter; however, it was 
attached to the choker which was around a section of Douglas fir with dimensions given in the 
sheriff's report as approximately 5 feet 6 inches in diameter and 5 feet in length.  This section 
was one of eight 5-foot sections cut in the middle of a tree 144 feet 6 inches long.  The sheriff's 
report noted that the choker was installed on the log in such a fashion as to cause the log to roll 
downhill once it was pulled free from the tree.  The responding deputy stated in the report that 
he had inspected the cuts at each end of this log section and that the cuts had been made all the 
way through.
According to the sheriff's report, the logging supervisor stated to the responding deputy that he 
estimated the weight of the log section at 3,000 pounds.  A separate calculation of the weight of 
the section, using the dimensions given above and specific gravity of commercial grade fir 
(0.36) obtained from an engineering reference source, yielded a section weight of 2,669 
pounds.  The gross weight of the helicopter, based on fuel loading of 700 pounds reported by 
the operator and a 3,000 pound log section, is estimated to have been approximately 9,200 
pounds at the time of the accident.  The Garlick Helicopters party representative to the 
investigation stated that the maximum load on the lift line is 4,000 pounds, and that the 
helicopter's maximum gross weight is 9,500 pounds.    
A later examination of the wreckage at Specialty Aircraft, Inc. of Redmond, OR on June 29, 
1995 revealed that both tail rotor blades were broken off approximately 1 to 2 feet out from the 
blade hinges.  One blade was broken back in rounded fashion at approximately a 60-degree 
angle.  The other was broken back squarely at a 90-degree angle.  The 90-degree gearbox case 
was broken apart with the main portion remaining attached to the tail rotor hub and blades.  
The other portion remained with the tail boom.  An exposed gear on this portion of the gearbox 
displayed machined-off teeth.  The tail rotor drive shaft exhibited a torsional overstress 
deformation, and was fractured at the point of this deformation.  The tail boom was buckled 
approximately 30 degrees toward the right about 3 feet forward of the tail rotor location.
Examination of the helicopter's maintenance history from April 10, 1995 until the accident 
revealed that the helicopter had experienced engine compressor stalls on two separate 
occasions.  The first occurrence, on April 17, required three attempts to correct (change of fuel 
control, replacement of bleed band actuator, and a second change of fuel control) before the 
aircraft was returned to service on April 25.  After the first two attempts, a technical-order 
compressor stall inspection was documented in the maintenance log.  This inspection was not 
documented after the third attempt although a limited maintenance test flight was performed 
after the second fuel control change.  The second occurrence took place on May 15, two weeks 
before the accident.  This was written up as a compressor stall at full power.  The corrective 
action for this was listed as "adjusted bleed band closure...."  Between the last compressor stall 
and the accident, the helicopter underwent two 25-hour maintenance inspections, both of 
which incorporated engine operation tests.  The aircraft maintenance records noted no engine 
operation anomalies from either of these two inspections.
The helicopter underwent four separate scheduled maintenance inspections between April 10 
and the accident:  a 25-hour inspection on May 3 at 9,400.6 hours, a Phase AB inspection on 
May 10 at 9,419.5 hours, a 25-hour inspection at 9,443.8 hours (date unspecified), and a 25-
hour inspection at 9,470.4 hours.  Some steps in the Phase AB inspection checklist had not 
been signed, including:  notes regarding 90- and 42-degree gearbox oil changes; tail rotor drive 
shaft covers; hydraulic fluid sampling; note regarding hydraulic fluid replacement; main fuel 
filter; tail rotor hub and blade; and tail rotor driveshaft.
A table in the maintenance records dated May 1, 1995 indicated that the number 1 hanger 
bearing, which supports the tail rotor driveshaft, had 79 hours of service left.  Between May 1 
and May 31, maintenance records indicated the helicopter flew 107.3 hours.  The tail rotor 
driveshaft bearings were signed off as "insp[ected and] found O.K." on the May 10 Phase AB 
inspection.  Maintenance records indicate the tail rotor hanger assemblies have a 1,200 hour 
service life.  The Garlick party representative provided technical data which indicates that 
exceeding service life by up to 10 percent is allowable.
Representatives from the NTSB and Allied Signal Engines conducted a teardown of the T53-
13B engine at Specialty Aircraft, Inc., Redmond, OR, on June 29, 1995.  During the teardown, 
investigators were able to rotate both N1 and N2 sections of the engine freely.  The bleed band 
actuator assembly was tested using 50 p.s.i. shop air and found to function normally.  
Movement of variable inlet guide vanes was also normal the entire way around the case.  Dirt 
and grass were packed into the top half of the engine intake.  The leading compressor stages 
contained dirt and foreign object damage around the entire disc.  Dirt deposits and foreign 
object damage decreased progressively from intake to exhaust stages of the engine.  The 
turbine outlet contained a  uniform dirt deposit around the outer diameter of the entire disc.  
All 5th stage compressor blades were curled back about 90 degrees at about mid-blade length.  
An apparent crack was noted in a bolt hole on the inner liner of the top half of the compressor 
case at the 5th stage.  The bolt head at this hole had been sheared off.  The compressor case top 
half was shipped to the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, DC for examination of the 
suspected crack.  The Materials Laboratory reported that the irregularity was an impact mark, 
where a rotating compressor blade had apparently dug in and come to a stop, rather than a 
crack.  The compressor case top half was later shipped to AlliedSignal Engines in Phoenix, AZ 
for further examination.  This examination, conducted under supervision of the FAA, noted 
chipped paint, marks, and a deformed mounting bolt head on the exterior of the compressor 
case in the area of the 5th stage rub strip impact mark.  AlliedSignal characterized this damage 
to the case exterior as impact damage, stating in its report on its examination:
     ...it is more apparent that the compressor case received a      significant impact in the area of 
the attachment bolt,      depressing the case and the 5th stage rub strip radially      inward.  
When this occurred, the 5th stage blades came in      solid contact with the rub strip and were 
folded over during      rundown.
     Thus, the damage observed on the 5th stage blades is       consistent with impact damage, 
most likely occurring during      the crash. 
Investigators removed the fuel control unit from the engine during the teardown and shipped it 
to the manufacturer, Chandler- Evans Control Systems Division of West Hartford, CT, for a 
functional test.  This unit was found to be functional although not meeting some performance 
specifications required of a new fuel control unit before shipment from the manufacturer.  
Chandler-Evans also reported that certain field adjustments appeared to have been made to 
the unit, including lowering of the governor cut-in speed.
The 42-degree gearbox was examined at the NTSB office in Seattle, WA.  It appeared externally 
intact on visual examination.  The shaft rotated freely but was slightly bent out of true.
An autopsy and toxicology tests on the pilot revealed no evidence of pilot impairment or 
incapacitation.
