Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Scottsdale, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX04LA254
Date & Time:
07/01/2004, 1500 MST 
Registration:
N513TS
Aircraft:
Eurocopter AS-350-B2
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
Analysis 
While performing a maintenance check flight, the collective down lock engaged, which resulted 
in an uncontrolled descent and collision with terrain. The pilot and a mechanic were to fly a 
maintenance flight check of the engine and perform a rotor track and balance. He entered a 
descent at approximately 1,200 feet above ground level (agl) and prepared to level off at 
approximately 700 feet agl. When he tried to pull up on the collective, the collective would not 
move and was observed latched by the collective down lock. He and the mechanic tried to 
unlatch the collective from the down lock, but they did not have enough time before he had to 
flare the helicopter for landing. With the collective stuck in flat pitch, they landed hard and 
with forward speed. The flight crew evacuated the helicopter once it had come to rest. An 
ensuing post accident fire destroyed the helicopter. A new after market avionics control panel 
had been installed and the collective down lock, which is secured to the panel, was adjusted 
prior to the flight. The down lock attaches to the lower section of avionics panel. When the 
collective is lowered to the lower pitch stop the clearance between the collective and the down 
lock is about 0.16 inches. The down lock is a flexible plate that is free to vibrate with the 
helicopter's normal rhythms. In the original factory installation, the clearance between the 
down lock and the collective is 0.3 inches. This is the second known accident where the 
collective lock has inadvertently engaged in flight with this particular after market avionics 
panel installed. The manufacturer of the aftermarket avionics panel provided installation 
information indicating that maintenance personnel must bend the collective locking plate such 
that the locking plate will spring away from the collective lock button. Examination of the 
accident aircraft™s locking plate indicated that the locking plate bend was likely reversed, 
allowing the locking plate to spring toward the lock button.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Inadvertent in-flight engagement of the collective down lock, which resulted in an uncontrolled 
descent and ground impact. The collective down lock engagement was caused by the improper 
installation and/or adjustment of the collective locking system, which reduced the clearance 
between the locking plate and the collective control. A factor was the pilot™s decision to embark 
Page 2 of 6LAX04LA254
on a maintenance test flight after encountering difficulty disengaging the collective lock release 
during previous hover tests.
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT
Findings
1. (C) ROTORCRAFT FLIGHT CONTROL,COLLECTIVE CONTROL - LOCKED
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. (C) REMEDIAL ACTION - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6LAX04LA254
Factual Information
On July 1, 2004, at 1500 mountain standard time, a Eurocopter AS-350-B2, N513TS, collided 
with terrain 8 miles northwest of Scottsdale Airport, Arizona, while performing a maintenance 
check flight.  Westcor Aviation, Inc., was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 
CFR Part 91.  The commercial pilot and a mechanic crewman received minor injuries, and the 
helicopter was destroyed.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had not 
been filed.  The maintenance test flight originated at Scottsdale Airport.
The pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Accident Report that they were performing a 
maintenance flight to check the engine and performing a rotor track and balance.  He entered a 
descent at 2,700 feet mean sea level (msl) (approximately 1200 feet above ground level (agl)), 
and prepared to level off at 2,200 feet msl (approximately 700 feet agl).  When he tried to pull 
up on the collective, the collective would not move.  It was observed by the mechanic-crewman 
that the collective lock had engaged.  He and the crewman tried to unlatch the collective from 
the down lock, but they did not have enough time before he had to flare the helicopter for 
landing.  With the collective stuck in flat pitch, they landed hard and with forward speed.  The 
flight crew evacuated the helicopter once it had come to rest.  An ensuing post accident fire 
destroyed the helicopter.
Examination of the helicopter maintenance logbook revealed that the helicopter's factory 
avionics console was replaced with a Geneva P132 avionics console on June 7, 2004.  On July 1, 
2004, the Eurocopter 12-year major inspection was entered as complied with.  One of the items 
entered in the logbook for the major inspection was a check of the collective lock, and the 
installation of a new collective lock button.  The collective lock consists of an aluminum metal 
button that protrudes from the end of the collective grip and an 8-inch (approximately) sprung 
steel strap or flexible lock plate is attached to the either the cockpit deck or the avionics console 
depending on how the helicopter is equipped.  The flexible lock plate is aligned in parallel with 
the vertical travel of the collective end.  The flexible plate has a circular hole in the upper end 
that fits over the protruding collective lock button.  The pilot locks the collective down by 
pushing it slightly past the lower pitch stop and pulling the flexible plate over the collective 
lock button.  The collective is held in place by its natural upward force towards the lower pitch 
stop position and a groove in the collective button that the flexible lock plate engages.  The 
pilot disengages the lock by pushing down on the collective slightly and the flexible plate 
springs itself forward away from the collective lock button.  When the flexible lock plate is not 
engaged (i.e., normal flight conditions) it is free to vibrate about its base attachment point with 
the rhythms of the helicopter.  A rubber plug placed in the middle of the flexible plate is meant 
to dampen out vibrations when in contact with the avionics panel.
Section 3.3, adjustment of the "LOW PITCH" lock plate, in the Eurocopter Maintenance 
Manual, the collective lock is to be adjusted such that when the collective is at the lower pitch 
stop, with no further downward force on the collective by the pilot, the collective lock button is 
set 1 mm short of being aligned to engage the flexible lock plate.  On the Geneva avionics panel, 
two setscrews in the base of the plate adjust the flexible lock plate vertically for alignment.
The clearance between the collective and the flexible plate when the collective is at the lower 
pitch stop was measured in an exemplar helicopter with a factory avionics panel installed.  The 
measurement was approximately 0.3 inches between the end of the collective lock button and 
the flexible lock strap.  Geneva provided documents that depicted the clearance between the 
Page 4 of 6LAX04LA254
collective lock button and the flexible lock plate with a Geneva avionics panel installed as 0.16 
inches.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
National Transporation Safety Board investigators have identified a second occurrence of an 
AS350 with the Geneva avionics panel installation where the collective lock engaged in flight, 
which resulted in an accident.  Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin SW-05-20 was 
issued on December 2, 2004, recommending inspection of the collective lock rigging.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/01/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/01/2004
Flight Time:
6200 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model), 6000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Eurocopter
Registration:
N513TS
Model/Series:
AS-350-B2 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2664
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/01/2004, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4961 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
0.3 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
2252 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Turbomeca
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
Arriel 1D1
Registered Owner:
Westcore Aviation Inc
Rated Power:
732 hp
Operator:
Westcore Aviation Inc
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
EKLR
Page 5 of 6LAX04LA254
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSDL, 1510 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
110°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.96 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
36°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Scottsdale, AZ (KSDL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1330 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Scottsdale (KSDL)
Runway Surface Type:
Dirt
Airport Elevation:
1510 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
33.700556, -111.941944
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Van S McKenny
Adopted Date:
12/20/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Larry Perkins; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Joseph Syslo; American Eurocopter Corp; Grand Prairie, TX
Mathew Rigsby; Federal Avaiation Administration; Grand Prarie, TX
Harry Darting; Federal Aviaiton Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Publish Date:
10/01/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX04LA254
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
