National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Dinsmore, CA
Accident Number: WPR12LA090
Date & Time: 02/03/2012, 1230 PST
Registration: N3879S
Aircraft: CESSNA 172E
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Hard landing
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis According to postaccident statements from both pilots, the flight instructor took control of the airplane from the student pilot either at touchdown or just before.
The airplane bounced several times after touchdown while veering to the right, and the right main wheel rolled off the 48-foot wide runway into the grass.
The flight instructor added full engine power to go around.
The flight instructor stated that he pulled back on the yoke to try to clear the trees beyond the end of the runway, and the airplane stalled and hit the ground.
After the airplane™s right wing tip contacted the ground, the airplane reversed direction and came to a stop.
Shortly after the airplane came to rest, a postimpact fire began, which consumed the airplane.
The student pilot, who was the airplane owner, reported no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The flight instructor's delayed remedial action, inadequate recovery from a bounced landing, and failure to attain/maintain adequate airspeed during an attempted go-around.
The airplane came to rest in a field about 50 yards beyond the runway™s end.
A post impact ground fire occurred, which consumed the substantially damaged airplane.
The commercial pilot holds a certified flight instructor (CFI) certificate, and he was seriously injured.
The CFI was providing flight instruction to a student pilot, who was the airplane™s registered owner.
The student pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The flight was performed under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
No flight plan was filed.
The flight originated about 1115.
The student pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that the CFI directed him to land at the Dinsmore airport.
However, on final approach, the CFI took the flight controls away from him.
The student released the controls, and he did not touch them again.
The wing flaps were extended to the 30-degree setting, and the CFI attempted to land.
After touching down on the runway, the airplane bounced several times, the right main wheel rolled off the 48-foot wide runway into the grass, and the CFI attempted to go around.
The CFI added full engine power, and the stall warning sounded as the airplane veered back across the runway as it continued to bounce.
After the airplane™s right wing tip contacted the ground, the airplane reversed direction as it cartwheeled to a stop.
Shortly after coming to rest, a post impact fire began, which consumed the airplane.
During a telephone conversation the CFI said they took off from Garberville about 1130 for an instructional session.
He said he does not recall completely but believes he took over the controls either just after the student had landed or just before he touched down.
The airplane was veering to the right and he decided to do a go around.
The stall warning was going off during the go around at the west end of the runway.
He said he was trying to go over the trees beyond the end of the runway; he pulled on the yoke to clear the trees and the airplane stalled and hit the ground.
The student pilot owner said there were no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane.
