National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Kansas City, MO
Accident Number: CEN12LA147
Date & Time: 02/02/2012, 1310 CST
Registration: N6564V
Aircraft: BELLANCA 17-30
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control on ground
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilot reported that after touchdown, the airplane suddenly veered off the left side of the runway.
During the runway excursion, the airplane struck the precision approach path indicator light system, resulting in substantial damage to both wings.
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that a rod end bearing on the nosewheel steering pushrod failed.
As a result, the pilot was unable to operate the nosewheel steering.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the nosewheel steering pushrod, which resulted in a loss of airplane directional control and runway excursion.
During the runway excursion, the airplane struck the precision approach path indicator (PAPI) light system resulting in damage to both wings.
The private pilot and flight instructor were not injured.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage and right wing.
The aircraft was registered to and operated by the private pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an personal flight.
The pilot was receiving flight instruction at the time the accident occurred.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not operating on a flight plan.
The local flight originated about 1145.
The pilot reported that after the previous takeoff, the red in-transit landing gear indicator light remained illuminated.
He said that he cycled the landing gear and the light went out.
The pilot reported that when he lowered the gear for landing at MKC, only two of the three green gear- down indicator lights illuminated.
The landing approach was aborted and the pilot cycled the landing gear three times.
At that point, all three green gear-down indicator lights illuminated.
The pilot reported that the subsequent landing was normal, but as soon as the nose wheel touched down the airplane veered sharply to the left and off the runway.
A postaccident examination revealed a fractured spherical rod end for the nosewheel steering pushrod.
The rod end was fractured in the threaded portion of the shank.
The threaded portion of the rod end, along with the jam nut remained attached to the steering pushrod.
