National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Eveleth, MN
Accident Number: CHI03LA190
Date & Time: 07/01/2003, 1430 CDT
Registration: N30CM
Aircraft: Cessna A185F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane was substantially damaged when it overran the grass runway and hit a ditch embankment.
The pilot reported that on the final landing attempt he landed past a mower that had cleared the runway about 1/4 of the way down the length of the runway.
He stated that he touched down past the halfway point on the runway and was too fast to stop on the grass runway, subsequently impacting the ditch embankment.
The pilot reported no mechanical difficulties with the airplane.
The tailwind component was calculated to be 5 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's misjudgment of speed and distance resulting in an overrun.
Factors were the ditch embankment, and the tailwind component.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 2.
(F) WRONG RUNWAY - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) ALL AVAILABLE RUNWAY - NOT USED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) AIRSPEED - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH 6.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The pilot and passenger were not injured.
The flight originated from the Manitowish Waters Airport, Manitowish Waters, Wisconsin, at 1310.
The runway is adjacent to the seaplane base and is used by aircraft coming to the base to have floats installed.
In a written report, the pilot stated that on his first landing approach, he noticed a mower on the runway and aborted the landing.
He contacted the airport to have the mower exit the runway.
The pilot stated that he circled the airstrip 2 to 3 times before making another landing attempt.
On the second landing attempt, the mower had moved to the right side of the runway about 1/4 of the way down the length of the runway.
The pilot stated that he landed past the location of the mower, touching down past the halfway point on the runway.
He reported that the airplane was too fast to stop on the grass runway, subsequently impacting the ditch embankment.
The pilot reported no mechanical difficulties with the airplane.
A weather reporting station about 2 nautical miles and 200 degrees from the accident site recorded the wind at 1436 as 230 degrees at 8 knots.
The tailwind component was calculated to be 5 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 60, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
