National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Englewood, CO
Accident Number: DEN03LA117
Date & Time: 07/01/2003, 1317 MDT
Registration: N2686W
Aircraft: Mooney M20C
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said he received instructions to land on runway 28.
The pilot set up for a right downwind, base turn , and final approach.
The pilot reported, "On final, I had to crab about 20 degrees to the right and lineup for touchdown."
The pilot said that in the flare, he transitioned to a slip, and touched down.
The pilot said that just after touchdown, a wind gust picked his airplane up about 10 feet off the runway and rolled the airplane into a 20 degree left bank.
The pilot said he attempted to go around, but was unable to level the wings or climb.
The pilot said the wind blew his airplane off of the runway.
About 35 feet left of the runway's edge, the airplane's left wing struck the terrain and the airplane "cartwheeled."
An examination of the airplane revealed no anomalies.
Reported winds at the time of the accident were 060 degrees at 6 knots, gusting to 30 knots.
A peak wind of 360 degrees at 30 knots was recorded 1 minute after the accident time.
Density altitude was 9,152 feet msl.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during landing.
Factors contributing to the accident were the gusting crosswinds and the high density altitude.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH DENSITY ALTITUDE 5.
GO-AROUND - NOT SUCCESSFUL - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 6.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On July 1, 2003, at 1317 mountain daylight time, a Mooney M20C, N2686W, piloted by a private pilot, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during landing at Centennial Airport (APA), Englewood, Colorado.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal  flight was being conducted on a visual flight rules flight plan under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot reported no injuries.
The cross-country flight originated at Mason City, Iowa, at 0930 central daylight time, and was en route to Denver, Colorado.
In his written statement, the pilot received instructions from APA air traffic control tower to land on runway 28 (4,903 feet by 62 feet, dry asphalt).
The pilot set up for a right downwind, base turn , and final approach.
The pilot reported, "On final, I had to crab about 20 degrees to the right and lineup for touchdown."
The pilot reported that in the flare, he transitioned to a slip and touched down.
The pilot said, "Shortly after touchdown, about 2 seconds, a wind gust picked me up about 10 feet off the runway and put me in about a 20 degree bank to the left."
The pilot said he attempted to go around, but was unable to level the wings or climb.
The pilot said the wind blew his airplane off of the runway.
About 35 feet left of the runway's edge, the airplane's left wing struck the terrain and the airplane "cartwheeled."
An examination of the airplane showed the right main landing gear pushed upward through the wing.
The left wing was bent upward and aft, starting at the flap and proceeding outboard to the tip.
The bottom fuselage was buckled, starting at the trailing edges of the flaps and proceeding aft to the empennage.
The horizontal stabilizer was bent and buckled aft.
An examination of the engine, engine controls and other airplane's systems revealed no anomalies.
Remarks:  peak wind recorded at 1318, was 360 degrees at 30 knots, virga distant southeast.
Density altitude was 9,153 feet mean sea level.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
