National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: San Antonio, TX
Accident Number: FTW03LA200
Date & Time: 07/01/2003, 1040 CDT
Registration: N84426
Aircraft: Champion 7AC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While flying over a wild animal orphanage and observing the animals, the pilot stated that he started losing altitude after completing a turn.
The pilot added that he "straightened it out, but he still couldn™t maintain altitude."
The airplane came to rest nose down in a wooded area inside the animal sanctuary.
The IIC calculated the density altitude to be approximately 3,288 feet at the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain minimum required airspeed while maneuvering, resulting in an inadvertent stall of the airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED(VS) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On July 1, 2003, about 1040 central daylight time, a Champion 7AC single-engine airplane, N84426, was substantially damaged when it impacted the ground following a loss of control while maneuvering near San Antonio, Texas.
The 761-hour private pilot received serious injuries and his passenger was not injured.
The airplane, registered to and operated by the pilot, was operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the personal flight, which originated from San Geronimo Airpark (8T8), near San Antonio, Texas at 1000.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot stated that he was flying over a wild animal orphanage at about 1,500 feet observing the animals when he started losing altitude after completing a turn.
The pilot added that he "straightened it out, but he still couldn't maintain altitude."
The airplane came to rest nose down in a heavily wooded area inside the animal sanctuary.
According to the FAA inspector that interviewed the pilot after the accident, the pilot's wife stated that he previously told her that he thought that he stalled the airplane.
With a temperature at 33 degrees Celsius, field elevation approximately 1,000 feet, and an altimeter setting of 30.01 inches of Mercury, the investigator-in-charge (IIC) calculated the density altitude to be 3,288 feet at the time of the accident.
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, revealed structural damage to the wings and wing struts.
The nose section of the airplane, the propeller, landing gear, and fuel tank were also damaged.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 68, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 1220 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 36.6 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2945 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: A65-8 Registered Owner: Louis Viggiano Jr.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
