National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Rio Rancho, NM
Accident Number: DEN03LA119
Date & Time: 07/01/2003, 0745 MDT
Registration: N360E
Aircraft: Eagle Balloons Corp. C-7
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that when the balloon took off, the winds were calm.
He reported on landing they were approximately 10 knots.
The pilot said he made a stand-up landing on hilly terrain.
The pilot reported that the landing was a hard landing, but was not one of the hardest landings he'd experienced.
During the landing, the passenger suffered a compound fracture in her lower left leg.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: a hard landing for undetermined reasons.
Factors relating to the accident were the unfavorable winds and landing on hilly terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - UNFAVORABLE WIND Factual Information On July 1, 2003, at 0745 mountain daylight time, an Eagle Balloons Corporation C-7 balloon, N360E, piloted by a private pilot, sustained a hard landing at Rio Rancho, New Mexico.
During the hard landing, a passenger on board the balloon was seriously injured.
The balloon sustained no damage and the pilot was uninjured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.
The local flight originated at 0710.
The pilot reported that the winds were calm when they took off.
He reported on landing they were approximately 10 knots.
The pilot said he made a stand-up landing in hilly terrain.
The pilot reported that the landing was a hard landing, but was not one of the hardest landings he'd experienced.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector reported the passenger suffered a compound fracture in her lower left leg during the landing.
The passenger was transported to a local hospital.
Registration: N360E Model/Series: C-7 Aircraft Category: Balloon Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Normal Serial Number: E81707 Landing Gear Type: Skid Seats: 1 Date/Type of Last Inspection:  Certified Max Gross Wt.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
