National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Winamac, IN
Accident Number: CHI03LA187
Date & Time: 07/02/2003, 1008 CDT
Registration: N6315P
Aircraft: Piper PA-24
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 5 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane was damaged during a forced landing in a rough plowed field following a loss of engine power during cruise flight.
Examination of the engine revealed that the crankshaft gear retaining bolt was missing and the gear's anti-rotation pin was sheared.
The oil pan of the engine was examined and no bolt was found.
The crankshaft gear retaining bolt was not found within the engine.
A review of the maintenance records revealed that the engine was last overhauled on April 6, 1986, and had accumulated 522 hours time in service since the overhaul.
No subsequent logbook entries were noted that indicated removal of the crankshaft gear or retaining bolt.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power due to the improper installation of the crankshaft gear due to the omission of the retaining bolt and subsequent shear failure of the anti-rotation pin.
The unsuitable terrain encountered,  and the rough field were factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,TIMING GEAR - NOT SECURED 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 3.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,OTHER - SHEARED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 5.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - ENCOUNTERED Factual Information On July 2, 2003, at 1008 central daylight time, a Piper PA-24, N6315P, piloted by an airline transport pilot, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing following an in-flight loss of engine power near Winamac, Indiana.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot and his four passengers reported no injuries.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating on an IFR flight plan.
The flight departed from Plymouth, Michigan, at 0819, with an intended destination of Perryville, Missouri.
The airplane's engine stopped producing power during cruise flight.
The pilot was given radar vectors to the Arens Field Airport (RWN), Winamac, Indiana.
The pilot was not able to reach RWN and executed a forced landing in a rough plowed field.
A postaccident examination was conducted by the Federal Aviation Administration.
During the initial examination of the airplane's engine, valve train continuity could not be established.
Rotation of the crankshaft produced no movement of the valve train components.
A subsequent examination of the accessory section of the engine revealed that the crankshaft gear retaining bolt was missing and the gear's anti-rotation pin was sheared.
The oil pan of the engine was examined and no bolt was found.
The crankshaft gear retaining bolt was not found within the engine.
A review of the maintenance records revealed that the engine was last overhauled on April 6, 1986, and had accumulated 522 hours time in service since the overhaul.
No subsequent logbook entries were noted that indicated removal of the crankshaft gear or retaining bolt.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Flight Instructor Age: 30, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
