National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Roscommon, MI
Accident Number: CHI03LA194
Date & Time: 07/01/2003, 2002 EDT
Registration: N172DE
Aircraft: Cessna 172M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane nosed over while landing on water.
The pilot reported the pontoon of the airplane hit a wave or a wake while landing.
The pilot noted the airplane bounced and came to rest inverted.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during a water landing.
A factor contributing to the accident was the rough water.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER,ROUGH ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING Factual Information On July 1, 2003, at 2002 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172M, N172DE, piloted by a private pilot, sustained substantial damage when it nosed over while landing on Higgins Lake, Roscommon, Michigan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported minor injuries.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The flight originated from Higgins Lake at 1940 with an intended destination of Fife Lake, Michigan.
The pilot reported he performed a normal approach and touchdown to the lake.
The pilot noted the pontoon of the airplane hit a wave or a wake while landing.
The pilot stated the airplane bounced and came to rest inverted.
The pilot reported no mechanical functions or defects with the airplane during the accident flight.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 71, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
