During the takeoff climb out, the airplane veered to the right and nose dived into a junkyard.  A 
passenger who held a student pilot certificate, was invited by the owner to fly the airplane.  The 
owner placed the student in the left seat, which was the side that had the flight control stick, 
rudder pedals, and brakes.  The owner sat in the right seat, which did not have a flight control 
stick but did have rudder pedals.  The student said there were no problems encountered during 
takeoff.  Once they had climbed over the tress, the left wing dropped abruptly.  A couple of 
seconds after she corrected the wings to a straight and level attitude, the pilot-in-command 
reached over to her side and took over the flight controls.  The airplane banked and fell off to 
the right and struck the ground in a nose-down, left wing low attitude.  Initial and follow-up 
examinations of the airplane and powerplant did not expose any preimpact mechanical 
discrepancies.
the pilot's excessive remedial control inputs in response to a passenger's control inputs, which 
led to a failure to maintain an adequate airspeed and an inadvertent stall/mush.  The pilot's 
inadequate preflight decision to allow a student pilot to occupy the only seat with full flight 
controls was a factor in the accident.
On March 3, 2002, at 1500 Pacific standard time, an Aeronca C-3, N17438, impacted terrain in 
a junkyard while in an uncontrolled descent shortly after takeoff from the Sonoma Skypark 
Airport, Sonoma, California.  The airplane was owned and operated by the private pilot under 
the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The airplane sustained substantial damage.  The pilot 
received minor injuries, and a passenger who held a student pilot certificate was seriously 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area flight, and no flight plan 
had been filed.
The pilot informed emergency medical services (EMS) personnel that during the takeoff climb 
he felt something "snap" on the control stick.  The airplane veered sharply to the left.  He 
attempted to correct back to the right, but was unable to do so.  The airplane nose dived to the 
ground with the left wing low.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board, the student pilot indicated 
that she had been at the airport that morning to do some flying in her airplane.  Later in the 
day she went down to the hangar that housed the accident airplane.  The owner and another 
person were getting the airplane ready to fly.  The other person was going to fly it around the 
area.  While the airplane was out flying, the owner asked her if she would "like to solo the C3 
next;" she replied with a negative response.  The owner asked her a couple of more times if she 
wanted to fly the airplane.  He also told her that it flew just like her own airplane, and she 
wouldn't have a problem flying it.  She stated that she said she would fly it as long as he went 
up with her first.  When the airplane returned, the owner had her get in the airplane and taxi 
around to get used to the rudder pedals.  After she was done taxiing the airplane, she took it 
over to the fuel pit to refuel it.  She then called her dad and asked if she could solo the C-3; she 
told him that she was going to fly with the owner first.  After she fueled the airplane, they got 
into the airplane and started to taxi to the runway.
The student pilot reported that the pilot had her sit in the left seat, the side that had a control 
stick, rudder pedals, and brakes.  The right side, where the owner was seated, had only rudder 
pedals.  She was unsure whether there were brakes on his side.
Once on the runway, she advanced the throttle with her right hand and held the control stick 
with her left hand.  She indicated that she didn't know the airplane, so if she had been doing 
something wrong she figured the owner would have said something.  She encountered no 
difficulties during the takeoff.  Once they had climbed over the trees, she stated that the "left 
wing dropped abruptly."  She corrected it "and got the plane back straight [and] level. Or the 
wings level [at least]."  She stated that the owner reached over and grabbed the controls.  The 
student pilot let go of the flight controls, and recalled losing altitude and seeing a house go by.
A witness to the accident stated that he saw the airplane veer to the left and then "went right 
and nose [dived] into the ground."
Another witness traveling on Highway 37 reported that the engine was not "sputtering."  She 
was unfamiliar with airplanes, but stated that the engine did not sound like anything was 
wrong with it.  She did note that the airplane was "very low."
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane.  He established 
flight control continuity, and the control linkages appeared attached and intact.  He examined 
the engine.  The spark plugs appeared normal.  The inspector manually rotated the propeller; 
he observed valve train movement, and obtained thumb compression on the two cylinders.  
The magneto remained attached to the engine and produced spark on one lead.  He removed 
the magneto, manually rotated it, and it produced spark at all of the terminals.  He observed no 
mechanical discrepancies.
