The pilot arrived at Mexia-Limestone County Airport (TX06), Mexia, Texas, sometime before 
1100. Once onboard the airplane, a witness, and an acquaintance of the pilot, closed and locked 
the airplane's cabin door for the pilot, and walked away from the airplane.  He also reported 
that after the engines to the airplane were started, the airplane stayed on the ramp and idled 
for 10 to 15 minutes. No one saw the pilot taxi to the runway, but he taxied to the north end of 
Runway 18 for a downwind takeoff to the south. Examination of the accident site found the 
wreckage oriented along a path consistent with an extended centerline of runway 18. The 
airplane was found along a fence line approximately 1/4 mile from the departure end of 
Runway 18.  The airplane's track was along a 183-degree bearing, and there was a large burn 
area prior to and around the debris zone along the wreckage path. Examination of the cockpit 
revealed a 9/16-inch hex-head bolt inserted in the control lock pinhole for the control column. 
Under normal procedures Cockpit Check in the Duke 60 Airplane Flight Manual, for Preflight 
Inspection the first item listed is: 1. "Control Locks - REMOVE and STOW". In addition, under 
normal procedures Before Starting check list in the Duke 60 Airplane Flight Manual, the forth 
item to check is listed as: 4. "Flight Controls - FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT and PROPER 
RESPONSE"
The pilot's failure to remove the control lock before the flight and his failure to follow the 
checklist.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 3, 2002 at 1350 central standard time, a Beechcraft BE-60, N7272D, registered to 
Mapleleaf Acquisitions and operated by the Airline Transport Pilot (ATP), collided with trees 
and a fence line, approximately 1000 feet from the departure end of runway 18, during takeoff 
at the Limestone County Airport in Mexia, Texas. The airplane was operated under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight. The pilot received fatal injuries 
and the airplane was destroyed and there was a post accident fire. The flight originated from 
Aurora, Illinois. 
According to a friend on the afternoon of March 3, 2002, the pilot boarded N7272D for a 
business flight to Dupage, Illinois.  The pilot had spent the morning with his friend in Mexia, 
Texas, and had been conducting tests or check rides in other airplanes that weekend.  The pilot 
arrived at Mexia-Limestone County Airport (TX06), Mexia, Texas, sometime before 1100. Once 
onboard the airplane, a witness, and an acquaintance of the pilot, closed and locked the 
airplane's cabin door for the pilot, and walked away from the airplane.  He also reported that 
after the engines to the airplane were started, the airplane stayed on the ramp and idled for 10 
to 15 minutes. No one saw the pilot taxi to the runway, but he taxied to the north end of 
Runway 18 for a downwind takeoff to the south.
Several witnesses observed the accident. One witness stated that as he was passing by the 
airport in his car when he observed an airplane attempting to takeoff. The witness stated the 
airplane lifted off the ground at least twice, but touched back down both times. He said he then 
watched as the airplane flew into some trees and exploded. Another witness relayed the same 
information as the first witness and added that she saw the right wing of the airplane strike the 
ground prior to hitting the trees. She also advised that she saw two separate explosions. The 
third witness said she observed the airplane, and believed that the pilot was trying to takeoff. 
She said she watched the airplane leave the ground twice and touch back down both times. She 
stated that she also saw the right wing of the airplane struck the ground. She said the airplane 
then spun into some trees and exploded.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
A review of information on file with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Airman's 
Certification Division, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, revealed the pilot was an ATP, with ratings 
for airplane single engine land, Multi-engine land, and a Certified Flight Instructor in Single 
and Multi-engine Instrument airplanes. Additionally, the pilot was type rated in the Cessna 
CE-500, and the Learjet L-18. A review of records on file with the FAA aero medical records 
revealed the pilot held a second-class medical certificate issued on July 1, 2000 with no 
restrictions. The pilot reported on his application for the medical certificate the he had 
accumulated 25,600 total flight hours. The pilot's logbooks were not recovered for 
examination.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Beech BE-60, N7272D, S/N P-124, was a six (6) seat, twin engine airplane, and was 
registered to Mapleleaf Acquisions, Wilmington, Delaware. The left engine was a Lycoming 
TIO-541-A1E4, SN: RL-281-59. The right engine was a Lycoming TIO-541-E1A4, SN: RL-578- 
59. The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on December 1, 2001. The 
airplane had a total time of 4,363 hours. The airplane was purchased on March 4, 2002, from 
T&M Aviation, Inc. out of Abbeville, Louisiana for Vintage Wings and Things, LLC. out of 
LaFayette, Louisiana.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. Weather conditions 
were reported at Waco, Texas at 13:50, as; clear, visibility 10 statute miles, wind 360 degrees at 
17 knots gusting to 22 knots, and the altimeter setting at 30.51 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site found the wreckage was oriented along a path consistent with 
an extended centerline of runway 18. The airplane was found along a fence line approximately 
1/4 mile from the departure end of Runway 18.  The airplane's track was along a 183-degree 
bearing, and there was a large burn area prior to and around the debris zone along the 
wreckage path.  The wreckage was found on airport property. The landing gear had separated 
from the airplane, but was determined to have been down and locked at the time of impact.  It 
was reported by the maintenance people at the local FBO that due to his physical size, the pilot 
was unable to enter the cockpit with the rudder control lock pins in place.  They reported 
removing the rudder control lock, which consisted of a piece of aluminum tubing with orange 
safety tape tied to it, for movement of the airplane.  One of the mechanics revealed that he had 
installed a 9/16 inch hex head bolt in the control column control lock hole after servicing of the 
airplane.  He reported that it had been the control lock that was installed when he entered the 
airplane.  Both control locks were non-standard, homemade pins.
The left wing was fire damaged and the aileron and flap assemblies remained attached. No flap 
actuator was found, and the aileron trim tab actuator was no longer connected to structure.  
The airplane had been modified with the addition of winglets.  The left winglet was found 
separated from the wing, with its structure delaminated, approximately 30 feet from the end of 
the wing.  It was not damaged by fire.
The right wing had impact damage and had separated at the aileron/flap intersection.  The 
inboard portion of the wing was mostly fire damaged.  The flap had remained attached, and 
was also fire damaged.  No flap actuator was found.  The aileron had remained attached to the 
outboard section of the wing.  This wing section was fire damaged, but intact, with its fuel cap 
in place.
The empennage was fire damaged.  Elevator and rudder trim tab actuators were found lying in 
the ash.  The actuators were separated from structure and their cables during the wreckage 
examination.
The cabin and cockpit areas were also fire damaged. Examination of the cockpit revealed a 
9/16 inch hex-head bolt inserted in the control lock pin hole for the control column.  The 
instruments and avionics were destroyed.  The cabin appeared to have been configured in the 
standard six-place, single club arrangement.  Engine control levers were found to be in their 
midrange positions; however, the control quadrant was lying on the floor of the cabin.  Picking 
up and placing of the control quadrant into its approximate installed position, repositioned the 
engine control levers to their full forward positions.
The engine remained attached to the wing and was found with its propeller attached.  It had 
tree limbs lying on top of it, and had brush and barbed wire wound around its propeller.  The 
propeller blades were bent aft, and they had leading edge damage, and twisting toward low 
pitch.  The leading edge damage was in the form of scratches and small half circular 
indentations, consistent with contact with the barbed wire
The engine had partially separated from its wing during the impact sequence.  It was found to 
be fire damaged, and was lying askew from the airplane's heading.  Its propeller had been 
found up the debris path from the main wreckage.  The propeller was fire damaged, with 
leading edge damage consistent with contact with the barbed wire fence.  Its blades were 
distorted and had some twisting toward low pitch.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A post mortem examination of the pilot was conducted on March 4, 2002, by the Office of the 
medical examiner in the County of Dallas, State of Texas. The cause of death was listed as 
"Blunt force injuries, smoke inhalation and thermal injuries." On April 15, 2002, a Toxicology 
examination of the pilot was conducted by the FAA Toxicology Research Laboratory. The 
examination revealed carbon monoxide in the blood but no cyanide or ethanol. The 
examination also revealed 301 (mg/dl) Glucose detected in Vitreous, 6050 (mg/dl) Glucose 
detected in Urine and 12.4 percent Hemoglobin A1C detected in Blood. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Under normal procedures Cockpit Check in the Duke 60 Airplane Flight Manual, for Preflight 
Inspection the first item listed is: 1. "Control Locks - REMOVE and STOW"
In addition, under normal procedures Before Starting check list in the Duke 60 Airplane Flight 
Manual, the forth item to check is listed as: 4. "Flight Controls - FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT 
and PROPER RESPONSE"
The wreckage was released to Air Salvage of Dallas and US Specialty Insurance Company, LAD 
Aviation, 16415 Addison Road STE 800, Addison, Texas, 75001 on March 5, 2002.
