While on approach to the Friedman Memorial airport (Hailey, Idaho), the pilot  of the Cessna 
421C lowered the landing gear but failed to receive a gear down and locked indication on the 
right main gear.  He attempted to lower the landing gear utilizing the nitrogen blow down 
system, again without success.  The pilot then executed a landing with the nose and left main 
gear extended.  Post-crash examination revealed a small amount of water in the landing gear 
hydraulic lines.  When the landing gear system was purged and replenished with 
uncontaminated fluid the gear operated without malfunction both normally and with the use of 
the blow down system.  Temperature at Hailey, Idaho, remained well below freezing before and 
after the accident.
Water contamination within the aircraft's landing gear hydraulic line(s) which froze and 
blocked the line(s) preventing extension of the right main gear.  A factor was the below freezing 
environmental conditions which the aircraft was operating in prior to and during the approach 
and landing.
On March 1, 2002, at 1936 mountain standard time, a Cessna 421C, N421DG, registered to and 
being flown by a private pilot, sustained substantial damage during a gear up landing on 
runway 31 at the Friedman Memorial airport, Hailey, Idaho.  The pilot and passenger were 
uninjured.  Visual meteorological conditions existed and an IFR flight plan had been activated.  
The flight, which was personal, was operated under 14CFR91, and originated from Santa 
Monica, California, earlier in the day, and was destined for Hailey.
As the aircraft approached Hailey, the pilot reported that he was unable to obtain a down and 
locked status on the right main landing gear.  He then attempted a manual extension of the 
landing gear using the nitrogen blow down system, but again was unable to get a down and 
locked indication on the right main gear.  The aircraft was landed with the nose and left main 
gear extended and during the initial landing roll the right wing impacted the runway.
An examination and testing of the aircraft's landing gear and associated hydraulic systems was 
conducted under the oversight of an inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration's 
(FAA) Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) at Boise, Idaho.  The hydraulic system was 
drained and the fluid was captured.  Examination of the fluid yielded no particulate 
contaminants but a small amount of water was found in the fluid.  The hydraulic system was 
subsequently replenished and the aircraft was placed on jacks.  The landing gear was then 
cycled up and down repeatedly with no malfunction noted.  The landing gear was then 
extended utilizing the emergency extension system, again with no malfunction (refer to 
ATTACHMENT FAA-I).
The surface temperature at Friedman airport was well below freezing several hours before and 
after the accident.
