After completing deicing procedures on a company Boeing 757-200, the driver of the deicing 
truck maneuvered his truck in a manner that caused the deicing basket boom to impact the 
trailing edge of the aircraft's left aileron. The boom penetrated the aileron to a depth of almost 
two feet and damaged its spar. The investigation revealed that while backing out from his 
position behind the aircraft's left wing, the driver had inadvertently turned his steering wheel 
in a direction that caused the boom, which is mounted on the  back end of the truck, to 
converge on the trailing edge of the aileron.
The failure of the deicing truck driver to insure that the deicing basket boom remained clear of 
the aircraft structure as he backed away from the position he had been in while performing 
deicing procedures.
On March 2, 2002, approximately 0620 Pacific standard time, a United Airlines Boeing 757-
200, N589UA, was impacted by the boom of a deicing truck while it was standing in position 
on the ramp with the engines running. The airline transport pilot, his first officer, the four 
flight attendants, and the 83 passengers were not injured, but the aircraft sustained substantial 
damage. The 14 CFR Part 121 scheduled domestic passenger flight, which was preparing to 
depart for O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois, was being operated in visual 
meteorological conditions. The crew had filed an IFR flight plan. There was no emergency 
evacuation.
According to United Airlines, the aircraft had been pushed back about 20 feet from the gate in 
order to remove heavy frost prior to taxi for departure. The deicing truck, which was being 
manned by a driver and a boom operator, had just completed deicing procedures when the 
accident occurred. Reportedly, the driver of the deicing truck, which had been parked just aft of 
the left wing and nose-in perpendicular to the fuselage, inadvertently turned his steering wheel 
in the wrong direction as he attempted to back away from the aircraft. In so doing, he allowed 
the deicing boom, which is mounted on the back end of the truck, to impact the trailing edge of 
the left aileron. The boom penetrated the aileron's structure to a depth of almost two feet, and 
damaging its spar. The boom operator, who was in the basket at the time of the impact was not 
injured. The deicing truck was not damaged.
According to United Airlines Flight Safety, the area was well lighted, there were no ramp space 
constraints, and there was no apparent distractions or rushing.
