During en route cruise, there was a failure of a number two system elevator hydraulic line. This 
resulted in a loss of hydraulic fluid and loss of pressurization in the number two system. The 
loss of this system resulted in the rudder being dependent upon the sole remaining activation 
system (hydraulic system number one) for its operation. After the landing gear was lowered 
manually, the aircraft landed without further incident, but because the loss of the number two 
system rendered the nose wheel steering inoperative, the aircraft had to be towed from the 
runway. The reason for the failure of the hydraulic line could not be positively determined.
The partial failure of one of the number two hydraulic system elevator hydraulic lines, leading 
to the loss of fluid and pressure in that system during cruise flight. This loss resulted in reliance 
upon the sole remaining activation system (number one hydraulic) to operate the rudder.
On March 1, 2002, approximately 1840 mountain standard time, a Horizon Airlines 
Bombardier DHC-8-401, N410QX, experienced a failure of the number two hydraulic system 
during en route cruise to Boise, Idaho. The airline transport pilot, his first officer, the two flight 
attendants, and the 69 passengers were not injured, and the aircraft did not sustain any 
damage. The 14 CFR Part 121 scheduled passenger flight, which departed Seattle-Tacoma 
International Airport, Seattle, Washington, about two hours earlier, was being operated in 
visual meteorological conditions. The flight, which was on an IFR flight plan, eventually landed 
at its destination around 1900. There was no emergency evacuation.
According to the flight crew, during en route cruise, they noticed the number two hydraulic 
system quantity beginning to decrease. As they began to run the appropriate checklist, they 
noticed the illumination of several hydraulic system caution lights. Eventually, the number two 
system lost pressurization, and the rudder became dependent upon the sole remaining system 
(hydraulic system number one) for its movement. After the landing gear was extended 
manually, the aircraft landed without further incident, but it had to be towed from the runway, 
as the failure of the number two system rendered the nose wheel steering inoperable.
It was later discovered that the number two system hydraulic line to the elevator had failed, 
leading to a loss of pressure in the number two system. The reason for the failure could not be 
positively determined.
