The commercial certificated pilot was on final approach for landing at a remote airport during 
a scheduled domestic passenger flight.  The airplane was about 300 feet above the ground, with 
15 degrees of flaps, and an airspeed of about 80 knots.  The pilot said that the airplane's 
airspeed seemed too fast, so he reduced engine power. The airplane's airspeed then became too 
slow, so he increased engine power, but the airplane collided with terrain short of the runway 
threshold.  The airplane received damage to the nose gear, propeller, and left wing.  The 
runway is 4,422 feet long, by 100 feet wide.
The failure of the pilot-in-command to maintain the proper glide path to the runway during the 
final approach for a VFR landing.
On March 1, 2002, about 1435 Alaska standard time, a Cessna 207A airplane, N7373U, 
sustained substantial damage during landing at the Kotlik Airport, Kotlik, Alaska.  The airplane 
was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) scheduled domestic passenger flight under 
Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was operated as Flight 408, 
by Hageland Aviation Services Inc., Anchorage, Alaska.  The commercial certificated pilot, and 
the four passengers, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  VFR 
company flight following procedures were in effect.  The flight originated at the Mountain 
Village Airport, Mountain Village, Alaska, at 1338.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 1, the director of operations for the operator reported 
the pilot told him that he was on final approach for landing on runway 19 at Kotlik.  The 
airplane was about 300 feet above the ground, with 15 degrees of flaps, and an airspeed of 
about 80 knots.  The pilot said that the airplane's airspeed seemed too fast, so he reduced 
engine power. The airplane's airspeed then became too slow, so he increased engine power, but 
the airplane collided with terrain short of the runway threshold.  The airplane received damage 
to the nose gear, propeller, and left wing.
Runway 19 at Kotlik has a gravel surface, and is 4,422 feet long, by 100 feet wide.  The remarks 
section of the airport facility directory/Alaska Supplement for Kotlik states, in part:  
"Unattended.  Runway condition not monitored, recommend visual inspection prior to 
landing.  ...Runway 01-19 marked with reflective cones."
