This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Ravenna, OH
Accident Number: CEN18FA045
Date & Time: 12/03/2017, 1140 EST
Registration: N2200T
Aircraft: PIPER TITAN TORNADO II D
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On December 3, 2017, at 1140 eastern standard time, an experimental amateur-built Piper 
Titan Tornado II D, N2200T, impacted terrain, while on final approach, about 0.8 miles from 
runway 27 at Portage County Airport (POV), Ravenna, Ohio. The airplane was destroyed by 
impact forces. The sport pilot sustained fatal injuries. The airplane was operated by the pilot 
under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight that was not operating on a 
flight plan. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The flight 
departed from POV about 1110.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: PIPER
Registration: N2200T
Model/Series: TITAN TORNADO II D
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: Yes
Operator: Pilot
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: POV, 1198 ft msl
Observation Time: 1133 EDT
Distance from Accident Site: 1 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 6°C / 0°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 5 knots / , 270°
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.22 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Ravenna, OH (POV)
Destination: Ravenna, OH (POV)
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude: 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Mitchell F Gallo
Additional Participating Persons: Alexander McAninch; Federal Aviation Administration; Cleveland FSDO; North Olmsted, OH
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
