This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Hernando, MS
Accident Number: ERA18LA039
Date & Time: 12/02/2017, 1700 CST
Registration: N7481ZK
Aircraft: Kevin Leue Sparrow Hawk
Injuries: 2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On December 2, 2017, about 1700 central standard time, an experimental amateur-built 
Sparrow Hawk gyroplane, N481ZK, impacted terrain near Eagles Ridge Airport (MS9), 
Hernando, Mississippi. The sport pilot and pilot-rated passenger were fatally injured. The 
gyroplane was destroyed by a postcrash fire, and was being operated under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91 as a local personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the flight.
There were no known witnesses to the departure or accident. According to an individual who 
was hunting, about 1700, he heard a loud sound similar to a gunshot, but dismissed it as 
another hunter. He left the area about dusk, and while walking, spotted a grass fire. He walked 
to a nearby home to tell the homeowner to call 911 to report the fire. First responders who 
arrived to extinguish the fire subsequently observed the wreckage.
The wreckage was recovered from the accident site and retained for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: Kevin Leue
Registration: N7481ZK
Model/Series: Sparrow Hawk
Aircraft Category: Gyroplane
Amateur Built: Yes
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation: OLV, 402 ft msl
Observation Time: 1650 CST
Distance from Accident Site: 13 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 19°C / 2°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Few / 25000 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: Calm / ,
Lowest Ceiling: 
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.11 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Hernando, MS (MS9)
Destination: Hernando, MS (MS9)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Passenger Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire: On-Ground
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: Unknown
Total Injuries: 2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude: 34.796667, -89.920833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Timothy W Monville
Additional Participating Persons: Allan Crabbe; FAA/FSDO; Jackson, MS
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
