National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Mount Airy, NC
Accident Number: GAA18CA067
Date & Time: 12/01/2017, 1600 EST
Registration: N701TF
Aircraft: TODD FOLEY ZENITH 701
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot of the experimental, amateur-built airplane reported that, during takeoff, he raised the nose after reaching about 20 mph, and about 40 mph, the airplane lifted off the runway.
He "held the stick back just a little [too] long and it started to tip stall to the left and [he] pushed the stick forward."
He added that he applied right aileron and rudder because the airplane was drifting to the left side of the runway.
Subsequently, the airplane aerodynamically stalled and bounced on the runway, and the right wheel separated from the airplane.
He then, with full power, continued to fly and make right aileron and rudder inputs to get back over the runway.
The airplane impacted the ground and came to rest inverted.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage, empennage, and wings.
The automated weather observation system at the accident airport reported that, about the time of the accident, the wind was from 090° at 4 knots.
The pilot was departing from runway 18.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's exceedance of the airplane's critical angle of attack during takeoff, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall.
Many stall accidents result when a pilot is momentarily distracted from the primary task of flying, such as while maneuvering in the airport traffic pattern, during an emergency, or when fixating on ground objects.
An aerodynamic stall can happen at any airspeed, at any altitude, and with any engine power setting.
Pilots need to be honest with themselves about their knowledge of stalls and preparedness to recognize and handle a stall situation.
Training can help pilots fully understand the stall phenomenon, including angle-of-attack (AOA) concepts and how weight, center of gravity, turbulence, maneuvering loads, and other factors can affect an airplane's stall characteristics.
The stall characteristics may be different in each type of airplane, so learn them before you fly.
The stall airspeeds marked on the airspeed indicator (for example, the bottom of the green arc and the bottom of the white arc) typically represent steady flight speeds at 1G at the airplane's maximum gross weight in the specified configuration.
Maneuvering loads and other factors can increase the airspeed at which the airplane will stall.
For example, increasing bank angle can increase stall speed exponentially.
Reducing AOA by lowering the airplane's nose at the first indication of a stall is the most important immediate response for stall avoidance and stall recovery.
This may seem counterintuitive at low altitudes, but is a necessary first step.
See http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_019.pdf for additional resources.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents.
Note that this should not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations (FARs).
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Eric A Swenson Adopted Date: 02/21/2018 Additional Participating Persons: David Laycock; FAA; Greensboro, NC Publish Date: 02/21/2018 Note: This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=96414
