During the landing roll, when the dual student allowed the tailwheel aircraft to drift too close 
to the right side of the runway, the instructor applied left rudder and left brake. As he took this 
corrective action, the left main gear leg fractured and separated from the aircraft. NTSB 
examination of the fracture surface revealed that two fatigue cracks had initiated in corrosion 
pits created where the gear leg rubbed against the gear leg clamping system. The two cracks 
eventually combined to become one, and when loads were applied during the landing roll, an 
overstress separation stemming from the fatigue fracture region occurred. 
Separation by fracture of the left main gear leg, as the result of fatigue cracks that initiated in 
corrosion pits on the gear leg surface. 
 On April 1, 1998, approximately 1540 Pacific standard time, the left main gear of a Cessna 
195A, N1069D, separated from the aircraft during the landing roll at Bend Municipal Airport, 
Bend, Oregon. The certified flight instructor and his student, who is a private pilot, were not 
injured, but the aircraft, which was owned by the student, sustained substantial damage. The 
14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight, which had been in the air for about 40 minutes, was being 
operated in visual meteorological conditions. No flight plan had been filed, and there was no 
report of an ELT transmission.
According to the CFI, the student, who had recently purchased the aircraft, allowed the aircraft 
to drift toward the right edge of the runway during the landing roll. At the point where it 
looked like additional corrective action was necessary, the instructor took control and applied 
left brake and left rudder. At that point the left main gear leg fractured where it protrudes from 
the gear leg attach box.
NTSB examination of the fracture surface revealed that two separate fatigue cracks had 
initiated in an area of corrosion generated by the gear leg rubbing on the gear leg clamping 
system. These two cracks had  combined and formed a united crack front. When loads were 
applied to the gear leg during the landing roll, an overstress separation stemming from the 
fatigue fracture region occurred.
