The airplane impacted a lake following an uncontrolled descent after the pilot experienced 
spatial disorientation at night.  The pilot was an instrument approach to runway 18R when he 
reported to air traffic control that he had a 'full failure;'.  One minute later he reported a 'static 
failure,' and shortly afterwards he stated that the 'DG' was out of order.  Air traffic control then 
lost radio and radar contact with the airplane. The controller who was tracking the airplane 
stated that it appeared as if the airplane was 'going around in circles,' just before it disappeared 
from the radar scope. A survivor was rescued from the lake the following morning and reported 
that the pilot tapped on the instrument 'with the blue horizon' and stated that 'this instrument 
is not working.'  A post-accident examination of the vacuum pump, by the NTSB Materials 
Laboratory, revealed that the vacuum pump failed in-flight.  Post accident examination of the 
electrically driven turn coordinator did not produce sufficient evidence to determine whether 
or not it was functioning at impact. 
The pilot's inability to maintain control of the airplane after experiencing spatial 
disorientation. Factors were the total failure of the vacuum pump, fog, drizzle, and night 
conditions. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 2, 1998, at 2232 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-235 single engine airplane, 
N21LL, was destroyed when it impacted Lake Pontchartrain during an uncontrolled descent, 
near New Orleans, Louisiana.  The airplane was owned by Altair Aviation Inc., and operated by 
North American Flight Academy of Denton, Texas.  The instrument rated commercial pilot and 
two passengers sustained fatal injuries.  One passenger received minor injuries.  Night 
instrument meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 flight, for which an 
IFR flight plan was filed.  The personal cross country flight originated from the Denton 
Municipal Airport, Denton, Texas, at 1855. 
On April 2, 1998, at 2225, N21LL accepted a clearance from New Orleans Approach Control for 
the ILS runway 18R approach at the Lakefront Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana.  Subsequently, 
at 2228, the pilot reported to New Orleans Approach Control that he had a "full failure."  One 
minute later the pilot stated that he had a "static failure," and at 2230 he stated that his "DG" 
was "out of order."  At 2231, New Orleans Approach Control lost radio contact with N21LL.  At 
2232, New Orleans Approach Control lost radar contact with N21LL.  The last radar return 
showed the airplane at 800 feet above Lake Pontchartrain.  The controller who was tracking 
N21LL stated that it appeared as if the airplane was "going around in circles" at the time the 
airplane disappeared from the radar scope.  Search and rescue teams reported that the airplane 
came to rest on the bottom of Lake Pontchartrain, which is between 15 and 20 feet deep,  in an 
inverted position 
On April 3, 1998, approximately 1030, a survivor was rescued from the lake 3 miles from Goose 
Point, Lacombe, Louisiana.  The survivor reported that the flight's destination was the 
Lakefront Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana.  She stated that the flight was normal until "late" in 
the flight when the pilot tapped on the instrument "with the blue horizon" and stated that it 
was "not working."     
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a valid second class medical certificate, dated May 23, 1997.  According to the 
medical application he had accumulated a total of 300 flight hours.  A renter information form 
was provided by the operator.  The form was signed by the pilot in September of 1996, although 
the only aircraft check-out recorded on the sheet occurred on April 2, 1998.  The form 
indicated that the pilot had accumulated a total of 202 flight hours, of which 30 hours were in 
complex type airplanes.  Additionally, the form stated that the pilot had completed a biennial 
flight review in August of 1997.  According to a family member the pilot had accumulated a 
total of approximately 450 flight hours.
On September 9, 1997, the pilot obtained a commercial pilot certificate.  The certificate 
indicated that the pilot held single-engine land, multi-engine land, and instrument ratings.  
Attempts to locate the pilots flight logbook, to verify instrument and night flight time, were 
unsuccessful.    
The surviving passenger, who was seated in the left rear seat, stated that the purpose of the 
flight was for her daughter to visit the Tulane University in Louisiana, where she was a 
prospective student. The surviving passengers daughter, who sustained fatal injuries, was 
seated in the right front seat.  The passenger seated in the right rear seat, who sustained fatal 
injuries, was an alumni of the  Tulane University, and was going to accompany the mother and 
daughter during their tour of the university.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The yellow and green, 1969 Piper PA-28-235, serial number 28-11235, underwent an annual 
inspection on March 4, 1998, and had accumulated a total of 3,503.32 hours at the time of the 
accident.  The last altimeter and static check (as required by  14 CFR Part 91.411) was 
performed on December 8, 1997.  The airplane was powered by a 235-horsepower Lycoming O-
540-B4B5 engine.  The engine had accumulated a total of 1,602.6 hours since major overhaul, 
as of March 4, 1998.  Additionally, the airplane was equipped with a Hartzell model number 
HC-C2YK-1BF, two bladed, constant speed propeller.  
The airplane was equipped with an engine driven dry air pressure vacuum pump.  The vacuum 
pump provided power to the directional gyro (heading indicator) and the artificial horizon 
(attitude indicator).  The vacuum pump was an Airborne model number 211CC, serial number 
7J4527.  According to the aircraft logbook, the pump was installed on the engine on September 
27, 1982, and had accumulated a total of 1,241.5 hours at the time of the accident.  
Additionally, the vacuum system was not equipped with a backup power source.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
On April 2, 1998, at 1907, the pilot received a standard IFR weather briefing and filed an IFR 
flight plan for a flight from Denton, Texas, to the Lakefront Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana, 
with the Fort Worth Flight Service Station.  
At 2226, a pilot, who executed the ILS runway 18R approach at the Lakefront Airport, reported 
that he broke out of the cloud layer while descending through 700 feet.
At 2230, a pilot, who was in the vicinity of the airport, reported that the cloud tops were "about 
eight [or] nine thousand [feet]."
At 2251, approximately 19 minutes after the accident occurred, the weather observation facility 
located at the Lakefront Airport recorded the following conditions: winds from 160 degrees at 
8 knots, visibility 3 miles, light rain and mist(fog), ceiling 600 feet broken, 1500 feet overcast, 
temperature 73 degrees Fahrenheit and dewpoint 72 degrees Fahrenheit.  The remarks portion 
of the sequence report stated: ceiling 500 feet variable 800 feet.
At 2253, approximately 21 minutes after the accident occurred, the weather observation facility 
located at the New Orleans International Airport (Moisant Field), located  approximately 15 
nautical miles southwest of the accident site, recorded the following conditions: winds from 
160 degrees at 8 knots, visibility 2 miles, light rain and mist(fog), ceiling 600 feet broken, 1,500 
feet overcast, temperature 73 degrees Fahrenheit and dewpoint 72 degrees Fahrenheit.  The 
remarks portion of the sequence report stated: surface visibility 3 miles.
COMMUNICATIONS
The following times and accounts were extracted from an FAA certified transcript of radio 
communications between New Orleans Approach Control and the pilot of N21LL. 
2225:03:  N21LL was cleared for the ILS runway 18R approach at the Lakefront Airport.  The 
pilot acknowledged the clearance and was then informed by the controller that the airplane 
which had just executed the ILS 18R approach broke out at seven hundred feet.  
2228:02:  The controller asked N21LL if the airplane was established on the localizer, and the 
pilot responded, "negative."  The controller stated that the approach clearance was cancelled 
and instructed the pilot to fly a heading of 270 degrees and maintain an altitude of two 
thousand feet.  
2228:20:  The pilot of N21LL stated "Mam, I have a full failure at this time and I'm climbing 
straight up, I hope."  
2229:15:  The pilot of N21LL stated "I'm just trying to keep this thing straight up, I'm having a 
static failure."  
2230:06:  The pilot of N21LL stated "Turning to a heading of two seven zero degrees and my 
DG is out of order."   
2231:25:  The pilot of N21LL reported that the airplane was "crashing."
Multiple attempts by the controller at New Orleans Approach Control to contact the pilot were 
unsuccessful. 
See the attached FAA certified radio communications transcript for additional details.   
 RADAR
According to radar data provided by the New Orleans Air Traffic Control Facility, the last 
image of the aircraft was observed at 800 feet, North 30 degrees 13.70 minutes Latitude and 
West 090 degrees 01.00 minutes Longitude, approximately 8 miles north of the Lakefront 
Airport..
See the attached FAA certified radar data for additional details.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on April 10, 1998, by the St. Tammany Parish Coroner's 
Office, located in Covington, Louisiana.  Toxicological test results were negative. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
On April 3, 1998, at 0711, a wheel and small debris were recovered, by search and rescue 
personnel, from Lake Pontchartrain, at North 30 degrees 13.70 minutes and West 090 degrees 
01.00 minutes, 8 miles north of the Lakefront Airport, New Orleans, Louisiana.  On April 13, 
1998, airplane was recovered from the lake and transported to a hangar at the Lakefront 
Airport, where an examination of the airframe and engine was conducted.
The engine cowling separated from the airframe.  The cabin floor separated from the main spar 
of the airframe, and the remainder of the cabin area and the fuselage stayed intact.  The right 
main landing gear was attached to the right wing structure, and the right wing remained 
attached to the fuselage by control cables only.  The right wing (outboard section) was crushed 
inward from the leading edge to the center of the wing, and the right wing tip separated from 
the wing.  The left main landing gear separated from the left wing, and the left wing separated 
from the fuselage.  The center of the left wing was buckled upwards in the shape of a "V," and 
the left wing tip separated from the wing.  The flaps and ailerons remained attached to their 
respective wings.  Both flaps were in the retracted position.  The left aileron cable was severed 
at the wing root and exhibited signs of tensile overload.  The right aileron cable was severed in 
multiple areas and exhibited signatures of tensile overload.  The empennage separated from 
the fuselage and remained intact.  Control cables for the rudder and elevator were severed in 
multiple areas and exhibited signatures of tensile overload.
The propeller remained attached to the engine, and the propeller blades remained attached to 
the hub.  Both propeller blades were loose in the propeller hub and exhibited "S" bending.  
The engine was not attached to the engine mounts, but remained attached to the firewall.  The 
engine crankshaft was rotated and each of the six cylinders exhibited "thumb compression."  
Valve action and continuity to the accessory gears was confirmed.  The muffler and exhaust 
pipes leading into the muffler were crushed.  The vacuum pump, magnetos, oil filter and 
engine driven fuel pump were attached to the engine accessory housing assembly. The engine 
driven fuel pump was removed, and the pump sucked and pumped fuel when operated by 
hand.  The vacuum pump was removed and examined at the NTSB Materials Laboratory in 
Washington, D.C.  See the Tests and Research section of this report for additional details.  The 
investigation did not produce any evidence that the engine was not capable of operating and 
producing power prior to impact.  
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The vacuum pump was examined at the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, D.C.  The 
rotor pieces did not exhibit rotational scoring.  One of the rotor pieces had a gouge on the vane 
slot surface.  The internal surface of the pump body exhibited evidence of rotational scoring 
and had two areas where the scoring had created depressions.  One of the pump vanes 
separated through its center and the fracture surface was smooth and had a polished 
appearance, "as if the two surfaces [had] been rubbing along eachother."  The fracture surfaces 
of the other vanes and rotor parts were rough and had a matte appearance.  The vacuum pump 
drive shaft was separated in two segments.  The fracture surface of the shaft exhibited 
stretching of the material in one direction due to overheating, "which is indicative of torsional 
overstress."  See the NTSB Materials Laboratory Factual Report for additional details.
The electrical driven turn coordinator was examined at the NTSB Materials Laboratory in 
Washington D.C.  The external housing exhibited no evidence of impact damage and was not 
compromised.  A functional test of the turn coordinator revealed that the gyro would not 
function due to an open circuit.  Although several of the wires emanating from the circuit card 
were separated and exhibited evidence of either tensile overload or mechanical cutting.  The 
internal components of the gyro assembly were not damaged, yet severe corrosion was present.  
Approximately 2 ounces of gray sediment was found inside the instrument.  No circumferential 
score marks were noted.  The main bearing spun freely with no binding noted.  The 
inclinometer portion of the instrument was intact and filled with fluid.  The ball moved freely 
during manual rotation of the instrument.  Additionally, there was no evidence of "needle slap" 
marks.  See the NTSB Materials Laboratory Factual Report for additional details.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The four place airplane was equipped with lap belts, but was not equipped with shoulder 
harnesses.  The airplane was not equipped with a floatation raft.  The surviving passenger 
stated that she does not remember how she exited the airplane, however she does recall "a 
force that pushed her upwards."  The airplane is equipped with one cabin door exit, which is 
equipped with a double latch and is located at the right front seat of the airplane.  No 
additional emergency exits were designated for this airplane.  Additionally, search and rescue 
personnel stated that the underwater visibility was limited due to the brackish water 
conditions.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane and all components were released to the owner's representative.
