The pilot, and two passengers, were taxiing for takeoff in a wheel/ski equipped, tailwheel 
airplane.  The flight was a VFR air taxi flight from a remote lake.  The landing/departure area 
was about 3,500 feet long, and covered by soft snow.  As the pilot began to taxi, he noticed the 
snow was softer than anticipated, so he began several taxi runs to pack down the snow for 
takeoff.  During a turn, the right ski encountered soft snow and sank.  The right wing struck the 
snow, and the airplane nosed over.  The airplane received damage to the right wing, and 
propeller. 
The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for takeoff.  Soft, snow covered terrain was a factor in 
the accident. 
 On April 3, 1998, about 1900 Alaska standard time, a wheel/ski equipped Cessna 185F 
airplane, N1205F, sustained substantial damage while taxiing for a takeoff from a remote lake, 
about 50 miles northeast of Coldfoot, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight 
rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14 CFR Part 135 when the accident 
occurred.  The airplane was registered to the pilot, and operated by North Quest Aviation, 
North Pole, Alaska.  The certificated commercial pilot, and the two passengers were not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  A VFR flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on April 6, 1998, at 1050, the pilot reported he landed at Squaw 
Lake about 1830.  The landing/departure area was about 3,500 feet long.  He loaded his 
passengers and began to taxi for takeoff from a mining camp.  The snow was softer than 
anticipated, so the pilot began several taxi runs to pack down the snow for takeoff.  During a 
turn, the right ski encountered soft snow and sank.  The right wing struck the snow, and the 
airplane nosed over.  The airplane received damage to the right wing, and propeller.  
Company personnel reported the flight was overdue, and a search was initiated.  Search 
personnel located the accident site on 4/4/98.
