While practicing soft-field takeoffs in a single-control throw-over yoke aircraft, the student 
pulled the aircraft off the runway prior to attaining enough speed to remain airborne. 
Immediately after becoming airborne, the aircraft banked sharply to the left, dropped onto the 
runway, and bounced back into the air. According to the instructor pilot, when he saw that the 
aircraft was going to lift off prematurely, he commanded the student to lower the nose. But, the 
student did not lower the nose enough, and the instructor did not apply forward pressure to the 
central control pedestal to keep the aircraft from lifting off too early. It was later discovered 
that the left wing had impacted the asphalt surface when the aircraft dropped back onto the 
runway. 
The flight instructor's inadequate supervision and the dual student's premature lift off which 
resulted in inadequate airspeed, a stall, and collision with the ground. 
 On April 1, 1998, approximately 1110 Pacific standard time, the left wing of a Beech 35-C33, 
N1310A, impacted the runway immediately after a premature liftoff at Portland-Hillsboro 
Airport, Hillsboro, Oregon. The certified flight instructor and his student, who holds a private 
pilot certificate, were not injured, but the aircraft, which was owned and operated by Tektronix 
Flying Club, sustained substantial damage. The 14 CFR Part 91 local instructional flight was 
being operated in visual meteorological conditions. No flight plan had been filed, and there was 
no report of an ELT transmission.
According to the FAA inspector who talked to the instructor, while practicing soft-field 
takeoffs, the student pulled the aircraft into the air prior to attaining enough speed to remain 
airborne. The aircraft almost immediately banked sharply to the left, and dropped back onto 
the runway hard enough to be "jolted" back into the air. The takeoff was then continued, 
followed by an immediate return to inspect for damage. 
According to the instructor pilot, when the aircraft, which was configured with a single throw-
over control yoke, began lifting off, he commanded the student to "drop the/your nose."  The 
student did not drop the nose enough to avoid the premature lift-off, and the instructor did not 
attempt to apply forward pressure on the central control pedestal to keep the aircraft from 
lifting off too early.
