The flight had departed runway 14, and had reached an altitude of about 200 feet, when  the 
pilot reported a loss of engine power.  The pilot elected to make a forced landing straight ahead 
into trees.  After impact, the pilot closed off the fuel valve.  Examination of the wreckage after 
the accident revealed that the fuel tanks had fuel.  The pilot said the fuel selector was on the left 
tank when the loss of power occurred.  Observation of the engine at the crash site did not reveal 
any obvious discrepancies.  The engine was removed from the airframe and examined at the 
NTSB's request, and under the supervision of the FAA, on June 24, 1998.  The engine 
examination revealed that the fuel control system exhibited fluid leakage at the fuel pump and 
throttle shaft.  Detailed examination of the fuel pump showed that the pump leaked fluid at the 
rear high speed adjusting needle at the seal to the pump body.  There was no evidence of 
impact damage observed on the fuel pump.  In addition, the throttle/metering unit leaked fluid 
at the throttle shaft into the metering unit.  The leak at the throttle shaft was severe enough 
that no flow test was possible.  The throttle arm displayed impact damage.  The throttle shaft 
was removed from the unit, and the 'O' ring seal was found flat from wear.  The 'O' ring was 
replaced and the leakage stopped.  The unit was then flow tested to manufacturer's standards. 
No other discrepancies were found during the engine examination 
a loss of engine power due to fuel leakage at the fuel control, resulting in a forced landing, and 
subsequent impact with trees. 
 On April 2, 1998, about 1400 eastern standard time, a Beech F33A, D-ECTB (German), 
registered to a private individual, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 local personal flight, 
impacted with trees during a forced landing near Fort Pierce, Florida.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The airplane was destroyed.  The private-
rated pilot was not injured.  The flight was originating from the Fort Pierce Airport at the time.
The flight had departed runway 14, and had reached an altitude of about 200 feet, when  
the pilot reported a loss of engine power.  The pilot elected to make a forced landing straight 
ahead into trees.  After impact, the pilot closed off the fuel valve.  Examination of the wreckage 
after the accident revealed that the fuel tanks had fuel.  The pilot said the fuel selector was on 
the left tank when the loss of power occurred.
Observation of the engine at the crash site did not reveal any obvious discrepancies.  The 
engine was removed from the airframe and shipped to Continental Motor's facilities, Mobile, 
Alabama, and examined at the NTSB's request, and under the supervision of the FAA, on June 
24, 1998.  The engine examination revealed that the fuel control system exhibited fluid leakage 
at the fuel pump and throttle shaft.  Detailed examination of the fuel pump showed that the 
pump leaked fluid at the rear high speed adjusting needle at the seal to the pump body.  There 
was no evidence of impact damage observed on the fuel pump.  In addition, the 
throttle/metering unit leaked fluid at the throttle shaft into the metering unit.  The leak at the 
throttle shaft was severe enough that no flow test was possible.  The throttle arm displayed 
impact damage.  The throttle shaft was removed from the unit, and the "O" ring seal was found 
flat from wear.  The ring was replaced and the leakage stopped.  The unit was then flow tested 
to manufacturer's standards.  No other discrepancies were found during the engine 
At the airplane owner's request, the engine was shipped to Fort Pierce, Florida, on July 
23, 1998, directly from TCM, Mobile, Alabama.
