The pilot departed the round trip cross country flight with a total of 50 gallons of fuel.  The first 
flight was 2 hours and 15 minutes.  Prior to the return night flight, the pilot elected not to refuel 
the airplane.  The airplane was one hour into the return flight, 70 nautical miles from the 
departure point, and 90 miles from the final destination, when the engine lost total power.  The 
pilot then performed a forced landing, during which the airplane impacted trees.  Examination 
of the wreckage revealed no evidence of preimpact failures with the airplane.  A few 
tablespoons of fuel was observed in the carburetor gascolator.  Both main fuel tanks had 
ruptured and were absent of fuel.  There was no evidence of a fuel spill in the vicinity of the 
wreckage.  The last refueling facility was tested and found free from contamination.   The fuel 
burn was calculated to be 14 gallons per hour allowing a total flight endurance of 3.5 hours 
with no reserve.  The airplane was operated for 3.3 hours prior to losing total engine power. 
The pilot's inadequate preflight planning and preparation, and his failure to refuel which 
resulted in fuel exhaustion and the subsequent collision with trees during the forced landing. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 2, 1996, about 2045 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-32-260, N5538J, 
operated by Airpark Sales and Service, Inc., was destroyed when it impacted trees during a 
forced landing near Felton, Pennsylvania.  The certificated commercial pilot and one passenger 
were seriously injured, and a second passenger was fatally injured.  Night visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the flight that departed the Wilkes-Barre/Scranton International 
Airport (AVP), Scranton, Pennsylvania, about 1945, destined for the Saint Marys County 
Airport (2W6), Leonardtown, Maryland.  No flight plan was filed for the personal flight 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
A passenger on the flight prior to the accident flight stated that the purpose of the round 
trip flight from 2W6 to AVP was to drop him off at AVP.  The flight departed 2W6 about 1715, 
and arrived at AVP about 1930.  After the passenger deplaned at AVP, he asked the pilot if he 
wanted to refuel, and the pilot responded no.  The flight then departed AVP destined for 2W6.
A witness in the area of the accident reported hearing the airplane's engine cutting in 
and out several times.  Another witness who observed the accident, stated that he did not hear 
any noise from the airplane.
The accident occurred during the hours of darkness, at approximately 39 degrees, 52 
minutes north latitude, 76 degrees, 33 minutes west latitude, at an elevation of 790 feet.
WRECKAGE EXAMINATION
The wreckage was examined at the accident site on December 3 and 4, 1996.  The 
examination revealed that all major components of the airplane were accounted for at the 
scene, and that the airplane came to rest in an open field on an approximate magnetic heading 
of 310 degrees.  The wreckage came to rest about 70 miles from the departure point, and 90 
miles from the final destination.  Wreckage was strewn about a magnetic path of 065 degrees.  
Examination of the wreckage did not disclose evidence of mechanical malfunctions with the 
airframe or engine. 
The engine was examined at the accident site.  The engine was rotated by hand through 
the propeller which remained attached to the engine.  Valve train continuity was observed on 
all cylinders, and thumb compression was obtained on all cylinders through removal of the 
bottom spark plugs.  All bottom spark plugs were removed and the electrodes were gray in 
color, except the number 6 plug, which had oil deposits.  All top spark plugs were removed and 
the number 1, 3, and 5 electrodes were light gray, while the number 2, 4, and 5 electrodes were 
light brown.  The left magneto was removed and spark was observed on all four towers, when 
rotated by hand.
The main fuel tanks were ruptured, and no fuel was observed in the tanks.  The fuel 
selector valve was found selected to the right main fuel tank and fuel was observed in the main 
fuel line from the fuel selector valve to the engine.  The carburetor, which was found separated 
from the engine, contained 4 tablespoons of fuel.  A layer of a brownish-red substance was 
observed in the carburetor bowl with the fuel.  The electric fuel pump contained about 3 
teaspoons of fuel.  Fuel removed from the electric fuel pump and the fuel selector valve both 
contained a brownish-red substance.  When the fuel was tested with water finding paste, it 
revealed that water was present in the fuel.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land 
and instrument airplane.  The pilot also held a flight instructor certificate with ratings for 
airplane single engine land.  The pilot's most recent Federal Aviation Administration second 
class medical certificate was issued on March 28, 1996, with no limitations.  A review of the 
pilot's most recent pilot log book revealed that he had accumulated about 490 hours, of which 
approximately 20 hours were in make and model.
On January 29, 1997, a copy of the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report form, 
6120.1/2, was faxed to a family member.  Also, several telephone messages were left with the 
same family member over the course of the investigation in an attempt to contact the pilot.  
The NTSB IIC did not receive the 6120.1/2 form or any return telephone calls from the pilot. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
On December 19, 1996, the NTSB investigator in charge (IIC) requested the Federal 
Aviation Administration, Flight Standards District office, with jurisdiction over 2W6, to test 
the fuel farm.  The test results for the fuel farm at 2W6 were negative for contamination.
On January 29, 1997, the engine was disassembled and examined at Textron Lycoming, 
Williamsport, Pennsylvania, under the supervision of the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) Inspector.  According to the FAA Inspector, there was no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions during the examination.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The owner/operator reported that the airplane departed 2W6 with the main fuel tanks 
topped off, and that the tip tanks were empty.
A passenger on the flight prior to the accident flight stated that when the flight 
originated, both tip tank fuel gages read zero.  He stated that the flight duration from 2W6 to 
AVP was about 2 hours and 15 minutes, and started with the right main fuel tank selected.  An 
hour into the flight, the pilot selected the left main fuel tank for 1/2 hour, and then completed 
the flight with the right main fuel tank selected.  The passenger deplaned at AVP just prior to 
the accident flight and stated that he was not aware of the fuel tank selection for the accident 
flight.
The Owner's Handbook for the PA-32-260 stated:
"The total fuel capacity of the Cherokee Six is 84 gallons, all of which is usable except for 
approximately one pint in each of the four tanks.  The two main inboard tanks, which hold 25 
gallons each, are attached to the wing structure with screws and nut plates and can be removed 
easily for service or inspection.  The tip tanks are constructed of resin-impregnated fiberglass 
and hold 17 gallons each."
The Owner's Handbook cruise performance chart depicted a fuel burn of 14 gallons per 
hour (GPH) with 75 percent power, and the mixture leaned per Lycoming instructions.
According to the operator's records, the pilot rented the airplane at a hobbs meter 
reading of 16.9, and at the accident site, the hobbs meter reading was 20.2.  The total flight 
time was calculated to be 3.3 hours.
With a fuel burn of 14 GPH and 50 gallons of fuel, a total flight endurance of 3.5 hours 
was calculated, with no reserve.
