The pilot obtained a weather forecast in the morning for a flight initiated in the afternoon.  
While en route he encountered low clouds short of his destination.  He called the airport of 
intended landing and found that the existing weather was instrument meteorological 
conditions.  He descended through a hole in the clouds in an attempt to locate visual 
instrument conditions, was unable to do so, and made an emergency landing on unsuitable 
terrain. 
the pilot's intentional flight into adverse weather.  Factors were clouds, the pilot's inadequate 
in-flight planning/decision making, his poor evaluation of the weather, and the encounter with 
unsuitable terrain for landing. 
 On December 3, 1996, at 1440 central standard time, a Cessna 177, N30255, sustained 
substantial damage during an emergency landing in a rough farm field, five miles east of 
Regan, North Dakota.  The pilot told investigators that he was flying VFR on top and decided to 
descended below the clouds.  When he did so, he was unable to maintain VFR and initiated an 
emergency landing in a rough farm field.  The non-instrument rated private pilot and one 
passenger reported no injuries.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight encountered instrument 
meteorological conditions at the accident site.  No flight plan was on file.  The flight departed 
Harvey, North Dakota, about 1400, with the intended destination of Bismarck, North Dakota.
The pilot said that he called for a weather briefing the morning of the accident.  He said the 
weather was VFR at that time.  He then initiated the flight about 1400, but attained no 
additional weather information, prior to the flight.  He said that en route to Bismarck he 
encountered clouds obscuring the terrain and that he was "on top" at 4,000 feet mean sea level.  
He said that he called Bismarck, checking for VFR conditions, but found that the airport was 
reporting instrument meteorological conditions.  He said that he then elected to descend 
through a hole in the clouds.  He found that visibility and the ceiling prevented him from 
maintaining VFR and he conducted an emergency landing in a field which he said was 
approximately 36 miles northeast of Bismarck.
