The private pilot lost directional control of the airplane approximately 200 feet after a 'smooth 
landing' on runway 24. The pilot reported that the airplane pulled to the left abruptly and 
control became erratic. After the airplane left the runway, the pilot attempted to abort the 
landing by adding power. He stated that the airplane became airborne, but he was unable to 
establish a positive climb rate, so he elected to reduce the power and land. The airplane crossed 
the runway and came to rest north of the runway. Examination of the airplane revealed that the 
left main landing gear tire was blown at the side wall. The pilot stated that the blown tire 
precipitated the initial loss of control. The passenger concurred with the pilot stating that 'the 
landing was very smooth.'  The recorded winds at the airport, 8 minutes before the accident, 
were from 280 degrees at 8 knots. The pilot reported that the winds at the time of the accident 
were from 210 degrees at 8 gusting to 20 knots. 
failure of the pilot to maintain directional control during landing roll, and his delayed aborted 
landing.  The gusty crosswind and blown left main tire were considered to be related factors. 
 On December 1, 1996, at 0845 mountain standard time, a Bellanca 17-30A airplane, N39812, 
was substantially damaged following a loss of control while landing near Ruidoso, New Mexico.  
The airplane was registered and operated by a private owner under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The 
private pilot and his passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the 112 nautical miles cross country flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  The personal 
flight originated from Santa Teresa, New Mexico, at 0800.
The pilot reported that his flare and touchdown on runway 24 at the Sierra Blanca Regional 
Airport, near Ruidoso, New Mexico, were uneventful.  He added that during the landing roll, 
about 200 feet beyond the touch down point, the airplane "abruptly pulled to the left" and as 
he corrected with right rudder, the airplane swung hard to the right.  The pilot further stated 
that the airplane veered to the left about 70 to 90 degrees crossing the runway.  The pilot added 
that he added power in an attempt to abort the landing.  The airplane became airborne but 
could not establish a positive climb rate, so the pilot elected to retard  the throttle and control 
was lost as the airplane touched down the second time.  
Examination of the airplane revealed structural damage to all 3 landing gears and both wings.  
The pilot reported that the left main gear tire was found blown at the side wall.  The 600x6 tire 
had accumulated a total of 200 hours.  The pilot stated that the blown tire precipitated the 
initial loss of control.  The passenger concurred with the pilot stating that "the landing was very 
smooth."  
The recorded winds at the airport, 8 minutes prior to the accident, were from 280 degrees at 8 
knots.  The pilot reported that the winds at the time of the accident were from 210 degrees at 8 
knots, gusting to 20 knots.
