While in cruise flight the engine lost power, and the pilot elected to land on a road.  As the 
airplane touched down the left wing struck the brush on the side of the road, veered left, and 
turned 180 degrees opposite the direction of travel.   Witnesses reported seeing black smoke 
coming from the engine before impact.  The airplane's engine was disassembled, and the 
examination revealed that the No. 3 connecting rod cap had become detached from the 
crankshaft assembly, resulting in external damage to the engine.  In addition, the remaining 
connecting rod assemblies were found to be incorrectly installed, and the nuts were all found 
opposite end down.  The No. 2 and No. 4 assemblies were found to be loose. 
a complete loss of engine power due to a disconnected connecting rod cap. 
 On December 1, 1996, about 1200 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-180, N9545J, 
registered to a private owner, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91, personal flight, crashed 
during a forced landing near Sugarloaf Key, Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  The airplane was substantially damage.  The private 
pilot received serious injuries, and one passenger received minor injuries.
While in cruise flight the pilot noticed a fluctuation in engine rpm.  The engine lost 
power, and the pilot elected to land on a road.  As the airplane touched down the left wing 
struck the brush on the side of the road, veered left, and turned 180 degrees opposite the 
direction of travel.   Witnesses reported seeing black smoke coming from the engine before 
impact. 
The airplane's engine was disassembled under the supervision of the FAA, at Certified 
Engines Inc., Opa-Locka, Florida, on December 12, 1996.  The engine examination revealed 
that the No. 3 connecting rod cap had become detached from the crankshaft assembly, 
resulting in external damage to the engine.  In addition, the FAA inspector stated, the 
remaining connecting rod assemblies were found to be "incorrectly installed," and the nuts 
were "all found opposite end down."  The No. 2 and No. 4 assemblies were found to be "loose."
