According to the pilot, the glider was released from the tow plane at 3,000 feet. After soaring 
for approximately 25 minutes in the vicinity of the airport, he maneuvered the glider to land on 
runway 17. The pilot added that on final approach, at approximately 250 feet AGL, 'the sail 
plane encountered a sink' and he realized that he would not be able to clear power lines at the 
approach end of the runway. The pilot stated that he elected to execute an 'off airport landing' 
in a field north of his position. The pilot turned right and executed a downwind landing with a 
15 knot tailwind in the field that he had selected. During the landing roll, the root of the glider's 
right wing impacted a fence post. 
the pilot misjudged his distance and altitude during the landing approach.  Factors relating to 
the accident were: the high obstructions (power lines), and subsequent tailwind during the 
forced landing. 
 On December 2, 1996, at 1545 central standard time, a Let L23 glider, N290SB, was 
substantially damaged while landing near Bryan, Texas.  The glider, owned and operated by 
West Wings Aviation of Bryan, Texas, was being operated under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The 
commercial pilot, sole occupant of the aircraft, was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the personal local flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  The 
glider departed in tow from Coulter Field at 1515.
According to the pilot, the glider was released from the tow plane at 3,000 feet.  After soaring 
for approximately 25 minutes in the vicinity of the airport, he maneuvered the glider to land on 
runway 17.  The pilot added that on final approach, at approximately 250 feet AGL, "the sail 
plane encountered a sink" and he realized that he would not be able to reach the airport and 
clear the power lines at the approach end of the runway.  
The pilot stated that he elected to execute an "off airport landing" in a field north of his 
position.  The pilot turned right and executed a downwind landing in the field he selected.  The 
pilot added that the 15 knot tailwind substantially increased the glider's ground speed and 
ground roll.  During the landing roll, the root of the glider's right wing impacted a fence post 
resulting in a loss of control.
Post accident examination of the glider by the operator revealed structural damage to the 
airframe as well as the right wing.  The pilot stated that the winds at the time of the accident 
were from 180 degrees at 15 knots.
The commercial pilot was rated in single and multi-engine airplanes.  He was properly 
endorsed by a flight instructor for solo flights in the glider and had accumulated a total of 8.9 
hours in gliders, of which 4 hours were solo.
