The airplane's engine lost complete power, and the pilot requested radar vectors to the nearest 
airport. While on short final, the airplane struck trees, turned 180 opposite the direction of 
travel, and impacted the ground. The pilot stated that just after establishing radar contact with 
ATC, the airplane 'experienced [a] power failure.'  The engine then surged momentarily for 
about 30 seconds, then stopped. The pilot did not try to restart the engine again. He performed 
a forced landing, but was not able to reach the airport due to head winds. The airplane had 
begun a descent from 6,000 feet, shortly before the engine failed. The carburetor heat control 
was found in the 'cold' position, and the fuel selector was 'on.'  Fuel was found in both fuel 
tanks. The airplane's engine was examined, started, and ran without any discrepancies noted. 
About 31 miles west-southwest at Valdosta, Ga, the temperature and dew point at 1955 EST 
were 46 and 41 degrees, respectively. According to icing probability charts, conditions at 
Valdosta were conducive for carburetor ice. 
carburetor ice, due to the pilot's improper use of carburetor heat, which resulted in a forced 
landing and impact with trees. 
 On December 2, 1996, about 2025 eastern standard time, a Cessna 150H, N6532S, 
registered to a private owner, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91, personal flight, crashed 
during a forced landing near Homerville, Georgia.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and a VFR flight plan was filed.  The airplane was substantially damage.  The airline transport 
pilot, and one passenger were not injured.
The airplane's engine lost complete power, and the pilot requested radar vectors to the 
nearest airport.  The pilot was vectored to Homerville, and while on short final, the airplane 
struck trees, turned 180 opposite the direction of travel, and impacted the ground.
The pilot stated that just after establishing radar contact with ATC, the airplane 
"experienced [a] power failure."  The engine then surged momentarily, for about 30 seconds 
then stopped.  The pilot did not try to restart the engine again, and performed a forced landing, 
but was not able to reach the airport because of the head winds.
According to the FAA inspector's statement, the airplane had begun a descent from 
6,000 feet, shortly before the engine failed.  The carburetor heat control was found in the 
"cold" position, and the fuel selector was "on."  Both fuel tanks, and the gascolator sump drain, 
"contained fuel."  The airplane's engine was examined, started and ran without any 
discrepancies noted.  The FAA inspector wrote in his statement that based on the engine run 
the cause of the loss of engine power "could not be determined."  He further stated "the 
possibility of carburetor icing does exist."
