The instrument-rated commercial pilot received a weather briefing for a VFR cross-country 
flight. The briefer described deteriorating VFR conditions along the pilot's route of flight, and 
the pilot elected not to file an IFR flight plan. The pilot departed on the flight and encountered 
dark night conditions in mountainous terrain near his destination. Lowering cloud ceilings and 
blowing snow were reported in the vicinity of the accident site about the time of the accident. 
The airplane impacted mountainous terrain near the top of a ridge about 20 miles from the 
intended destination. Radar data showed that the airplane had entered a climbing turn and 
was climbing through about 5000 feet msl when the last radar return was recorded. Elevation 
of the crash site was about 5000 feet. No distress calls or communications to ATC were made 
by the pilot, and no preimpact mechanical malfunction was found. 
continued VFR flight by the pilot into instrument meteorological conditions (IMC), and his 
failure to maintain sufficient altitude and/or clearance from mountainous terrain.  Factors 
relating to the accident were: darkness, low ceiling, and snow. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
     On January 1, 1996, about 1815 mountain standard time, N8870W, a Piper PA-28-235, 
collided with mountainous terrain and was destroyed near Lehi, Utah, while maneuvering.  The 
commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was fatally injured.  Instrument meteorological conditions 
(IMC) prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.  The personal flight departed from St. 
George, Utah, about 1630 and was destined for West Jordan, Utah.  The flight was conducted 
under 14 CFR 91.
     According to the FAA, the pilot received a weather briefing from the Cedar City FAA Flight 
Service Station (FSS) via telephone at 1424 (transcript attached).  The briefing ended six 
minutes later at 1430.  The pilot was told by the FSS briefer that an AIRMET existed for 
"possible mountain obscuration" along the pilot's intended route of flight.  The briefer also 
stated:
... forecast for Salt Lake for your arrival time [is for sky conditions of] two thousand  
[feet agl] scattered, [cloud] ceiling four thousand [feet agl] overcast, light snow showers  in the 
vicinity with an occasional ceiling of two thousand [feet agl] broken that's valid  [until 1900 
hours] and then some lowering ceilings and show showers after that... 
     After receiving the briefing, the pilot told the briefer: "Well, it looks like I could probably go 
up there at least give her a look.  It doesn't sound too bad."   The pilot then departed from 
Colorado City, Arizona, en route to Salt Lake City International Airport to meet an 
acquaintance.  He intended on flying back to Colorado City that evening.
     According to a line service person, the pilot arrived at the St. George Municipal Airport, 
Utah, about 1600.  The pilot had the accident airplane "topped off" with 60.7 gallons of 
automotive gasoline.  The line service person reported that the pilot did not indicate any 
problems with himself or the airplane. The airplane was then observed to depart the St. George 
Municipal Airport about 1630.
     According to recorded radar data (attached) from the FAA Air Traffic Control (ATC) facility 
at the Salt Lake City International Airport, four radar returns were recorded about 1.5 nautical 
miles south of the accident site about the time of the accident.  The radar returns were 
recorded at 1811 hours and were marked by a "1200" beacon code.  The returns indicated a 
climb from 4,800 feet above mean sea level (msl) to 5,000 feet msl, and a right turn from a 
magnetic heading of 313 degrees to 001 degrees.  
     No radio distress calls or communications of any kind from the accident airplane were 
reported or recorded by ATC.
     Later that evening, an emergency locator transmitter beacon was received by local 
authorities.  The wreckage was located about 20 nautical miles south of the destination airport 
at an elevation of 5,000 feet msl along a mountain ridge.
     The accident occurred during the hours of darkness at the following coordinates:  40 
degrees, 27.39 minutes North; 111 degrees, 54.55 minutes West.
 PERSONNEL INFORMATION
     The pilot, age 63, held an FAA certified flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane 
single engine land airplanes, multiengine land airplanes, and instrument airplanes.   According 
to FAA records, the pilot was issued an FAA Second Class Medical Certificate on December 29, 
1994, with the limitation that he "must wear corrective lenses."
     An examination of a copy of the pilot's flight logbook revealed that the pilot had logged a 
total of 4,904 hours of total flight time, including 3,012 hours of instruction given, 240 hours at 
night, 273 in simulated or actual instrument conditions, and 227 in type.  During the 90 days 
previous to the accident, the pilot had logged a total of 5.2 hours of flight in simulated or actual 
instrument conditions, and 22 hours of night flight 
  METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
     According to a Salt Lake City International Airport automatic terminal information service 
(ATIS) report issued 25 minutes prior to the accident, "snow showers of unknown intensity 
southwest through west" were reported.  The report also stated that scattered cloud layers were 
located at 1,500 feet and 3,600 feet above ground level (agl), with a measured overcast cloud 
ceiling of 5,000 feet agl.  (The field elevation at Salt Lake City International Airport is 4,227 
feet msl.  The elevation of the accident site was 5,000 feet msl.)
     According to a report filed by the Utah County Sheriff's Office (attached):
 Witnesses in Lehi, and Highland indicated that there was a "white out" type snow  
squall that came south from a point beginning [about] 1715 [hours].... The squall  was 
accompanied by high winds and horizontal snow creating a blizzard like   condition.  Upon 
my arrival in the area the roads were ice covered, and snow was  on  the north side of poles 
and trees.  There had obviously been a brief but intense  snow storm.... there was a small 
amount [of snow] on the wreckage strewn about.   Dark night conditions existed at the 
time of the accident.      
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
     The airplane wreckage was examined at the accident site one day after the accident on 
January 2, 1996.  
     The airplane came to rest near the top of a ridge, and the wreckage was distributed along a 
magnetic bearing of 052 degrees. The wreckage path was measured to be about 250 feet in 
length. The initial ground scar contained pieces of right wing tip fragments.  A piece of nose 
landing gear fairing, left stabilator tip, left aileron balance weight, outboard portion of the right 
wing, left aileron, and baggage door were found, in that order along the wreckage path.  The 
separated pieces were distributed along rising, flat terrain and led up to the aft fuselage and 
empennage, which was lying adjacent to the cockpit area, engine, propeller, and left wing. 
     No evidence of fire, explosion, or in-flight breakup was found.  All primary and secondary 
flight control surfaces were accounted for at the accident site.  No evidence was found to 
indicate a flight control deficiency. The mechanically-driven flap drive mechanism was 
examined; the mechanism was in the fully retracted position.
     The cockpit throttle, fuel mixture, and propeller controls were found in the full forward 
position.  The engine tachometer read 2,350 revolutions per minute.  The electric clock was 
stopped at 6:15.
     The engine, a Lycoming model O-540-B4B, and its accessories were partially disassembled 
and examined.  The crankshaft could be easily rotated in each direction through 360 degrees of 
rotation.  Crankshaft drive and valve train continuity was verified for all six cylinders during 
propeller rotation.  No evidence of fuel or oil contamination/blockage was evident.  No 
preimpact mechanical malfunctions were noted with the engine or any of its associated 
accessories.
     The two-bladed Hartzell metal propeller remained attached to the engine after the accident.  
It was then removed and examined. Both blades exhibited evidence of "S" bending and 
chordwise scratching.
 MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
     An autopsy was performed on the pilot by Dr. Edward A. Leis, M.D., of the State of Utah 
Office of the Medical Examiner, Salt Lake City, on January 2, 1996.  A toxicological analysis 
(attached) was performed on specimens taken from the pilot by the FAA Civil Aeromedical 
Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  
 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
     The aircraft wreckage was released to Mr. Merril Stubbs, Hildale, Utah, on January 2, 1996.  
Mr. Stubbs is representing the registered owner of the airplane.
