The pilot rented a multiengine airplane to fly 70 hours during a 3 week period.  The pilot and 
passenger departed, flew a 4.4 hour flight, and refueled with 73 gallons of fuel.  The pilot then 
flew 2 legs that totaled 3.5 hours, and refueled the airplane with 68.9 gallons.  Two days later 
the pilot departed on another leg that lasted 2 hours.  After a brief stop, and no refueling, the 
pilot departed on the accident leg.  About 1.5 hours after takeoff, during night IMC, the right 
engine lost power, followed by the left engine.  The pilot received radar vectors to an airport 
during the emergency descent and did not feather either propeller.  The airplane descended 
clear of the clouds and landed in an open field, 6 miles short of the airport.  Examination of the 
wreckage revealed 3 quarts of fuel in the right wing tanks, and 1 quart of fuel in the left wing 
tanks.  No fuel stains were noted on the fuselage, wings, or ground.  The capacity of the 
airplane's main and auxiliary fuel tanks were measured and verified during the investigation.  
The engines were removed, test run,  and ran normally.  The fuel burn during the tests were 
consistent with the manual. Based upon the average fuel consumption of the previous legs, 
about 39 gallons of fuel were unaccounted for at the accident scene. 
A loss of engine power as a result of fuel exhaustion. 
 On January 1, 1996, at 1750 eastern standard time (EST), a Piper PA-23-150, N1082P, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing near Silver Springs, Pennsylvania.  The 
commercial pilot and passenger were not injured.  Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the personal flight that originated at Poughkeepsie, New York, at 1621.  An IFR 
flight plan had been filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
    In the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the owner of the airplane stated that the pilot rented the 
airplane to fly 70 hours during a 3 week period.  The pilot arrived in Kansas City, Missouri, 
about 1130 EST, December 29, 1995, while the airplane was under going a 100 hour inspection.  
About 2100 EST, after the inspection was completed, the owner conducted a "2 hour training 
and check out flight" with the pilot.  The owner stated that the pilot flew well, and he "checked 
him out in the airplane."  At 0030 EST, the pilot departed Kansas City in the rented airplane. 
    In a written statement, the pilot said that he and a passenger departed Kansas City, on 
December 30, 1995, at 0100 EST.  After a 4 hour and 20 minute flight, they landed in 
Columbus, Ohio, refueled with 73 gallons of fuel, and departed about 0600.  The next leg to 
Gaithersburg, Maryland, was 2 hours in duration.  The airplane was not refueled at 
Gaithersburg, and the passenger was dropped off.  The pilot departed Gaithersburg and flew a 
1.5 hours flight to Latrobe, Pennsylvania, where the airplane was refueled with 68.9 gallons.  
    The airplane remained at Latrobe until January 1, 1996, when the pilot departed for the 
Dutchess County Airport (POU), Poughkeepsie, New York.  The flight time was about 2 hours, 
and the airplane was not refueled at POU.  The pilot then departed for Lynchburg, Virginia, 
with his passenger who had rejoined him at POU.  
    The pilot stated that about 1.5 hours after takeoff, at 8,000 feet:
"...Approximately 30 minutes after switching from the auxiliaries to the mains, the right engine 
lost power ...I fully enriched the mixtures and fully advanced the throttle and propeller 
controls.  I turned on the fuel pumps, and held my altitude while slowing the plane to blue line.  
We adjusted the carburetor heat on the right engine, and the engine momentarily regained 
power, but then immediately lost power...We advised ATC of the engine failure.  About this 
time (about 3 minutes after the right engine lost power), the left engine lost power.  We 
notified ATC that we had lost both engines, and the controller began turning us towards LRP 
[Lancaster]...I attempted to restart both engines with the starter, but this did not have any 
effect.  We were descending at about 1,250 feet per minute, and entered the overcast cloud 
layer at about 7,500 feet.  I intercepted the localizer, and was flying towards LRP.  We broke 
out of the clouds at about 4,500 feet, and spotted the beacon for LRP...I determined that we 
were not going to make it to LRP...I picked a field...at which point we began to manually extend 
the landing gear.  Before the landing gear was fully extended, we touched down in a field..."
    According to a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector, the airplane landed in a field 
about 6 miles southwest of the Lancaster Airport.  Examination of the wreckage revealed 3 
quarts of fuel in the right wing tanks, and 1 quart of fuel in the left wing tanks.  The fuel tanks 
were not ruptured, and no fuel stains were noted on the fuselage, wings, or ground.
    In a written statement, the lineman who refueled the airplane at Latrobe stated, "...fueled the 
aircraft with 100LL, which topped off all four tanks."  
    The engines were removed for examination and shipped to the Textron-Lycoming Plant, 
Williamsport, Pennsylvania.  On February 16, 1996, an FAA Inspector observed a test run of 
both engines.   In his statement, the Inspector stated:
"...Both engines ran normally, and the fuel burn was consistent with the manual.  No problems 
were found with the engines that would have contributed to the in-flight engine failure...."
    The capacity of the airplane's main and auxiliary fuel tanks were measured during the 
investigation.  In the FAA Inspector's report he stated:
"...I...witnessed the measurement of the fuel capacity of each of the four fuel tanks.  The two 
main fuel tanks held 30 gallons each, and the two auxiliary tanks held 18 gallons of fuel each.  
The two main tanks should hold 36 gallons...We concluded that the difference was due to the 
wing being on stands and not in the same position as when it was attached to the complete 
aircraft..."
    The last refueling at Latrobe provided an estimated fuel consumption of 19.7 gallons per 
hour (GPH).  The estimated fuel used during the 3.5 hours of flight since the last refueling was 
68.9 gallons.  At the time of the accident, fuel unaccounted for since the last refueling was 
approximately 39 gallons.  
    During a telephone interview with the pilot, he stated that he did not feather either of the 
propellers during the emergency.
    According to the Piper Owner's Handbook, under engine failure in the emergency 
procedures section, it stated:
"...While the plane is slowing down to the single engine cruising speed...the propeller on the 
dead engine should be feathered..."
    The Owner's Handbook also stated:
"...The Hartzell feathering propellers can only be feathered while the failed engine is rotating, 
and not if the engine stops completely..."
    The Piper Owner's Handbook did not discuss or list any procedures to follow in the event of a 
dual engine failure.  It also did not list a two engine-out glide speed, or provide an engine-out 
gliding distance chart.
    Manuals for similar weight Cessna and Beech light twin engine airplanes listed procedures to 
follow in the event of a dual engine out condition.  The manuals listed airspeeds and gliding 
distances with both propellers feathered.  The Cessna 310 Information Manual listed the best 
glide speed as 111 knots, and a glide distance 12 nautical miles from 7,000 feet above the 
ground.  The Beechcraft E55 Pilot's Operating Handbook listed the best glide speed as 120 
knots, and a glide distance of approximately 2 nautical miles per 1,000 feet above the ground, 
or 14 miles from 7,000 feet above the ground. 
    The National Transportation Safety Board, Office of Research and Engineering, provide a 
recorded radar study of N1082P.  The radar data depicted N1082P at 5,600 feet, 13.5 miles 
southwest of the Lancaster Airport, flying in a northeast direction.  Based upon that data, an 
estimated glide distance of 11 miles was computed from the Beech E55 best glide distance.
