The pilot said while on the ILS approach for runway 36 (5,500' x 100'), he had visual contact 
with the runway two miles out.  The airplane touched down 42 feet left of centerline and 8 feet 
right of the runway edge where the airplane contacted 30-inch deep snowdrifts.  There was a 
NOTAM (D) issued for the snow banks on the sides of the runway and a 75-foot width clearing 
between the snow banks. 
the pilot's failure to properly align the airplane for a safe landing on the runway.  Related 
factors were: the pilot's inadequate preflight planning/preparation, snow, the snow-covered 
runway, and snowbanks on the sides of the runway. 
 On January 4, 1996, at 1835 eastern standard time (est), a Piper PA-31-350, N111UC, 
registered to Executive Aviation Group, was substantially damaged following a loss of control 
during the landing roll on runway 36 (5,500'x 100'), at the Indianapolis Terry Airport, 
Indianapolis, Indiana.  The airline transport pilot reported no injuries.  The 14 CFR Part 91 
flight was operating in instrument meteorological conditions.  An IFR flight plan had been 
filed.  The flight originated from Cleveland, Ohio, at 1730 est. 
According to the pilot's written statement, while executing the ILS approach to runway 36, he 
gained visual contact with the runway two miles out. He also stated that during landing, the left 
main wheel stuck deep snow and the airplane turned to the left exiting the left side of the 
runway. 
Post accident examination of the airplane by the Federal Aviation Administration Principal 
Maintenance Inspector (PMI), stated that the airplane touched down 42 feet left of centerline 
and 8 feet right of the runway edge which was covered by approximately 30 inch deep 
snowdrifts.  The PMI stated that the pilot allowed the airplane to drift left about 500 feet down 
the runway where the left gear encountered the snowdrifts causing the airplane to turn left and 
become totally engulfed in the deep snow.  The airport manager/owner stated that a NOTAM 
(D) was issued for 2 foot snow banks at the sides with 75 feet width cleared for the runway 
used.  The runway surface was covered with 1 3/4 inches of dry powdery snow.
