The pilot stated that he encountered deteriorating weather while approaching his destination 
and elected to land on a public highway, and that the accident occurred during landing.  
However, a county sheriff's report indicated that the pilot told law enforcement personnel that 
he had landed on the highway earlier due to deteriorating weather and was attempting to take 
off again from the highway.  The pilot told law enforcement personnel that during the takeoff, a 
motor vehicle rounded a corner in the road and that he pulled up to avoid it, but that 'The 
plane wasn't ready to get airborne.'  The sheriff's report stated that after pulling up, the 
airplane touched down several times before impacting a bank along the side of the road.  
Statements from the vehicle driver and a local resident who lives along the highway supported 
the sequence of events given in the sheriff's report. 
the pilot's premature lift-off and inadequate airspeed following liftoff.  His use of a public 
highway as a takeoff area, and a motor vehicle on the highway, were factors. 
 On January 2, 1996, approximately 1330 Pacific standard time, a Cessna 170B, N2761D, 
received substantial damage when it impacted a roadside embankment after a loss of control 
on takeoff approximately 15 miles southeast of Baker City, Oregon.  The commercial pilot, who 
was the sole occupant of the aircraft and was not injured, was attempting to take off from a 
public highway.  The loss of control followed a near collision between the airplane and a motor 
vehicle on the highway.  The driver of the motor vehicle was also uninjured.  According to the 
pilot, the 14 CFR 91 flight was en route from Nampa, Idaho, to Baker City.  Instrument 
meteorological conditions existed and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot stated on his NTSB accident report that he encountered  deteriorating weather 
conditions in the area, from which he was unable to escape, and decided to land on the 
highway (referred to as "Highway 30" in the Baker County sheriff's report of the accident.)  He 
stated that the weather conditions prevented him from landing at the Baker City airport.  He 
reported that during the attempted landing on the highway, the airplane's wingtip struck a 
bank on the side of the road and he lost control of the airplane.  However, the sheriff's report 
indicated that the pilot told responding law enforcement personnel that he had landed on the 
highway earlier, due to the weather conditions, and was attempting to take off from the 
highway at the time of the accident.  According to the sheriff's report, the pilot stated that 
during the attempted takeoff, a pickup truck rounded a corner in the road and "he then pulled 
up, but in his words, 'The plane wasn't ready to get airborne.'"  The sheriff's report indicated 
that the plane then touched down several times before impacting the bank on the east side of 
the highway.
The sheriff's report indicated that responding law enforcement personnel interviewed the 
driver of the pickup, who returned to the scene.  The sheriff's report stated that she told them 
she encountered the airplane as she rounded a curve in the road.  The pickup driver stated to 
the law enforcement personnel that she swerved to miss the airplane and that the airplane then 
"climbed in an upward motion."  She also stated to them that "the plane came very, very close 
to her vehicle" and indicated to them that she had been badly frightened in the encounter.  The 
pickup driver later verified this information in a telephone interview with the NTSB 
investigator-in-charge (IIC).  The pickup driver  stated to the NTSB IIC that she encountered 
the airplane head-on as she traveled east on the highway.
The driver of the pickup truck furnished the name and telephone number of a local resident 
whose house is on the public highway approximately 2/3 to 3/4 mile west of Pleasant Valley.  
This local resident stated in a telephone interview with the NTSB IIC on April 18, 1996, that she 
saw a "little orange airplane" parked, in apparently undamaged condition, between Pleasant 
Valley and her house at about 0900 on the day of the accident.  She stated that the airplane 
was parked off the side of the road, and that she had seen the airplane circling the area before 
she saw it parked.  She stated that she asked the pilot if he was all right, and that he replied he 
was fine.  She also said the pilot asked her details of the road such as the length of the straight 
stretch and where the corners were, and said the pilot told her he needed to take off into the 
wind.  She said that later, at about 1600, she saw the damaged airplane west of its parked 
location.
Records contained in a FAA air traffic services package assembled for the accident 
investigation indicated that the pilot of N2761D received two telephone weather briefings from 
the automated flight service station (AFSS) at Boise, Idaho on the morning of the accident, at 
1503 UTC and 1606 UTC.  Transcripts of both briefings indicate that the pilot gave his 
destination as Seattle and that he was informed both times that visual flight rules (VFR) flight 
was not recommended.  The weather in both briefings was given as generally marginal VFR to 
IFR conditions along the pilot's entire route, with IFR outlook.  At 2150 UTC (1350 PST, 
approximately 20 minutes after the accident) Baker, 12 miles northwest of the accident site, 
reported scattered clouds at 400 feet, an estimated broken ceiling of 900 feet, an overcast at 
1,300 feet, and 7 miles visibility.
On his NTSB accident report narrative, the pilot attributed his "landing" accident to 
improperly placing the mixture control to full rich in high density altitude conditions, stating 
that the aircraft's altimeter read 4,710 feet after the accident, and that the mixture setting had 
resulted in a loss of engine power which prevented him from being able to arrest a descent rate 
during his landing attempt.  However, the elevation of the accident site as shown by terrain 
contour lines on a map in the DeLorme Oregon Atlas is approximately 3,600 feet.  A post-
accident photograph of the aircraft instrument panel provided by the on-scene FAA 
investigator showed the aircraft altimeter reading 4,100 feet.  Baker, at an elevation of 3,369 
feet, reported a temperature of 38 degrees F and altimeter setting of 30.09 inches Hg in its 
2150 UTC surface observation.  For conditions of 3,369-foot field elevation, 38 degrees F, and 
30.09 inches Hg, the density altitude was calculated by the investigator to be 2,564 feet.
The pilot indicated on his NTSB accident report that his last biennial flight review was in June 
1993, over 2 1/2 years prior to the accident.
