During landing, the airplane exited the right side of the runway and struck a ditch, and the 
main landing gear collapsed. No defects were found with the airplane's brake system. 
Photographic evidence of skid marks showed that the tailwheel experienced shimmy during the 
landing, which continued to the side of the runway. Postaccident examination of the airplane 
revealed some play in the tailwheel assembly due to wear, which allowed the tailwheel to 
shimmy during the landing.
The pilot™s loss of directional control during landing. Contributing to the accident was the wear 
in the tailwheel assembly.
On September 1, 2011, about 0815 central daylight time, an Aeronca 7AC, N83533, was 
damaged when it departed the right side of runway 9 and struck an adjacent ditch while 
landing at the Porter County Regional Airport (VPZ), Valparaiso, Indiana. The pilot and 
passenger were not injured. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage 
longerons. The aircraft was registered to Skyview Aviation LLC, and operated by the pilot 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not operated on a flight plan. The 
flight originated from the Greenville Municipal Airport (6D6), Greenville, Michigan about 
0600.
The pilot reported that she made a wheel landing in the tail wheel equipped airplane holding 
the tail up until the tail wheel settled onto the runway. She said that once the tail wheel 
contacted the runway the airplane turned to the right which she countered by applying left 
rudder. The airplane continued to turn to the right. The pilot reported that she applied left 
brake which had no effect. The pilot reported that at this point, the airplane was in the grass 
adjacent to the runway and was approaching a hill/ditch. She applied both brakes, but only the 
right brake was effective which caused the airplane to turn more to the right. The airplane went 
over the hill/ditch and the landing gear collapsed.
The pilot reported that there was excessive play found in the tail wheel assembly, and that the 
left brake was not functional.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors after the accident 
revealed no anomalies with regard to the left brake system of the airplane. Some wear of the 
tailwheel assembly was noted, but the tail wheel was operational and appeared to be in an 
airworthy condition.
Photographs of the runway after the accident showed skid mark evidence that the airplane's 
tail wheel experienced shimmy during the landing. The shimmy continued to the side of the 
runway.
