While configuring the airplane for landing, the flight crew observed a landing gear disagree 
message and an indication that the left main landing gear was not down and locked. The flight 
crewmembers followed procedures to address the landing gear disagree message; however, 
they were unable to get the left landing gear to extend. The captain declared an emergency and 
chose to land the airplane with only the right main landing gear and nose landing gear 
extended. The airplane came to rest in an upright, left-wing-low position. Postincident 
examination of the left main landing gear system revealed that the upper attachment bolt for 
the left main landing gear uplock assembly, which is designed to be attached to both the uplock 
mechanism and the structure, was attached only to the airplane structure. The left main 
landing gear uplock assembly had been removed and reinstalled the day before the incident 
flight. The mechanic who performed the maintenance did not have training on nor prior 
experience performing the installation of the uplock assembly, and the maintenance inspector 
who inspected its installation did not have training on inspecting the uplock assembly. Neither 
the mechanic nor the maintenance inspector observed any problems during the 
postinstallation inspection. Thus, it is likely that the uplock assembly was installed incorrectly 
due to the lack of training in both the installation by the mechanic and the inspection by the 
inspector.
The improperly installed upper attachment bolt in the left main landing gear uplock assembly, 
which led to the failure of the left main landing gear to extend before landing. Contributing to 
the accident was maintenance personnel's lack of training on the installation and inspection of 
the uplock assembly.
On September 1, 2011, about 1725 central daylight time, a Bombardier CL-600-2B19 airplane, 
N875AS, operated as Delta Connection flight 5058, landed at the Baton Rouge Metropolitan 
Airport (BTR), Baton Rouge, Louisiana, with the left main landing gear in the retracted 
position. The airline transport pilot captain, first officer, flight attendant, and 50 passengers 
were not injured. The airplane received minor damage. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the landing and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 121 flight. The flight originated from the Hartsfield Jackson Atlanta 
International Airport (ATL), Atlanta, Georgia, at 1409.
While configuring the airplane for landing, the flight crew observed a landing gear disagree 
message, and the left main gear indicated that it was not down and locked. The Quick 
Reference Handbook (QRH) procedures were accomplished, which included cycling the 
landing gear handle and the use of the alternate gear extension (manual release) system; 
however, the crew was unable to get the left landing gear to extend. The captain declared an 
emergency and elected to land the airplane with the right main landing gear and nose gear 
extended. The airplane came to rest in an upright and left wing low position. The captain 
commanded an evacuation, and all passengers departed the airplane using the left forward 
door.
Post-incident inspection of the airplane revealed minor damage to the left wing. There was no 
other damage to the airplane as a result of the left main landing gear being retracted at the 
time of landing. Examination of the left main landing gear assembly revealed that the upper 
attachment bolt for the left main landing gear uplock assembly, which is designed to be 
attached to both the uplock mechanism and the structure, was attached to the airplane 
structure only. 
Maintenance had been performed on both the left and right main landing gear systems prior to 
the incident flight. The mechanic who performed the maintenance did not have prior 
experience performing the installation of the uplock assembly. Following the incident, Atlantic 
Southeast Airlines changed their maintenance requirements and procedures to prevent future 
accidents. In addition, Bombardier issued Service Letter ATA:3230 to address this 
maintenance discrepancy and prevent future accidents.
