Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Ruston, LA
Accident Number:
FTW03LA102
Date & Time:
03/02/2003, 1200 CST 
Registration:
N383MA
Aircraft:
Enstrom 280FX
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The 43-hour student helicopter pilot landed stated that he hovered the helicopter from the 
parking area to the taxiway for a west departure.  After taxiing "at about a 2-3 foot skid height 
for about 100 yards, he settled the helicopter back down on the ground against a headwind, 
landing very, very gently."  The pilot stated he started to "throttle down" the engine.  At 
approximately 1/3 power, he heard a loud "splat," after which the helicopter "quivered."  After 
shutting down the engine, the pilot exited the helicopter and noticed that the tail rotor was not 
turning.  The 1986-model helicopter was reported to have accumulated a total of 1,609 hours 
since new.  The investigation revealed that the tail cone separated and the associated bolt had 
fractured due to fatigue failure.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The separation of the upper tail cone as a result of a fractured bolt due to fatigue.
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: STANDING - ENGINE(S) OPERATING
Findings
1. (C) MISC ROTORCRAFT,TAIL CONE - SEPARATION
2. (F) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - FRACTURED
Page 2 of 5FTW03LA102
Factual Information
On March 2, 2003, approximately 1200 central standard time, an Enstrom 280FX helicopter, 
N383MA, was substantially damaged when the tail boom separated while on the ground prior 
to takeoff at the Ruston Regional Airport (RNS) near Ruston, Louisiana.  The helicopter was 
registered to and operated by the pilot.  The private pilot, sole occupant, was not injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional solo flight.  The cross-country flight was originating 
at the time of the accident and was destined for the Monroe Regional Airport, near Monroe, 
Louisiana.
The 43-hour student helicopter pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report 
(NTSB Form 6120.1/2) that he hovered the helicopter from the parking area to the taxiway for 
a west departure.  After taxiing "at about a 2-3 foot skid height for about 100 yards, he settled 
the helicopter back down on the ground against a headwind, landing very, very gently."  The 
pilot stated he started to "throttle down" the engine.  At approximately 1/3 power, he heard a 
loud "splat," after which the helicopter "quivered."  After shutting down the engine, the pilot 
exited the helicopter and noticed that the tail rotor was not turning.  
According to a witness who was outside the fixed base operator, the pilot started taxiing to the 
middle of the ramp at approximately 2-3 feet above the ground.  When the helicopter reached 
the middle of the ramp, the pilot started to set the helicopter on the ground.  When the pilot 
got the helicopter on the ground, he started backing off the power.  The witness then heard a 
loud noise.
Another witness, standing approximately 1,500 feet away from the accident site, observed the 
helicopter taxiing from a hangar area toward the runway.  The helicopter "appeared to be well 
controlled and handled by a qualified pilot."  Before reaching the taxiway, the helicopter 
landed, and the witness heard a loud noise, "possibly a backfire."  Both the main rotors and the 
tail rotor began slowing down.  The tail rotor came to a stop while the main rotors continued to 
decelerate.
The pilot noted that the tail was bent down and a bolt that holds the tail was broken in half.  
The pilot also noted that the tail rotor drive was bent and detached from the tail rotor, and the 
counter rotation cable control on the right side was broken.  
Examination of the helicopter tail boom by the FAA Inspector, who responded to the site, 
revealed that the upper tail cone bolt was fractured.  Further examination of the tail boom 
revealed that the tail rotor drive shaft flex coupling was separated, the tail rotor drive shaft was 
bent, and the tail rotor control cable was separated.
On November 28, 2003, an examination of the upper tail cone bolt at the National 
Transportation Safety Board Materials Laboratory revealed that the head of the bolt was rusted 
in most areas including inside the hexagon hole.  The bolt itself was fractured at approximately 
the 5th thread from the shank and the mating section was missing.
Examination of the upper tail cone bolt also revealed that the washer contained a 45 degree 
chamfer on one side to cover the large head radius with the shank.  The washer contact face 
with the bolt head showed circumferential scoring marks.
The bolt fracture surface was flat, on a plane perpendicular to the bolt axis, and contained 
Page 3 of 5FTW03LA102
arrest marks indicative of fatigue cracking over much of its area.  The fatigue region initiated at 
the outer diameter surface of the bolt at a thread root and propagated across approximately 85 
percent of the cross-sectional area prior to transitioning to tensile overstress.
The 1986-model helicopter was reported to have accumulated a total of 1,609 hours since new.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private; Student
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/14/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
123 hours (Total, all aircraft), 43 hours (Total, this make and model), 53 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Enstrom
Registration:
N383MA
Model/Series:
280FX 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
2018
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
9 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1609 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
HIO-360-F1AD
Registered Owner:
Herbert F. Vandenberg
Rated Power:
225 hp
Operator:
Herbert F. Vandenberg
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5FTW03LA102
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Broken / 3400 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3400 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.16 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Ruston (RSN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Monroe, LA (MLU)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1100 
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Airport Information
Airport:
Ruston Municipal Airport (RSN)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
360 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
32.514444, -92.588333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Douglas D Wigington
Adopted Date:
06/02/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Tim D Wells; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Baton Rouge, LA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5FTW03LA102
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
