The pilot reported that he was conducting flybys to film a segment for a documentary. During 
his last run, he initiated a 150- to 180-degree climbing right turn to about 200 ft above the 
ground. After the turn, he attempted to neutralize the flight controls in preparation for a 
normal approach to land, but he was unable to move them. The helicopter remained in the 
same turn rate with the same collective pitch and cyclic input until ground impact. A 
postaccident examination of the helicopter revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. The reason for the flight 
control malfunction could not be determined. 
 
A flight control malfunction while maneuvering for reasons that could not be determined 
because postaccident examination revealed no evidence of a mechanical malfunction or failure 
that would have precluded normal operation. 
 
 
 
On March 01, 2012, at 1220 mountain standard time, N197LE, an experimental exhibition Bell 
AH-1F helicopter experienced a loss of directional control during maneuvering flight and 
impacted the ground at Coolidge Municipal Airport (P08), Coolidge, Arizona. The helicopter 
was operated by the Army Aviation Heritage Foundation and Museum, Inc., under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The pilot and mechanic received 
minor injuries; the helicopter sustained substantial damage. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the local area flight that departed P08 at an undetermined time.
The pilot stated that the purpose of the flight was to film a segment for a documentary. The 
first flight of the filming sequence was uneventful. It lasted approximately 10 minutes and 
included helicopter flybys. The next filming sequence consisted of the accident helicopter and a 
vehicle in a race simulation.  At 1205, a practice run began that terminated at the start/finish 
line.  After crossing the finish line, the pilot initiated a climbing 150- to 180-degree right turn 
to an altitude of about 200 feet above the ground. He attempted to neutralize the controls in 
preparation for a normal approach for landing but was unable to move them. The helicopter 
remained in the same rate of turn, with the same collective pitch and cyclic input, until impact 
with the ground. The pilot further stated that, at impact, he tried to activate the emergency 
hydraulic switch. 
A postaccident examination by the Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector 
revealed no mechanical failures or malfunctions that would have precluded normal operation. 
Neither the pilot nor the operator provided a completed NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident 
ReportForm 6120.1. 
