The pilot said he was on a cross-country flight and he noticed that the alternators were 
producing about 9 volts. He tried to troubleshoot the problem, and he switched the alternators 
off and on a ﬁnumberﬂ of times, but he was unable to get them to indicate more than 8 to 9 
volts (the pilot used the term "alternator" and "generator" interchangeably in his statement). 
He said that he heard a ﬁsquealﬂ coming through the headset, and when the right alternator 
was switched off, the noise would stop. He said that he eventually lost radio communication 
capability while en route to his destination, and he diverted to an alternate airport. The pilot 
lowered the landing gear on the downwind leg, and he observed that the nose landing gear was 
extended by its reflection in the spinner. The landing roll was ﬁnormalﬂ until the right main 
landing gear collapsed, and then the left main landing gear collapsed. 
A postaccident examination of the landing gear did not disclose any evidence of a mechanical 
malfunction. The pilot reported that he lost all electrical power due to a loss of one or both 
alternators. It is likely that the right alternator failed, so when the pilot turned off the right 
failed alternator, the noise stopped; however, the left alternator could not put out enough 
voltage to power the radios and other electrical demands. By the time the gear was lowered, 
there was not enough power to lock the left and right main landing gears in place, so they both 
collapsed during the landing roll. Had the pilot realized that he had lost electrical power and 
followed the emergency checklist, he could have verified the locked status of the landing gear 
and followed the emergency landing gear procedures to extend the gear.
The pilot™s failure to follow the published emergency procedures to lower the landing gear 
following a loss of electrical power.
On March 2, 2012, about 1420 central standard time, a Piper PA-30, N373JT, had its main 
landing gear collapse during landing on runway 36 at the Northwest Regional Airport (52F), 
near Roanoke, Texas. The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, reported no injuries. The 
airplane sustained substantial spar damage. The airplane was registered to and operated by the 
pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Day 
visual flight rules (VFR) conditions prevailed for the flight, which did not operate on a VFR 
flight plan. The flight originated from the Crystal City Municipal Airport, near Crystal City, 
Texas, about 1300, and was destined for the Denton Municipal Airport (DTO), near Denton, 
Texas, when it diverted to 52F with electrical system issues.
According to a pilot statement, during the flight the alternators were producing approximately 
nine volts of output. He switched the generators off and on a ﬁnumberﬂ of times and was 
unable to get them to get them to indicate more than eight to nine volts. The pilot had 
intermittent global positioning system operation, heard a ﬁsquealﬂ in his radio. He observed 
that when the right alternator was switched off, the noise would stop. The pilot eventually lost 
radio communication capability while en-route to DTO. He diverted to 52F and lowered the 
landing gear on downwind. The pilot observed that the nose landing gear was extended by its 
reflection in the spinner. The landing roll out was ﬁnormalﬂ until the right main landing gear 
collapsed. The left main landing gear then collapsed. The pilot™s comments, in part, stated:
It is obvious that at least one alternator failed, probably the right 
one, and the other alternator could not put out enough voltage to carry 
the radios, GPS, autopilot, lights and other electrical demands and by 
the time that gear was lowered there was not enough power in the battery 
to lock the gear in place and/or the gear failed to lock in place.
The PA-30 flight manual contained an emergency procedure referencing emergency landing 
gear extension. As part of the procedure, the pilot is instructed to slow the airplane to an 
airspeed ﬁnot to exceed 100 mph.ﬂ The full travel of the extension handle or a green light on the 
instrument panel indicate the landing gear is extended. An operational note indicated that 
ﬁreducing power and rocking gear extension handle will aid in manually extending the landing 
gear.ﬂ
According to a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, there was no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal landing gear operation.
