Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Belen, NM
Accident Number:
CEN12FA174
Date & Time:
03/01/2012, 0535 MDT 
Registration:
N273TE
Aircraft:
HEMP TIMOTHY LEGACY 2000
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The experimental airplane collided with power lines shortly after takeoff and before sunrise. 
No distress calls from the pilot were reported, and no one witnessed  the accident. The airplane 
was severely fragmented, and the debris path extended over 900 feet beyond the initial contact 
with the power lines  consistent with a high-velocity impact. Examination of the engine and 
airframe did not reveal any preexisting mechanical anomalies that would have precluded 
normal operation. 
Two occupants were on board the airplane, the pilot and the pilot-rated owner of the airplane. 
Witnesses reported that the pilot and pilot-rated passenger flew together because the pilot-
rated passenger did not have a valid medical certificate. The pilot™s most recent medical 
certificate had the following restrictions: ﬁmust wear corrective lensesﬂ and ﬁlimited to daytime 
flight onlyﬂ due to color vision limitations. The investigation revealed that the power lines were 
barely visible on the horizon in the desertlike terrain during daylight hours. Although it could 
not be determined whether the pilot or the pilot-rated passenger was at the controls at the time 
of the accident, it is likely that the flight™s conduct before sunrise and the pilot™s restriction for 
daytime flight only due to color vision limitations made the identification of the power lines 
more difficult. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s failure to maintain clearance from power lines while maneuvering after takeoff. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot™s decision to operate the airplane during the hours of 
darkness when he had a restriction for daytime flight only due to color vision limitations.
Page 2 of 7CEN12FA174
Findings
Aircraft
Altitude - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Color-vision - Pilot (Factor)
Use of equip/info - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 7CEN12FA174
Factual Information
On March 1, 2012, approximately 0535 mountain standard time, an experimental Lancair 
Legacy 2000, N273TE, registered to the pilot-rated passenger, was destroyed when it collided 
with power lines and impacted the ground shortly after takeoff from the Alexander Municipal 
Airport (E80), Belen, New Mexico. The pilot and pilot-rated passenger were fatally injured. 
Dark night visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 flight. The flight's intended destination was Falcon Field, 
Mesa, Arizona.
The PNM Power Company of Albuquerque, New Mexico, recorded a voltage spike at 0535 on a 
three phase power line that runs south of E80. Company personnel who dispatched to identify 
the problem discovered three primary power lines cut and the lower common line separated, 
and the wreckage of the airplane scattered beyond the damaged lines. There were no radio 
distress calls reported from the airplane after takeoff and there were no eye witnesses of the 
accident. Local FBO personnel indicated that the airplane was being flown to Mesa, Arizona, 
for maintenance and calibration of the fuel system. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot had about 1,013 hours of flight time as reported on his last FAA medical certificate 
(Third Class) dated September 28, 2011. He help a Commercial Pilot Certificate (Airplane 
Single Engine Land, Instrument, Flight Instructor, Ground Instructor). According to a friend, 
he had about 46 hours in the accident airplane. The pilot was a friend of the pilot-rated 
passenger who owned the airplane. According to people who knew him at the local FBO, the 
pilot and pilot-rated passenger always flew together because the pilot-rated passenger did not 
have a valid medical certificate.
The pilot's most recent medical (September 28, 2011), had restrictions. The restrictions were: 
'Must Wear Corrective Lenses' and 'Limited to Daytime Flight Only' due to color vision 
limitations. 
The pilot-rated passenger held a Private Pilot Certificate (Airplane Single Engine Land, 
Airframe and Powerplant Mechanic), with a restriction for night flight. His reported flight 
experience was 750 total hours as reported on his last application for a FAA medical certificate, 
dated August 4, 2009. His application was denied for medical conditions. 
It is unknown whether the pilot or the pilot-rated passenger was at the controls at the time of 
the accident.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The 2005 model Lancair Legacy 2000 was powered by a Continental IO-550-N engine. 
Records for the airframe and engine were not found. It was reported from local FBO personnel 
that the airplane was well maintained and had about 154 hours total time. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Evidence at the accident site showed that the airplane had collided with 25-foot high power 
lines about 1.2 miles west of the departure end of runway 21. The first ground impact mark was 
found about 900 feet beyond the damaged power lines. Debris from the airplane was scattered 
beyond the initial ground impact point for about 500 feet on an approximate heading of 020 
Page 4 of 7CEN12FA174
degrees magnetic.
Since the power lines were a main source for the area, the damaged power lines were repaired 
prior to the arrival of NTSB investigators. 
The airplane was severely fragmented and documentation was limited on-scene. The wreckage 
debris path, which extended over 900 feet beyond the initial contact with the power lines, was 
consistent with a high velocity impact with the power lines. Examination of the engine did not 
reveal a pre-existing mechanical anomalies. Flight control continuity was confirmed from the 
cockpit to all flight control surfaces and all separations of flight control cables, rods, and 
bellcranks, showed signatures of overload due to impact forces. 
The three-bladed propeller assembly was found separated from the engine. The crankshaft 
showed evidence of torsional separation just aft of the propeller flange. All three propeller 
blades were found secured within the propeller hub. One blade was buckled longitudinally 
along its span with moderate torsional twisting. The second blade had some torsional twisting, 
and the third blade was relatively undamaged. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Autopsies were performed on the pilot and the pilot-rated passenger. No preexisting medical 
conditions were found that may have contributed to the accident. Toxicology tests on both the 
pilot and pilot-rated passenger were negative.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to the owner's representative.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
63
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/28/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/20/2011
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1013 hours (Total, all aircraft), 46 hours (Total, this make and model), 1 hours (Last 
24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 7CEN12FA174
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
57
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
None None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/04/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 750 hours (Total, all aircraft), 60 hours (Total, this make and model), 60 hours (Last 
90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
HEMP TIMOTHY
Registration:
N273TE
Model/Series:
LEGACY 2000 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
L2K164
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/21/2011, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
154 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550-N
Registered Owner:
WESTBROOK GEORGE J
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
WESTBROOK GEORGE J
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7CEN12FA174
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0530 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
25 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.01 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
30°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Belen, NM (E80)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Unknown
Destination: 
Mesa, AZ (FFZ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0534 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Airport Information
Airport:
Alexander Municipal Airport (E80)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
5194 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
34.639444, 106.863889 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alexander Lemishko
Adopted Date:
09/24/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Dick M Stone; FAA FSDO Albuquerque; Albuquerque, NM
Publish Date:
09/24/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=83001
Page 7 of 7CEN12FA174
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
