The private pilot departed in the airplane, which he had purchased that morning, with his dog 
onboard. According to the airplane™s previous owner, who witnessed the accident, shortly after 
takeoff, the pilot announced over the common traffic advisory frequency that the ﬁdoor popped 
openﬂ and that he was returning to the airport. The witness further stated that, on final 
approach, about 30 feet above ground level, the airplane banked left, rolled wings level, flew 
perpendicular away from the runway, and impacted the ground in a flat attitude. The airplane 
subsequently became engulfed in flames. 
Postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any abnormalities that 
would have precluded normal operation. Thermal damage around the main cabin door 
precluded determination of the main cabin door locking mechanism™s position at the time of 
impact. It is likely that the pilot did not securely latch the main cabin door before takeoff and 
that the door partially opened in flight, which resulted in his decision to return to the departure 
airport. It is also likely that the pilot™s dog was not in an animal carrier, which further 
distracted the pilot. As the pilot slowed the airplane for landing, his attention was likely more 
focused on the partially opened door and the dog than the landing, which resulted in his failure 
to maintain airplane control during the landing approach.
The pilot's failure to maintain airplane control during the landing approach due to his diverted 
attention to the partially opened main cabin door and the unsecured dog. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's failure to securely latch the main cabin door before takeoff and to 
secure his dog.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 2, 2014, about 1340 eastern daylight time, a Beech V35B, N702JS, collided with 
terrain during a landing attempt at Middlesboro-Bell County Airport (1A6), Middlesboro, 
Kentucky. The certificated private pilot sustained serious injuries and a dog sustained minor 
injuries. The airplane sustained substantial impact and thermal damage to both wings and 
fuselage. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the flight. 
The airplane was registered to a private individual and operated by another private individual 
under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. 
According to an eyewitness, who was also the registered owner of the airplane on file with the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the pilot purchased the airplane the morning of the 
accident and flew with another private pilot prior to the accident flight. Shortly after departure, 
on the accident flight, the pilot announced on the common traffic advisory frequency that a 
"door popped open" and that he was returning to land. The eyewitness further stated that on 
final approach, about 30 feet above ground level, the airplane banked to the left, rolled wings 
level, flew perpendicular away from the runway, and impacted the ground in a flat attitude. The 
airplane subsequently became engulfed in flames, and the pilot extricated himself from the 
airplane with thermal injuries.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The pilot, age 71, held a private pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land, issued 
September 30, 1995, and a third class medical certificate issued February 21, 2006. The pilot's 
logbook was not provided to the investigation team at the time of this writing. On the pilot's 
February 21, 2006, medical application, he reported approximately 2300 total flight hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The four-seat, low-wing airplane, serial number D-9603 was manufactured in 1974. It was 
powered by a Teledyne Continental Motors IO-550B. Review of the airplane maintenance 
logbook records showed and annual inspection was completed on May 1, 2014, at a recorded 
tachometer reading of 2250.5 hours, which correlated to an airframe total time of 5363.67 
hours. The tachometer was observed at the accident site and indicated 2250.58 hours.
According to an FAA inspector on scene, an FAA Aircraft Registration Form, No. 2120-0042, 
was located within the wreckage. The form was dated May 2, 2014, and listed the accident pilot 
as the registered owner. A Bill of Sale was also provided from the previous registered owner 
dated May 2, 2014, and indicated that the accident pilot had purchased the airplane from the 
registered owners.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1335 recorded weather observation at 1A6, included wind from 270 degrees at 4 knots, 10 
miles visibility, broken clouds at 5,500 feet above ground level, temperature 18 degrees C, dew 
point 4 degrees C; barometric altimeter 29.93 inches of mercury
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The airport is a publically owned airport and at the time of the accident did not have an 
operating control tower. The airport was equipped with one runway designated as runway 
10/28. The runway was 3,631-foot-long by 75-foot-wide runway and was listed as "in good 
condition." The airport was 1,154 feet above mean sea level.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFOMRATION
On-site examination of the wreckage by an FAA inspector and a representative from the 
airplane manufacturer revealed that the airplane impacted the paved portion of the displaced 
threshold of the intended landing runway with the left wing fiberglass fuel tip tank. The debris 
path was about 250 feet in length, from the initial impact point to the main wreckage, began 
about 90 feet prior to the runway displaced threshold, and was on a course of about 071 
degrees. Along the debris path, 5 distinct ground scars were located in the ground, similar in 
appearance as propeller blade marks. The ground scars varied in distance between each other 
and were progressively increasing in distance. The distances from the first ground scar to the 
last ground scar was approximately 48 inches. Further examination revealed flight control 
continuity to all flight control surfaces and the ruddervator trim actuator extension was 
measured and found to be about one-half inch, which correlated to approximately 20 degree 
nose up trim position. Both wing flap actuators were measured and the measurements 
correlated to about a 30 degree flap position. Both main fuel tanks contained approximately 40 
gallons of blue fluid similar in color and smell as 100 LL aviation fuel and both fiberglass 
wingtip tanks were breeched. The fuel selector valve was found in the right wing main fuel tank 
detent. The fuel system was free of debris and no abnormalities with the system were noted. All 
three landing gear assemblies, including the actuators, were found in the extended position 
and the landing gear selector handle, located in the cockpit, was found in the "DOWN" 
position. The cockpit and forward portion of the cabin, including the main cabin door, 
exhibited thermal damage consistent with postimpact fire. The thermal damage precluded 
examination of the door lock mechanism.
No evidence existed in the wreckage that indicated there was any animal carrier to secure the 
dog. However, the investigation could not conclusively determine if the dog was in the front 
seat or some other location in the airplane at the time of the accident.
TEST AND RESEARCH
A postaccident examination of the engine, revealed thermal damage to the rear accessories as 
well as cables and hoses. The engine was mounted in an engine test cell, started on the first 
attempt, and operated at various power settings required of a newly manufactured engine. 
During the engine exam and test run, no anomalies were noted that would have precluded 
normal operation. For further information in regards to the engine examination please 
reference the "Engine Examination Report" located in the docket for this accident case.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Pilot Operating Manual (POM) "BEFORE TAKE-OFF" checklist in Section II, "Normal 
Procedures" outlines the before takeoff procedures. The procedure states in part "–.11. Doors 
and Windows Œ Secure–"
In addition Section III "Emergency Procedures" states in part "Unlatched Door in Flight Œ If 
the cabin door is not locked it may come unlatched in flight. This may occur during or just after 
take-off. The door will trail in a position approximately 3 inches open but the flight 
characteristics of the airplane will not be affected. Return to the field in a normal manner. If 
practicable, during the landing flare-out have a passenger hold the door to prevent it from 
swinging open."
According to the Hawker Beechcraft Corporation "Bonanza 35 Series Shop Manual" Section 7C, 
"Cabin and Baggage Compartment" states in part "–14 Windows and Doors -–Inspect doors 
for security of attachment. Check latching mechanism for proper engagement and ease of 
operation. Check that the rotation of the interior door handle without depressing the handle 
lock release button does not unlatch the door–"
