On the landing rollout, the airplane veered off the runway into the grass median and the 
airplane came up on its nose; when the airplane fell back onto its landing gear, the tail cone 
was damaged forward of the vertical stabilizer attachment.  The pilot said he made a steeper 
than normal approach in an almost direct 12-knot crosswind that resulted in a higher ground 
speed during the landing and landing rollout than he was accustomed to.  The pilot attributed 
his uncoordinated approach and landing to unfamiliarity with the airport, landing with a more 
aft center of gravity, accepting a landing clearance that resulted in a crosswind landing, and a 
loose tail wheel.
the pilot's inadequate compensation for the crosswind condition and failure to maintain 
directional control.
On May 1, 2005, about 1400 Pacific daylight time, an experimental Kittleson Quickie Q-200, 
N200AL, departed runway 15 on the landing rollout, came up on its nose, and then came to 
rest on its main landing gear at Santa Barbara Municipal Airport (SBA), Santa Barbara, 
California.  The pilot operated the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The private 
pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.  The 
cross-country personal flight departed Laughlin/Bullhead International Airport (IFP), 
Bullhead City, Arizona, about 1050 mountain standard time, with a planned destination of 
SBA.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot submitted a written report.  The pilot reported that he was cleared to land runway 15L 
at Santa Barbara, and the reported winds were from 230 degrees at 12 knots.  He was 
unfamiliar with the airport and made a steeper approach than he normally would to 
compensate for his unfamiliarity and buildings on the approach end.  The pilot stated that he 
lost directional control on the landing rollout due to a faster than normal landing ground 
speed.  The airplane skidded sideways off to the left side of the runway into a grass median 
where it came to a sudden stop and came up on its nose.  The airplane then fell back onto its 
main landing gear, and the tailcone was damaged forward of the vertical stabilizer attachment.  
According to the pilot, the area that was damaged in the accident, forward of the vertical 
stabilizer attachment, had been identified as a structural weak point by the kit manufacturer.
The pilot reported that he landed with a 75-percent aft center of gravity, which he was 
unaccustomed to.  He normally landed at a 50-percent forward center of gravity.  The pilot 
further indicated that on the landing rollout he felt a "wobble" in the tailwheel.  When he 
inspected the tailwheel area, he found a "loosening of the channel in which the bolt that 
secures the tailwheel on the tail spring travels."  The pilot indicated that with a loose tailwheel 
there would be a reduction in controllability during a high-speed taxi.
The pilot attributed the accident to three areas:
1.Landing in a gusty crosswind condition
2.Landing with a more aft center of gravity than he was accustomed.
3.Wobble in the tailwheel.
In the section of NTSB Form 6120.1/2 entitled RECOMMENDATION (HOW COULD THIS 
ACCIDENT HAVE BEEN PREVENTED), the pilot wrote: "reduced acceptable crosswind 
component when tail dragger aircraft is loaded to CG in rear 1/2 of envelope."
