The 2,800-hour pilot was performing an aerial application on a rice field when the airplane's 
turbine engine lost power.  The airplane landed short of a road, struck a drainage canal, 
bounced and came to rest in a rice field.  Examination of the engine revealed that the firewall 
fuel filter was blocked by an unknown foreign contaminant.
The loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of blockage of the firewall fuel filter 
with an unknown contaminant.  A contributing factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the 
forced landing.
On May 1, 2005, approximately 0730 central daylight time, a tail-wheel equipped Grumman-
Schweizer G-164B agricultural turbine powered single-engine airplane, N63E, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following a reported loss of engine power 
during an aerial application flight near Fenton, Louisiana.  The airplane was registered to and 
operated by Kinder Ag Service, Inc., of Natchitoches, Louisiana.  The commercial pilot, sole 
occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a 
flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 aerial application 
flight.  The local flight originated from a private airstrip near Kinder, Louisiana, at an unknown 
time.  
In a written statement to the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the 2,800-hour pilot reported that 
he had just finished a turn to reverse direction and was in the process of positioning the 
airplane for the next pass when "the engine lost power."  The pilot added that he attempted to 
land on an adjacent field road; however, the airplane landed short of the road, struck a 
drainage canal, bounced, and came to rest in an upright position in a rice field.  There was no 
fire.  
The pilot added that as the airplane came to a stop, the engine was still running.  After shutting 
the engine down, the pilot evacuated the airplane.  
Examination of the airplane by an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who 
responded to the accident site, revealed that the left and right main landing gear were folded 
outboard, and the main support beam for the landing gear was cracked.  Fuel was observed in 
the left wing fuel tank.
Examination of the Walter M601 turbine engine by a representative from Walter America Inc., 
of West Helena, Arkansas, revealed that the firewall fuel filter was blocked by an unknown 
foreign contaminant.  Remaining fuel drained from the fuel control unit and the engine fuel 
pump was found to be consistent with diesel fuel.
A completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) was not received 
from the pilot or the operator.
