The airplane was substantially damaged during an emergency landing when the landing gear 
did not extend properly.  The pilot noted that when he attempted to lower the landing gear on 
approach to the intended destination nothing happened.  He elected to divert to an airport with 
additional capabilities and assistance available.  The pilot stated that he executed the 
emergency gear extension procedure, however, this procedure was not successful.  The left 
main landing gear appeared to be fully extended, the nose landing gear was in a "dragging" 
condition, and the right main landing gear was retracted when observed by the tower controller 
prior to landing.  The pilot noted that the red gear unlocked indicator light was illuminated and 
the green landing gear down/locked indicators were not illuminated.  Since no further options 
were available to extend the gear, the pilot executed an emergency landing.  The airplane 
touched down on the left main wheel which did not collapse initially.  The right wing 
subsequently dropped and contacted the runway.  The pilot applied left wheel brakes, however, 
the airplane departed the right side of the runway pavement and came to rest in the grass. The 
left main landing gear collapsed and a runway light was damaged in the process.  The post-
accident inspection revealed that a hydraulic powerpak drain line (Piper part number 46138-
00) was ruptured.  The drain line was located in the nose section of the airplane, forward of the 
cabin pressure bulkhead.  The rupture was approximately one-half inch long.  Hydraulic fluid 
was observed in the vicinity of the line rupture.  The hydraulic reservoir was empty.
Rupture of the hydraulic powerpak drain line which resulted in a loss of hydraulic fluid and the 
inability to properly lower the landing gear despite the pilot's execution of the emergency 
extension procedures.  A contributing factor was the runway light struck during the emergency 
landing.
On May 3, 2005, about 2100 central daylight time, a Piper PA-31T, N2338V, piloted by a 
private pilot, was substantially damaged during an emergency landing on runway 21 (6,600 
feet by 100 feet, asphalt) at Bismarck Municipal Airport (BIS), Bismarck, North Dakota.  The 
flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91 on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.  The 
flight departed Jeffco Airport (BJC), Denver, Colorado, at 1630 with an intended destination of 
Bowman Municipal Airport (BPP), Bowman, North Dakota.
In his written statement, the pilot noted that when he attempted to lower the landing gear on 
approach to BPP nothing happened.  He elected to divert to BIS due to additional capabilities 
and assistance available there.
The pilot stated that he executed the emergency gear extension procedure outlined in the 
pilot's operating handbook.  However, this procedure was not successful.  He reported that the 
nose landing gear was in a "dragging/trailing" position when observed through the engine 
cowling site mirror.  He noted that the red gear unlocked indicator light was illuminated and 
the green landing gear down/locked indicators were not illuminated.  
The pilot noted that the BIS tower controller informed him that the left main landing gear 
appeared to be fully extended, the nose landing gear was in a "dragging" condition, and the 
right main landing gear was retracted.
Since no further options were available to extend the gear, the pilot prepared for and executed 
an emergency landing.  He noted that the airplane touched down on the left main wheel which 
did not collapse initially.  The right wing subsequently dropped and contacted the runway.  The 
pilot reported that he applied the left wheel brakes, however, the airplane departed the right 
side of the runway pavement and came to rest in the grass. The left main landing gear collapsed 
and a runway light was damaged in the process.
The post-accident inspection revealed that a hydraulic powerpak drain line (Piper part number 
46138-00) was ruptured.  The drain line was located in the nose section of the airplane, 
forward of the cabin pressure bulkhead.  The rupture was approximately one-half inch long.  
Hydraulic fluid was observed in the vicinity of the line rupture.  The hydraulic reservoir was 
empty.
