National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MIAMI, FL
Accident Number: MIA95LA032
Date & Time: 12/03/1994, 1246 EST
Registration: N707PP
Aircraft: CESSNA 172D
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was in cruise flight at 5,000 feet agl and had slowed to 70 mph.
The passenger stated that she was taking off her headset and moving her seat back so she could get a good photograph.
The pilot heard what sounded like a yell, and simultaneously felt wind and noise in the cabin.
He looked towards the sound, and observed the passenger partially out of the airplane.
When their eyes met, she jumped.
Review of ATC transcripts verified that the pilot departed and returned to the departure airport without any intermediate stops.
Another pilot wrote a letter to the Safety Board describing a similar incident that occurred 4 days prior to the accident with the same passenger.
During that flight, she unlatched the door gunner's safety belt while sitting on the floor with her feet outside the airplane on the landing gear.
At the time, she was wearing a parachute with a hidden automatic opener on the reserve parachute.
She was subsequently pulled back into the airplane by a safety crewmember and restrained for the return flight.
The passenger's airman and medical certificates had been revoked 8/12/91 for failing to disclose a history of, among other conditions, a personality disorder and for the taking of numerous prescribed medications.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The passenger committed suicide.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
The passenger was not located and is presumed to be fatally injured.
The airplane was not damaged.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated from Opa Locka Airport, Opa Locka, Florida, about 1 hour 6 minutes before the accident.
Charles J.
Flowers, President of Flowers Air Charter, Opa Locka, Florida, stated his office was contacted on three separate occasions in November 1994, by Christine M. Pascale, who asked  to rent an airplane with a pilot to take some aerial photographs.
Mr.
Flowers stated he was unable to support her request, and he contacted a private owner, Hodelin F.Rene, who agreed to make the flight.
The pilot, Hodelin F. Rene, stated he arrived at Flowers Air Charter, on December 3, 1994, at about 1000, and was introduced to his passenger by Mr.
Flowers.
Miss Pascale stated she wanted to take several pictures of a couple of houses in the Cutler Ridge area, and drew a circle around the area on an aeronautical chart.
He went to Terminal One, taxied  his airplane to Flowers Air Charter, and did a preflight inspection.
The passenger did her own preflight inspection, and asked several questions about the operations of the right passenger door.
They departed Opa Locka Airport and flew to the area previously marked on the map.
He leveled off at 5,000 feet agl, slowed the airplane to 70 mph, and asked her where she wanted to go.
She stated she would look outside to make sure.
A short time later, she stated she was going to take off the headset and move the seat back so she could get a good shot.
He then heard what sounded like a yell, felt wind and noise simultaneously in the cabin area.
He looked towards the sound, she was already partly out of the airplane, and when their eyes met, she jumped out.
"I was in total amazement, shock and just froze for a moment, not knowing what to do.
I could not believe what had happened.
After about ten seconds, I called ATC and requested a descent as I struggled to close the door."
He then informed ATC that he would like to declare an emergency, that his passenger had jumped out of the airplane.
After landing at the Homestead General Aviation Airport, Homestead, Florida, a confrontation ensued, and the Metro Dade Police Department was called.
Mr. Manning informed the two police officers who responded to the call that he thought Miss Pascale was trying to commit suicide.
Review of airman records on file with the FAA Airmen Certification Branch, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, revealed the passenger, Christine M. Pascale, was issued private pilot certificate No.
85526189, on October 22, 1990, with ratings for airplane single engine land.
The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration, issued an emergency order of revocation of any airman pilot certificate or airman medical certificate held by the passenger on August 12, 1991.
The airman and medical certificates were revoked for falsification of airman medical application dated March 23, 1990, October 27, 1990, and general medical condition.
She failed to disclose that she had a history of the following:      a.
Seizures      b.
Taking numerous prescribed medications Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 50, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
