National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ST. PETERSBURG, FL
Accident Number: MIA95GA033
Date & Time: 12/03/1994, 1730 EST
Registration: N23321
Aircraft: SIKORSKY UH-60A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 5 None
Flight Conducted Under: Public Aircraft
 Analysis The pilot-in-command was ground taxiing into an unmarked parking area between two hangers without a ground marshaller.
The helicopter's main rotor blades collided with the hanger.
There were no written procedures pertaining to marshalling of aircraft or designated parking areas.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot-in-command's failure to maintain separation while ground taxiing between two hangers, resulting in the main rotor blades colliding with a hanger.
Contributing to the accident was the lack of written procedures pertaining to ground marshalling of aircraft, and designated parking areas.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 1.
OBJECT - HANGAR/AIRPORT BUILDING 2.
(C) VISUAL SEPARATION - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The helicopter sustained substantial damage.
The airline transport-rated pilot, commercial pilot, copilot, air interdiction officer, and two occupants were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an agency flight plan was filed.
The flight originated from Jacksonville Naval Air Station, Jacksonville, Florida, about 1 hour before the accident.
The airline transport-rated pilot-in-command (PIC), and copilot stated after landing they taxied to the U.S. Customs ramp where they were met by maintenance personnel.
The PIC was asked to park in a grassy area.
They informed the maintenance employee that they had night vision goggles and weapons on board the helicopter, and needed to park in a secure area between the two hangers.
No request was made by the PIC, nor was he asked by maintenance personnel if he wanted marshalling support while taxiing the helicopter.
He taxied into the unmarked parking area along the northwest corner of the ramp, made a right turn towards the south, and continued towards the southeast corner of the ramp.
As they started the final right turn, a crewmember stated, "we are getting close," and the main rotor blades collided with the hanger.
Information pertaining to aircraft information is contained in NTSB Form 6120.1/2 and NTSB Form 6120.4.
Toxicology studies of specimens from the pilot-in-command, and copilot were negative for neutral, acidic, and basic drugs.
Review of written procedures at the Jacksonville Air Branch, Tampa Air Unit, SERV-AIR Inc., Standard Operating Procedures, and the Aviation Operations Handbook for U.S. Customs, revealed there are no written procedures concerning designated parking areas, marking of parking areas, and marshalling of aircraft.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Commercial Age: 55, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane; Helicopter Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
