The commercial pilot was conducting a personal cross-country flight. The pilot reported that, 
while en route to the destination airport, he noted that the right tank's fuel level was not 
changing and that it did not appear that fuel was draining from the right tank. The fuel 
remaining in the left fuel tank was not adequate to complete the planned flight. The pilot chose 
to divert to a closer airport, and while he was preparing to land, the engine lost power. The 
pilot performed a forced landing to a field, during which the airplane nosed over and came to 
rest inverted. 
Contaminants consistent with insects and leaves were recovered from the right fuel tank and 
fuel lines. The contamination had prevented the fuel from flowing from the right fuel tank to 
the engine and resulted in the loss of engine power. No other anomalies were noted that would 
have precluded normal operation.
The total loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of contamination in the right 
fuel tank and fuel lines, which prevented fuel from flowing to the engine.
On December 1, 2015, about 1950 mountain standard time, a Pipistrel Virus motorglider, 
N145VS, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power 
near Centennial Airport (KAPA), Englewood, Colorado. The commercial pilot and his 
passenger were not injured. The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 without a flight plan. Night visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident. The cross country flight departed Sayre Municipal Airport 
(3O4), Sayre, Oklahoma, about 1710, was en route to Erie Municipal Airport (KEIK), Erie, 
Colorado, and diverted to KAPA.
While en route, the pilot assessed that the fuel level from right tank was not changing. It did 
not appear that fuel was draining from the right tank and the fuel remaining in the left fuel 
tank was not adequate to complete the flight as previously planned. The pilot requested to 
divert to KAPA and while preparing to land the engine lost power. The pilot performed a forced 
landing to a field during which the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted. The lower 
fuselage and the engine mount were substantially damaged.
The airframe, engine, and fuel system were examined under the auspices of the National 
Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge. The sight gauges for the left and right fuel 
tanks and indicated capacity of the left and right fuel tanks were accurate. Visible 
contaminants, consistent with insect(s) and leaves, were recovered from the right fuel tank and 
fuel lines. Once the contaminants were removed fuel flowed freely from the right fuel tank. The 
examination of the engine, airframe, and remaining systems revealed no anomalies.
