The flight instructor was preparing the pilot for her commercial rotorcraft-helicopter practical 
test. The instructor stated that they were returning to the airport when the engine shut down. 
The instructor entered an autorotation, which terminated in a hard landing. The instructor 
stated that he assumed the pilot pulled the mixture control instead of the carburetor heat 
because he saw it pulled after the helicopter came to a full stop on the ground; however, he 
never actually saw her pull the mixture control. The pilot stated that the instructor rolled the 
throttle to idle to simulate an in-flight loss of engine power as part of her checkride 
preparation. Both she and the instructor were operating the controls for the autorotation. The 
pilot said she was not sure what happened, but they landed hard and a section of windscreen 
popped out. She then pulled the mixture to shut off the engine, while the instructor used the 
rotor brake to stop the main rotor blades. The pilot exited the helicopter to recover the 
windshield and was subsequently struck in the head by a main rotor blade. Although the 
instructor's and pilot's accounts varied regarding the events leading up to the autorotation, 
they both reported that the autorotation ended in a hard landing, and that there were no 
mechanical issues with the helicopter or the engine that contributed to the accident.
The flight instructor's failure to maintain control of the helicopter during an autorotation, 
which resulted in a hard landing.
On December 1, 2015, about 1530 eastern standard time, a Robinson R22, N8560M, made a 
forced landing to a field near Venice, Florida. The flight instructor sustained minor injuries and 
the private pilot was seriously injured. The helicopter was registered to N8560M, LLC, and 
operated by Helicopter Academy under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91 as an instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions existed near the accident site at 
the time of the accident and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated from the Venice 
Municipal Airport (VNC), Venice, Florida, about 1430.
The flight instructor reported that he was preparing the pilot for her commercial rotorcraft-
helicopter checkride. They had practiced several maneuvers before heading back to the airport. 
While en route to the airport, the instructor was asking the pilot where she would land in the 
event of an engine failure when he noticed that the manifold pressure had dropped below 18 
inches of mercury, which necessitated activation of the carburetor heat. The instructor did not 
recall if he told the pilot to turn the carburetor heat on, but remembered looking back outside 
because they were discussing forced landing areas. The instructor said the pilot then 
accidentally "pulled the mixture" versus the carburetor heat and "shut off the engine." He 
immediately took control of the helicopter, entered an autorotation, and landed "hard." The 
windshield popped out and the helicopter rocked back and forth before it came to rest. The 
instructor said the pilot then exited the helicopter and ran toward the front. The main rotor 
blades were still moving and struck the pilot's head. The instructor said he never saw the pilot 
actually pull the mixture control in flight. He assumed that she did, because when he went to 
shut the engine down, the mixture control's safety gate was on the floor and the mixture 
control was pulled out.
The pilot stated that while returning to Venice, the instructor asked her where she would land 
if they had an engine failure. She said the beach, but the instructor pointed out a more suitable 
spot. The instructor then called out "3-2-1" and rolled off the throttle to simulate an engine 
failure. The pilot said that both of them were on the controls and the autorotation looked good 
until they were about 250 feet from the landing spot. The helicopter landed hard, but she did 
not know why. Once on the ground, the pilot said she "pulled the mixture" while the instructor 
had his hand on the rotor-brake. She then exited the helicopter to go retrieve the windshield 
that had popped off during landing. While standing out in front of the helicopter, one of the 
main rotor blades struck her on the left side of the head, fracturing her orbital bone.
Both the instructor and pilot reported there were no mechanical deficiencies that would have 
precluded normal operation of the helicopter or engine.
The instructor held a commercial pilot certificate for rotorcraft-helicopter and was also a 
certified flight instructor in rotorcraft-helicopter. He reported a total flight experience of 700 
hours, of which, 600 hours were in the R22. The instructor's last Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) second class medical was issued on August 11, 2015.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate for rotorcraft-helicopter. She reported a total flight 
experience of 150 hours, of which, 150 hours were in the R22. The pilot's last FAA second class 
medical was issued on June 6, 2015.
Weather reported at VNC at 1535 was wind 310 degrees at 6 knots, clear skies, and visibility 
great than 10 miles. The temperature was 79 degrees F and the dewpoint was 72 degrees F.
