Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Schaumburg, IL
Accident Number:
CEN11LA049
Date & Time:
11/01/2010, 1530 CDT 
Registration:
N71823
Aircraft:
LUSCOMBE 8A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness reported seeing the airplane takeoff and climb to about 150 feet above the ground. At 
that point, the sound from the engine ceased, and the airplane stalled and spun to the left 
making one-half revolution before striking the ground. Examination of the airframe, control 
system, and engine revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical anomalies that would 
have precluded normal operation. Examination of the cockpit engine controls showed that the 
carburetor heat was off and the engine primer was unlocked and pulled out. Although the 
weather conditions at the time of the accident were conducive to carburetor icing, they were 
not in the range likely to result in serious carburetor icing. Examination of the spark plugs 
indicated a rich mixture condition. The primer position and the condition of the spark plugs 
indicate that the engine power loss was likely due to an overly rich mixture resulting from 
excess fuel being pulled through the primer into the engine™s intake system when takeoff power 
was applied. Since the purpose of the primer is to assist in starting a cold engine, it is possible 
the pilot used the primer when starting the engine and did not ensure that it was in and locked 
before initiating take off.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot did not maintain airspeed following a loss of engine power during takeoff climb, 
which resulted in an aerodynamic stall. Contributing to the accident was the loss of engine 
power due to the unlocked engine primer.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Engine controls - Incorrect use/operation (Factor)
Page 2 of 6CEN11LA049
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On November 1, 2010, about 1530 central daylight time, a Luscombe 8A, N71823, sustained 
substantial damage when it impacted the ground after takeoff from runway 11 (3,800 feet by 
100 feet, concrete), at the Schaumburg Regional Airport, Schaumburg, Illinois. The pilot, who 
was the sole occupant, was fatally injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the 
pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual 
flight rules (VFR) conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not operated on a flight plan. 
The flight was originating at the time of the accident and was en route to the Sylvania Airport, 
Sturtevant, Wisconsin.
A commercial pilot who was at the airport was a witness to the accident. He reported that the 
initial climb after takeoff appeared to be at a normal pitch angle and when the airplane reached 
about 150 feet above ground level (agl), the sound of the engine ceased. The airplane ﬁhung 
thereﬂ and then stalled. The left wing dropped and the airplane made about one-half of a 
revolution before it impacted the ground. The witness stated that he could see that the 
propeller was turning during the accident sequence. He also reported that prior to the accident 
flight the pilot fueled the airplane using a red fuel can and that the pilot may have had trouble 
getting the airplane™s engine started; however, the witness stated that the engine sounded 
normal during its taxi and subsequent takeoff until the point where the engine sounds ceased.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with single-engine land, single-engine sea, glider, 
and instrument airplane ratings. He also held a flight instructor certificate with a rating for 
single engine airplanes. The pilot™s most recent second class airman medical certificate was 
issued on September 11, 2007. The pilot reported having 1,100 hours of flight experience on his 
application for that medical certificate.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
The airplane was a 1946 Luscombe model 8A, serial number 3250. It was a 2 place airplane 
with tailwheel type landing gear and side-by-side seating. It had a strut braced high-wing. The 
wing had aluminum covering, and the fuselage was of predominately aluminum construction. 
The airplane was powered by a Continental A-65-8 engine rated to produce 65 horsepower. 
The airplane™s most recent annual inspection was completed on September 16, 2010.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
At 1552, the recorded weather conditions at the Dupage Airport, about 8 miles southwest of the 
accident site, were: Wind 280 degrees at 6 knots; 10 statute miles visibility; broken clouds at 
8,000 feet agl; temperature 22 degrees Celsius; dew point 6 degrees Celsius.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The airplane impacted the ground about 20 feet to the side of the runway. The aft fuselage was 
partially separated from the forward fuselage at the aft cabin. All of the airplane™s tail surfaces 
remained attached to the aft fuselage. The engine and forward fuselage were crushed rearward. 
The wings exhibited impact damage to their leading edges and the wings remained attached to 
the upper cabin of the fuselage. The upper cabin section of the airplane had separated from the 
Page 3 of 6CEN11LA049
remainder of the fuselage. The wing struts remained attached at all points and the main 
landing gear remained attached to the fuselage. Examination of the airplane™s control system 
revealed no preimpact anomalies. 
Examination of the cockpit controls for the engine revealed that the magneto switch was in the 
ﬁRightﬂ position and the key was bent, the carburetor heat was off, the throttle was full 
forward, and the engine primer was out.
Examination of the airplane™s engine confirmed crankshaft rotation, valve train continuity, and 
magneto operation. Compression was evident on 3 cylinders during initial examination of the 
engine. Compression on the fourth cylinder was evident after ﬁstakingﬂ the valves. All spark 
plugs exhibited sooting, consistent with a rich mixture. Fuel was present in the carburetor and 
the fuel strainer was free of obstruction. No preimpact anomalies were found with respect to 
the engine.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on November 2, 2010, by the Cook County Medical 
Examiner™s Office. The autopsy findings included "multiple injuries," and the report listed the 
specific injuries. The cause of death was attributed to these injuries. 
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The toxicology report listed negative 
findings for all tests performed.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Referencing Federal Aviation Administration Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin CE-
09-35, the temperature and dew point at the time of the accident were conducive for the 
formation of carburetor icing. 
The accident airplane was a standard category airplane but its specifications allowed it to be 
operated as a light sport airplane. When operated as a light sport airplane, the pilot is not 
required to possess a current airman medical certificate. Pilots are allowed to use their state 
driver™s license to establish medical fitness in-lieu of an actual airman medical certificate 
unless their most recent application for an airman medical certificate was denied.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (total)
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 4 of 6CEN11LA049
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
66, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/11/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/22/2010
Flight Time:
1100 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
LUSCOMBE
Registration:
N71823
Model/Series:
8A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3250
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/16/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1260 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
A-65-8
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN11LA049
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DPA, 759 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1552 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
225°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 8000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.01 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Schaumburg, IL (06C)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Unknown
Destination: 
Sturtevant, WI (C89)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1530 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Schaumburg Regional Airport (06C)
Runway Surface Type:
Concrete
Airport Elevation:
801 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
29
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3800 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
41.989444, -88.101111
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John M Brannen
Adopted Date:
03/08/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Sandra Boerman; FAA-Dupage FSDO; West Chicago, IL
Publish Date:
03/08/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77710
Page 6 of 6CEN11LA049
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
