Page 1 of 3ERA18FA240
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Covington, TN
Accident Number:
ERA18FA240
Date & Time:
09/01/2018, 1720 CDT 
Registration:
N815EY
Aircraft:
LANCE M HOOLEY JETEZ
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On September 1, 2018, about 1720 central daylight time, an experimental amateur-built 
JETEZ, N815EY, was destroyed when it experienced an in-flight breakup and impacted terrain 
while maneuvering at low altitude near Covington Municipal Airport (M04), Covington, 
Tennessee. The airline transport pilot was fatally injured. The airplane was operated by the 
pilot as a personal flight conducted under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal 
Regulations
 Part 91. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was 
filed for the local flight.
According to a witness, the purpose of the flight was to observe the two canard jets based at the 
airport in-flight together. He reported that the accident airplane departed prior to the other jet 
from runway 19, climbed to about 1,000 ft above ground level (agl), then started a descending 
270° turn. The airplane crossed over the middle of M04, about 200 ft agl, at an estimated 
speed of 200 to 210 knots, in a level pitch and bank attitude. Shortly after the airplane crossed 
the runway, he observed the left wing and winglet "oscillate" about 5 times and then the left 
wing "exploded." He then observed pieces of the airplane falling, the airplane pitched up about 
90°, the right wing separated, and the airplane descended into a cotton field. He reported that 
the engine "sounded fine."
According to a second witness, he observed the airplane cross over the airport about 200 ft agl. 
He stated the engine sounded as it "was not at idle," and it "had power." After the airplane flew 
over the airport, he continued watching the airplane to his left, observed a "gentle pull-up" to 
the point where he could see the canard located on the forward part of the fuselage. At this 
time, he noticed a "wave like movement" or a "wiggle" in the left wing and then the "left wing 
failed at mid-span." Subsequently, the airplane pitched up "violently," the right wing "snapped 
off," and numerous pieces departed the airplane as it "tumbled down to the left" and impacted 
terrain. He then observed fire and smoke. The witness reported that he held an airline 
transport pilot certificate.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airmen records, the pilot held an airline 
transport pilot certificate with an airplane multi-engine land rating, and a commercial pilot 
certificate with airplane single-engine land and lighter-than-air balloon ratings. He also held a 
flight instructor certificate for airplane single and multi-engine. He held type ratings for the A-
Page 2 of 3ERA18FA240
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
320, BA-3100, EMB-120, and the SF-340, and a repairman experimental aircraft builder 
certificate for the accident airplane as well as a DR-107 experimental amateur-built airplane. 
The pilot was issued an FAA first-class medical certificate on March 22, 2018. At that time, the 
pilot reported civil flight experience that included 22,000 total hours and 5 hours in preceding 
6 months.
According to FAA airworthiness records, the airplane was a two-seat original design composite, 
canard style airplane, manufactured by the pilot. It was powered by a modified GE-T58-8B 
turbine engine. The airplane was issued a special airworthiness certificate on June 30, 2014. 
The airplane was designed with blended composite winglets that were integral to a C-channel 
wing spar. 
The weather conditions reported at M04, at 1715, included visibility of 10 statute miles, few 
clouds at 5,000 ft and 5,500 ft above ground level, wind 130° at 6 knots, temperature 31°C, and 
dew point 23°C. 
The airplane's fuselage came to rest inverted in a flat cotton field oriented on a magnetic 
heading of 065°, about 0.50 nautical miles northeast of M04. The airplane sustained extensive 
impact damage, and evidence of a post-impact fire was observed. All major components of the 
airplane were accounted for along the airplane's flight path. Fragments of the outboard portion 
of the left wing and winglet were found separated from the left-wing root, earliest in the debris 
field, about 1,000 ft from the fuselage. Moving forward in the debris field, fragments of the 
outboard portion of the right wing and winglet were found separated from the right-wing root, 
about 870 ft from the fuselage. 
The nose landing gear separated from the fuselage and examination revealed it was in the 
retracted position. The main landing gear separated from the fuselage and was found about 
100 ft forward of the fuselage. Examination of the restraint system buckles found next to the 
fuselage revealed they were latched. Fragments of the canard were found separated from the 
fuselage in the debris path. The engine had separated from the engine mounts and was found 
with the fuselage. 
Flight control continuity could not be established from the control surfaces to the cockpit area, 
as they had separated from their attachments and the cockpit section was destroyed by the 
post-crash fire. Examination of the left wing revealed that it separated from the fuselage into 
multiple fragments. Multiple pieces of the blue foam wing core separated from inside of the 
wing and were scattered in the along the flight path. The left aileron fragmented and separated 
from the wing. The left rudder was found in one piece and separated from the winglet, and its 
flight control cable had separated and was consistent with tensile overload.
The right wing separated from the fuselage into multiple fragments. The right aileron was 
found separated from the wing and was in one piece. The right rudder separated from the 
winglet and was found in one piece.
The engine was visually inspected, and no signs of foreign object debris damage was observed. 
The inlet variable guide vanes were intact and displayed rotational scoring. The alternator and 
Page 3 of 3ERA18FA240
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
belt, starter, and tail cone sustained impact damage. The exhaust section and tail cone were 
free of debris. The second stage turbine vanes were intact when examined. 
The wreckage was retained for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
LANCE M HOOLEY
Registration:
N815EY
Model/Series:
JETEZ 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
Yes
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KM04, 280 ft msl
Observation Time:
1715 CDT
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C / 23°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 5000 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
6 knots / , 130°
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30.04 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Covington, TN (M04)
Destination: 
Covington, TN (M04)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
35.586389, -89.578333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Adam M Gerhardt
Additional Participating Persons:
Dan Merrell; FAA/ FSDO; Memphis, TN
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
