Page 1 of 12
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Peru, WV
Accident Number:
ERA12FA012
Date & Time:
10/02/2011, 2045 EDT 
Registration:
N115CL
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-32R-300
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
VFR encounter with IMC
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The non-instrument-rated pilot, who was also the owner of the airplane, departed on a night 
visual flight rules (VFR) flight. Weather conditions at the departure airport were VFR, the 
weather conditions en route were a combination of marginal VFR and instrument flight rules 
(IFR), and the weather at the destination airport was IFR. The pilot had obtained a weather 
briefing earlier in the evening, during which he was informed that VFR flight was not 
recommended. About 30 minutes before the accident, the pilot's in-flight weather briefing 
indicated that instrument meteorological conditions, including low ceilings and mountain 
obscuration, were forecast for their intended route and at their destination. About 4 minutes 
before the accident, the pilot advised air traffic control personnel that "we are losing VFR, I 
need a deviation." Radio and radar contact were then lost. 
A postaccident examination of the wreckage indicated that the airplane struck the top of a tree, 
rolled inverted, and impacted the ground. No preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures 
with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation were noted. The only 
navigational charts found at the accident scene were folded VFR charts and airport facility 
directories. No IFR charts were found. 
Analysis of the radar data and wreckage information revealed that the airplane made a series of 
erratic maneuvers, including a 360-degree heading change, before entering a descent and 
impacting the ground at high speed. These maneuvers took place in the last few minutes of the 
flight and were consistent with spatial disorientation. FAA guidance indicates that spatial 
disorientation can occur when there is no natural horizon or surface reference, such as a night 
flight in sparsely populated areas similar to that of the accident area and conditions. Although 
about 34 percent of the moon's disk was potentially illuminated at the time of the accident, 
given the cloud coverage in the area it is unlikely that the moon provided any illumination over 
the accident site. FAA guidance also indicates that spatial disorientation is more likely to occur 
if a pilot lacks proficiency in instrument flying.
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 12ERA12FA012
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The non-instrument rated pilot's improper decision to continue visual flight into instrument 
meteorological conditions, which resulted in spatial disorientation and subsequent in-flight 
collision with mountainous terrain.
Findings
Personnel issues
Spatial disorientation - Pilot (Cause)
Weather planning - Pilot
Environmental issues
Below VFR minima - Decision related to condition (Cause)
Mountainous/hilly terrain - Not specified
Page 3 of 12ERA12FA012
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 2, 2011, about 2045 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-32-300R, N115CL, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted the trees and terrain in a mountainous, wooded area 
near Peru, West Virginia. The airplane departed from Danville Regional Airport (DAN), 
Danville, Virginia, about 1930 with an intended destination of John Murtha Johnstown-
Cambria County Airport (JST), Johnstown, Pennsylvania. Night, instrument meteorological 
conditions (IMC) prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The private pilot and two passengers 
were fatally injured. The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91. 
The flight departed Grand Strand Airport (CRE), North Myrtle Beach, South Carolina about 
1800 with the pilot and three passengers. After an intended intermediate stop at DAN, one 
passenger deplaned and the flight continued to its intended destination of JST.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and personal records, the pilot held a 
private pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land privileges. The pilot had received his 
private pilot certificate on August 31, 2011 and his most recent pilot logbook entry was dated 
September 24, 2011. At that time, he had recorded 110.5 total hours of flight experience, 
including 40.4 total hours in the accident airplane make and model. He had also recorded 5.4 
hours of simulated instrument experience, of which all were in a different aircraft make and 
model than the accident airplane. He had also recorded 7.6 total flight hours of night 
experience, of which 3.0 of those hours were in the accident airplane with a certificated flight 
instructor. On September 4, 2011, the accident pilot received an endorsement for "PIC [pilot in 
command] Œ Complex airplane" and "PIC Œ High performance airplane." The pilot did not 
possess an instrument rating. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
According to aircraft and FAA records, the airplane was issued an airworthiness certificate on 
July 23, 1977 and was registered to the pilot on August 18, 2011. The airplane's most recent 
annual inspection was recorded on March 2, 2011 at a recorded total time of 4,541.15 flight 
hours. It was equipped with a Lycoming IO-540-K1G5D engine, rated at 300 horsepower. The 
engine's most recent annual inspection was recorded on March 2, 2011 and indicated 734.15 
flight hours since major overhaul (SMOH). The most recent entry in the engine maintenance 
records was on July 7, 2011 and at that time indicated 736.44 flight hours SMOH.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 2055 recorded weather observation at Grant County Regional Airport (W99), Petersburg, 
West Virginia, located approximately 11 miles northwest of the accident location, included calm 
winds, visibility 10 miles with light drizzle, broken clouds at 3,600 feet and 4,300 feet above 
ground level (agl) and overcast at 5,000 feet agl, temperature 8 degrees C, dew point 6 degrees 
C, and barometric altimeter 29.97 inches of mercury.
The National Weather Service (NWS) surface analysis chart for 2000 EDT (0000Z) on October 
2, 2011, depicted a low pressure system over southern New York with several troughs of low 
pressure extending westward and southward from the low. The station models over West 
Page 4 of 12ERA12FA012
Virginia indicated general winds from the west with overcast clouds and scattered rain 
showers. The NWS radar composite chart for 2045 depicted a large area of echoes extending 
from New York and Pennsylvania, into West Virginia, Eastern Kentucky, and Virginia.
The closest upper air sounding from Sterling, Virginia, located about 74 miles east of the 
accident site, indicated a moist low-level environment with a relative humidity of 75 percent 
and greater from the surface to 12,800 feet. The freezing level was identified at 4,132 feet msl 
and supported icing in clouds and in precipitation to above 20,000 feet.
The NWS area forecast, issued at 1341, expected broken clouds at 5,000 feet msl with tops to 
9,000 feet, with overcast clouds at 4,000 feet after 2000. Occasional visibilities of 3 to 5 miles 
in light rain and mist were expected. The forecast included Airmen's Meteorological 
Information (AIRMET) Sierra for IFR conditions and mountain obscuration along the 
intended route of flight.
According to Lockheed Martin Flight Service (LMFS) recorded data, the pilot contacted them 
earlier in the day. A representative from LMFS provided details of a preflight weather briefing. 
The briefing lasted about 9 minutes, during which time the pilot was notified of the existence of 
icing and IFR conditions due to precipitation and ceilings and visual flight rules (VFR) flight 
was not recommended for the planned flight from DNV to JST.
According to the U.S. Naval Observatory, on the day of the accident, sunset occurred at 1858 
and moonset was at 2258. The moon was a waxing crescent with 34 percent of the moon's 
visible disk illuminated.
The 1935 recorded weather observation at DNV included wind from 340 degrees at 4 knots, 
visibility 10 miles, clear skies, temperature 14 degrees C, dew point 0 degrees C, and 
barometric altimeter 30.14 inches of mercury. The weather remained similar for several hours 
after the accident.
The 2054 recorded weather observation at JST, the intended destination, included wind from 
310 degrees at 9 knots, visibility 9 miles with light rain, overcast clouds at 400 feet agl, 
temperature 2 degrees C, dew point 2 degrees C; barometric altimeter 29.89 inches of mercury. 
From about 1400 until several hours after the accident, the clouds were overcast between 200 
and 900 feet agl.
COMMUNICATION
The accident airplane was receiving flight following services from the FAA Air Route Traffic 
Control Center facility located in Leesburg, Virginia. Recordings of voice and radar tracking 
data were obtained from that facility.
At 2038:08, the pilot, who had been flying direct JST on a northerly course at 5,500 feet, 
notified the controller, "we are losing VFR I need a deviation." At 2038:22, he stated "we're 
gonna try reversing course." The controller asked if the flight was IFR capable and if pilot 
wanted to file an IFR flight plan. The pilot reported ﬁwe are IFR capableﬂ; but when asked if he 
wanted to file an IFR flight plan, the pilot declined, stating, in part, "I'm not even sure I've got 
the plates here–" and clarified his intention to return to DAN. At 2039:20, the pilot said that 
he was going to change frequencies to check the weather.
At 2042:03, the pilot announced that he was back on the controller™s frequency. The controller 
stated "okay looks like you're going back opposite direction" to which the pilot stated "yeah 
we're headed back." Asked to clarify his intended destination, the pilot said ﬁI think we™re 
Page 5 of 12ERA12FA012
gonna head back toward Danville–ﬂ. The controller identified an alternate airport 10 miles 
north of the airplane™s position but, at 2042:30, the pilot responded, "yeah I just as soon not do 
that I can't seem to find my plates I'm getting bounced around pretty good."
Radar data indicated that during the time when the pilot reported to the controller that he was 
going to be off frequency checking weather, the airplane began a series of erratic maneuvers. 
About 2040:49, the airplane entered a gradual left turn. Between 2041:13 and 2041:25, the 
turn tightened and the airplane entered a steep left spiral dive, losing 700 feet in 12 seconds. 
The airplane briefly disappeared from radar on a westerly heading, but it reappeared at 
2141:43, at a higher altitude and flying a southeasterly heading. At 2141:55, the airplane began 
to make a tight left turn. Shortly after the pilot informed the controller that he was back on the 
controller™s frequency, the airplane briefly stabilized on a northerly heading at 4,900 feet msl 
but, at 2142:30, as the pilot made his final transmission, the airplane disappeared from radar 
for the last time. 
Recordings of voice data obtained from the Lockheed Martin Washington Contracted Flight 
Service Station indicated that the pilot contacted Flight Watch at 2016. During the recorded 
conversation the weather specialist informed the pilot that an AIRMET for IFR conditions and 
mountain obscuration still existed along their intended route of flight. The specialist further 
informed the pilot that the forecast was showing ceilings below 1,000 feet and visibility below 3 
miles. The pilot informed the specialist, "do believe we're gonna look at lynchburg uh I'll get 
back to ya here in just a little bit uh I have to get back on uh flight following here right now."  
The recorded communication lasted about 6 minutes and no further communication with 
Flight Watch was located.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane was found inverted in mountainous, wooded terrain. The debris path was about 
650 feet in length. The wreckage debris path was oriented on 045 degree magnetic heading and 
the main wreckage was located about 2,900 feet msl. The engine was found separated from the 
airplane and was within the vicinity of the main wreckage. A review of Washington Center 
radar data indicated that the last radar return was at 4,900 feet msl and was 255 degrees and 
0.62 miles from the accident location.
 
Examination of the wreckage indicated that the stabilator was impact separated and the center 
section of the stabilator was located in a tree approximately 80 feet agl and in the vicinity of the 
initial tree strike. Sections of the left wing were located along the debris field prior to the main 
wreckage. The impact crater was 11 feet in length, 53 inches wide, and 22 inches in depth. 
Inside the impact crater were the inboard section of the left flap, a section of the cockpit 
instrument panel, and numerous fragments of the left wing. The engine and cockpit area came 
to rest between a group of three trees. A section of the right wing, including the retracted main 
landing gear, was located up the hill, approximately 79 feet forward, and to the right of the 
main wreckage. A fragmented portion of the right wing flap was located up an incline and in 
front of the main wreckage approximately 107 feet. The flap handle was found in the down 
position, which correlated with flaps "UP" position. The stabilator trim indicator was not 
viewable and the landing gear handle was not located. 
Fuselage
The fuselage was segmented and the cabin walls were breeched. All windows were separated 
Page 6 of 12ERA12FA012
from their normal positions; were cracked, splintered and segmented. The forward cabin and 
aft cabin doors were separated and impact damaged. The aft cargo door was separated and 
impact damaged. All six seats were recovered and noted to be separated from their fuselage 
floor mountings; all exhibited impact damage and some torsion twisting. Seat restraints were 
located and all showed impact damage but were found to be connected to their mountings; 
however, the mountings were separated from the fuselage fragments. The co-pilot's seat 
restraint was found in the latched position. The seat belts associated with the pilot, co-pilot, 
and the middle row seat located behind the co-pilot seat exhibited web stretching.
Cockpit
The instrument panel was separated from the forward fuselage area. It was void of 
instrumentation and the instrumentation was located throughout the debris field and did not 
yield any useable information. The rudder pedals and flight control "T"-bar were impact-
damaged and control cable continuity was traced to all the cable breaks from the associated 
attach points. The breaks had the appearance of broomstrawing at the fracture points. The 
aileron chain was found impact separated from the "T" bar. 
Loose papers, around the accident location, were collected and examined. The only 
navigational publications found in the vicinity of the wreckage were three unopened/folded 
Sectional Aeronautical Charts, along with several Airport/Facility Directories.  No IFR charts 
were found. 
Empennage
The vertical fin was found separated from the fuselage and exhibited impact damage along the 
leading edge. The side skins were concave due to impact damage. The rudder was attached to 
the vertical fin at its hinge points and control cable continuity was traced to the tensile 
overload breaks. The stops were in place and exhibited some impact damage. The rudder 
balance weight was not located in or around the debris field. The rudder position at impact 
could not be determined.
The stabilator was separated from its mounting. Both tip sections were separated and both tip 
weights were attached. The main stabilator assembly was located in an approximate 100-foot-
tall tree near the initial impact location. The primary balance weight was located in the ground 
impact debris field approximately 60 feet forward of the main impact area. Control cable 
sections were attached and exhibited tensile overload separations. The left and right tip 
sections were located on the ground forward of the tree impact area. The trim drum was not 
located.
Left Wing
The left wing was separated and fragmented. The fuel tank was impact-damaged, breeched and 
void of fuel. The fuel cap remained secure and in place. The flap was partially attached and 
fragmented. The aileron was fragmented and partially attached. The aileron balance weight 
was not located. An aftermarket gap seal kit was installed on the flap and aileron. The primary 
balance cable was segmented and exhibited evidence of tensile overload. Control continuity 
was partially established. The fiberglass wing tip was separated and fragmented. The left main 
landing gear was separated and the strut tube was separated from its housing and located 
within the debris field.
Right Wing
Page 7 of 12ERA12FA012
The right wing was impact separated and fragmented. The wing root section was located 
forward of the main impact area in the debris field. It contained the right main landing gear 
and appeared to be in the "UP" position. The outboard wing section was fragmented from 
impact and the fuel tank was fragmented and void of fuel. The fuel cap was impact separated 
and was located approximately 40 feet from the fuel tank. The wing tip was separated and 
fragmented. The aileron was separated and the aileron control sector was located within the 
debris field. It contained segments of the primary and balance cables attached and they 
exhibited tensile overload signatures. The right flap was impact damaged, partially attached 
and fragmented. The control rod was broken and the flap and aileron had aftermarket gap seals 
installed. The fiberglass wing tip was separated, impact damaged, and fragmented.
The doors were all impacted separated and indicated the doors were in the close and locked 
positions.
Engine
The engine was impacted separated from the engine mounts. The No.s 2, 4, and 6 cylinders 
exhibited impact damage, with the No.2 cylinder most extensively damaged. The top spark 
plugs were removed by investigators, with the exception of the No. 2 cylinder plug, which was 
missing. The No.s 4 and 6 cylinder spark plugs remained attached in the cylinder plug hole but 
were fractured slightly above their threads. Cylinder No.s 1, 3, and 5 remained attached and all 
spark plugs appeared gray in color with no unusual wear indicated. The engine sump pump 
exhibited impact damage and oil was present. 
The engine power controls were visible; however, they were severely bent and were difficult to 
move due to impact damage and their pre-impact positions could not be accurately 
determined. Engine control continuity was not established on the mixture, propeller, and 
throttle due to impact damage. The alternator and starter were separated and found forward of 
the debris field.
The fuel injector and engine-driven fuel pump contained a blue fluid and had a smell similar to 
100 LL aviation fuel. The engine-driven fuel pump was disassembled by investigators and the 
diaphragm was intact and no damage was noted. The fuel pump armature operated smoothly. 
The fuel servo was impacted separated, the throttle valve was jammed with dirt, and the fuel 
servo diaphragm was impact damaged. The electric-driven fuel pump was located within the 
debris field; impact damaged, and was devoid of fuel. The fuel selector valve was found in the 
right fuel tank position.
Oil was present on the engine oil dipstick and the oil filter was removed from the rear of the 
engine by investigators. It contained oil and was free of debris or contaminants. 
The right oil cooler was impact damaged but remained attached to the engine. The left oil 
cooler was impact separated and damaged.
The magneto was impacted separated, located 68 feet forward of the main wreckage. When 
rotated by hand, spark was observed. The magneto switch was located in the impact crater and 
was found in the "BOTH" position; however, the key was sheared and part of it remained inside 
the key hole.
The vacuum pump remained attached to the engine. Disassembly revealed that the vanes were 
cracked with rotational scoring noted inside the case.
The turn coordinator, HSI [horizontal situational indicator], and directional gyro were all 
Page 8 of 12ERA12FA012
examined and exhibited extensive impact damage. The gyro was removed and exhibited 
rotational scoring on the inside of the gyro case.
Propeller
The Hartzell 3-bladed propeller was impacted separated and located up the incline and 40 feet 
in front of the main wreckage. The blades were partially imbedded in the ground and all three 
blades remained attached to the hub. Two of the propeller blades exhibited extensive tip 
curling on the outboard approximate one-third of their length, and S-bending. One propeller 
blade remained relatively straight, embedded in the ground and exhibited chordwise scratches.  
The propeller governor was impacted separated, fractured, and remained within the vicinity of 
the engine. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on October 8, 2011, by State of West Virginia Office of 
the Chief Medical Examiner, Charleston, West Virginia. The autopsy findings included 
"catastrophic injuries" and the report listed those injuries. The report also stated that alcohol 
was detected in muscle tissue and was ascribed to postmortem formation.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The toxicology reported stated 15 
(mg/dL, mg/hg) ethanol detected in muscle, and no drugs were detected in the muscle.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Federal Aviation Regulation 91.155, Basic VFR Weather Minimums, states, "no person may 
operate an aircraft under VFR when the flight visibility is less, or at a distance from clouds that 
is less, that that prescribed for the corresponding altitude and class of airspace." Class C, D, E, 
and G distance from cloud minimums were listed as: 500 feet below, 1,000 feet above, and 
2,000 feet horizontal.
According to the FAA website, Sectional Aeronautical Charts are "the primary navigational 
reference medium used by the VFR pilot community–is designed for visual navigation of slow 
to medium speed aircraft–"
Airplane Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-3A)
The Airplane Flying Handbook (AFH), Chapter 16 "Emergency Procedures" contained a section 
entitled "Inadvertent VFR Flight into IMC" which stated in part " A VFR pilot is in IMC 
conditions anytime he or she is unable to maintain airplane attitude control by reference to the 
natural horizon, regardless of the circumstances or the prevailing weather 
conditions–Accident statistics show that the pilot who has not been trained in attitude 
instrument flying, or one whose instrument skills have eroded, will lose control of the airplane 
in about 10 minutes once forced to rely solely on instrument reference." The stated purpose of 
the AFH was "to provide guidance on practical emergency measures to maintain airplane 
control for a limited period of time in the event a VFR pilot encounters IMC conditions–to 
help the VFR pilot keep the airplane under adequate control until suitable visual reference s 
are regained." The AFH further stated that the first steps necessary for a VFR pilot to survive 
an encounter with IMC included "recognition and acceptance of the seriousness of the situation 
and the need for immediate remedial action, maintaining control of the airplane, and obtaining 
the appropriate assistance." It stated that "Attempts to control the airplane partially by 
reference to flight instruments while searching outside the cockpit for visual confirmation of 
Page 9 of 12ERA12FA012
the information provided by those instruments will result in inadequate airplane control," 
which "may be followed by spatial disorientation and complete control loss."
The handbook additionally stated, "The pilot must believe what the flight instruments show 
about the airplane's attitude regardless of what the natural senses tell. The vestibular sense 
(motion sensing by the inner ear) can and will confuse the pilot. Because of inertia, the sensory 
areas of the inner ear cannot detect slight changes in airplane attitude, nor can they accurately 
send the attitude changes which occur at a uniform rate over a period of time. On the other 
hand, false sensations are often generated, leading the pilot to believe the attitude of the 
airplane has changed when, in fact, it has not. These false sensations result in the pilot 
experiencing spatial disorientations."
FAA Advisory Circular 60-4A
"The attitude of an aircraft is generally determined by reference to the natural horizon or other 
visual reference with the surface. If neither horizon nor surface references exist, the attitude of 
an aircraft must be determined by artificial means from the flight instruments. Sight, 
supported by other senses, allows the pilot to maintain orientation. However, during periods of 
low visibility, the supporting senses sometimes conflict with what is seen. When this happens, 
a pilot is particularly vulnerable to disorientation. The degree of orientation may vary 
considerably with particularly vulnerable to disorientation. The degree of orientation may vary 
considerably with individual pilots. Spatial disorientation to a pilot means simply the inability 
to tell which is 'up'–Surface references and the natural horizon may at times become obscured, 
although visibility may be above flight rule minimums. Lack of natural horizon or such 
reference is common on overwater flights, at night, and especially at night in extremely 
sparsely populated areas, or in low visibility conditions– The disoriented pilot may place the 
aircraft in a dangerous attitude–therefore, the use of flight instruments is essential to maintain 
proper attitude when encountering any of the elements which may result in spatial 
disorientation."
FAA Advisory Circular 61-134
"According to National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and FAA data, one of the leading 
causes of GA [general aviation] accidents is continue VFR flight into IMC– the importance of 
complete weather information, understanding, the significance of the weather information, 
and being able to correlate the pilot's skills and training, aircraft capabilities and operating 
environment with an accurate forecast cannot be emphasized enough– VFR pilots in reduced 
visual conditions may develop spatial disorientation and lose control, possibly going into a 
graveyard spiral–"
Private Pilot Certification
According to the FAA, the minimum requirement for private pilot certification was in part "– 3 
hours of flight training in a single-engine airplane on the control and maneuvering of an 
airplane solely by reference to instruments, including straight and level flight, constant 
airspeed climbs and descents, turns to a heading, recovery from unusual attitudes, radio 
communications, and the use of navigation systems/facilities and radar services appropriate to 
instrument flight–"
Page 10 of 12ERA12FA012
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Preflight or dispatch event
Enroute-cruise
VFR encounter with IMC (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/20/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/31/2011
Flight Time:
111 hours (Total, all aircraft), 40 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N115CL
Model/Series:
PA-32R-300 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
32R-7780439
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/02/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4541.15 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-K1G5D
Registered Owner:
WINGS R US
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
WINGS R US
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 11 of 12ERA12FA012
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
W99, 963 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2055 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
335°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3600 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Drizzle; No Obscuration
Departure Point: 
Danville, VA (DAN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Johnstown, PA (JST)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
1930 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
38.848611, -79.015556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Shawn Etcher
Adopted Date:
07/18/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Antonio C Santos; FAA/FSDO; Glen Burnie, MD
Ron Maynard; Piper Aircraft Corporation; Vero Beach, FL
Publish Date:
07/18/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82007
Page 12 of 12ERA12FA012
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
