Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fayetteville, TN
Accident Number:
ERA11FA435
Date & Time:
08/02/2011, 1110 CDT 
Registration:
NONE
Aircraft:
RANS S18
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot was making his inaugural flight in the recently purchased, recently reassembled 
unregistered experimental airplane. After the pilot's initial takeoff from his home airstrip, 
witnesses saw the airplane turn back toward the runway then lost sight of it behind a tree line. 
They continued to hear the airplane's engine operate until hearing the airplane impact the 
ground. Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no preexisting mechanical 
anomalies, and structural damage indicated that it had impacted the ground in a stall/spin to 
the right. The pilot had not flown in about 6 years, and when a family member suggested that 
he get some refresher flight training before his first flight in the airplane, the pilot declined to 
do so.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed, which resulted in an inadvertent stall/spin. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's lack of recent flight experience.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause)
Recent experience - Pilot (Factor)
Page 2 of 6ERA11FA435
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 2, 2011, about 1110 central daylight time, an unregistered experimental Rans S18 
light sport airplane was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain near a private turf 
airstrip in Fayetteville, Tennessee. The certificated private pilot was fatally injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight, which 
was operated under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
 
Family members stated that the accident flight was the pilot's first flight in the airplane, but 
that he had taxied it on the grass airstrip several times in order to familiarize himself with the 
flight controls.
 
Two witnesses, located approximately 1/4 mile north of the north-south airstrip, stated that 
they heard an airplane that "sounded like a crop duster." They then observed the airplane 
airborne behind trees at the departure [northern] end of the runway, and stated that it 
appeared to bank sharply to the left, back towards the runway. They lost sight of the airplane, 
and afterwords, heard the sound of an impact. They also stated that the airplane's engine was 
running "loudly" until the sound of impact.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot, age 70, held a private pilot certificate. According to the pilot's logbook, his last 
recorded flight was on August 14, 2005. A family member stated that the pilot's wife had urged 
him to get some flight instruction prior to flying the airplane by himself, since it had been some 
time since he had flown; however, the pilot declined to do so. The pilot's latest medical 
certificate was issued on June 6, 2005, and at the time, he indicated 640 hours of flight time.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The two-seat airplane was powered by a Rotax 503 engine. According supporting 
documentation, the airplane was purchased during an on-line auction on July 12, 2011, and a 
bill of sale was signed for it on July 14, 2011. After transport, the airplane was reassembled on 
the pilot's property. No maintenance logbooks were located; however, the advertisement for 
sale stated that it had approximately 200 hours of total airframe and engine time, that it had 
always been hangared, and that it had previously flown under an "ultralight instructor 
exemption."   
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The nearest recorded weather was at an airport about 12 nautical miles south of the accident 
site, about 5 minutes after the accident, and included clear skies and calm wind.
AIRSTRIP INFORMATION
The turf airstrip was mowed into a larger field, and partly indiscernible from its surroundings, 
oriented about 010/190 degrees magnetic, approximately 1,400 feet long and 50 feet wide.
 
Page 3 of 6ERA11FA435
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
 
The airplane came to rest inverted approximately 300 feet east of the airstrip near its southern 
end, in the vicinity of 35 degrees, 6.29 minutes north latitude, 086 degrees, 32.58 minutes west 
longitude. Two ground scars were located underneath the wreckage, each measuring about 1 
foot in length, and oriented toward 080 degrees magnetic. 
The nose and cockpit area exhibited significant fore-to-aft crush damage, and when the 
airplane was righted, the nose was observed bent upwards about 80 degrees. 
The left and right wings, vertical stabilizer, horizontal stabilizer, flaps, ailerons, and elevators 
remained attached to the airframe. Continuity was confirmed from all flight control surfaces to 
the cockpit area. 
The wooden propeller remained attached to the engine, although one blade was fracture-
separated opposite the direction of rotation about one-quarter of its length from the hub. The 
leading edge of the separated portion of the blade exhibited gouging and chordwise scratching. 
The propeller rotated freely by hand, and crankshaft continuity as well as thumb compression 
on both cylinders were confirmed. 
MEDICAL AND TOXICOLOGIOCAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was conducted on the pilot at the Tennessee Office of the Medical Examiner, 
Nashville, Tennessee, where the cause of death was determined to be "multiple blunt force 
injuries."
Subsequent toxicological testing was performed by the FAA Forensic Toxicology Research 
Team, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, with the following results:
Amlodipine in blood and urine, diphenhydramine in blood and urine, and rosuvastatin in urine 
only.
According to the National Institute of Health online reference, amlodipine is used to treat high 
blood pressure and chest pain, diphenhydramine is used to relieve symptoms of common cold, 
hay fever or allergies, and rosuvastatin is used to reduce cholesterol and other fatty substances 
in the blood.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 4 of 6ERA11FA435
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
70, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
None 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
640 hours (Total, all aircraft), 0 hours (Total, this make and model), 0 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
RANS
Registration:
NONE
Model/Series:
S18 NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental Light Sport
Serial Number:
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
970 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
200 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
503
Registered Owner:
Larry Eugene Sheaks
Rated Power:
52 hp
Operator:
Larry Eugene Sheaks
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ERA11FA435
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MDQ, 756 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
15 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1115 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
183°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C / 23°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Fayetteville, TN (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Fayetteville, TN (NONE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1110 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Private 
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
720 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry; Vegetation
Runway Used:
01
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
1400 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
35.104722, -86.543056
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
04/17/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
David Alderman; FAA/FSDO; Nashville, TN
Publish Date:
04/17/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=81353
Page 6 of 6ERA11FA435
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
