National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Beluga, AK
Accident Number: ANC06LA032
Date & Time: 03/01/2006, 1800 AST
Registration: N777YA
Aircraft: Douglas DC-3
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The airline transport pilot was landing a non-scheduled cargo flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, at a gravel airstrip.
While on final approach to land, the airplane struck treetops, but landed safely.
The left wing of the airplane received structural damage.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain altitude/clearance from trees on final approach, which resulted in an in-flight collision with trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On March 1, 2006, about 1800 Alaska standard time, a Douglas DC-3 airplane, N777YA, sustained substantial damage during an in-flight collision with trees on final approach to the Beluga Airport, Beluga, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated by Transnorthern Aviation Inc., Anchorage, Alaska, as a visual flight rules (VFR) non-scheduled cargo flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The airline transport certificated pilot, and the first officer were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company VFR flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight departed the Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport, Anchorage, about 1700.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 3, an FAA principal operations inspector said he had found an airplane with extensive left wing leading edge damage at the Ted Stevens Anchorage International Airport.
He said the operator told him the damage occurred while the pilot was landing at the Beluga Airport, on March 1.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on March 3, a representative of the operator said the pilot reported striking trees at the approach end of the runway during landing.
She said the airplane landed without incident, and the pilot subsequently flew the airplane to Anchorage.
In a written statement to the NTSB dated March 2, the pilot confirmed that the airplane struck treetops on final approach to the Beluga Airport, but landed safely.
: 26900 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 25659 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Pratt & Whitney ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: 1830-92 Registered Owner: Bush Air Cargo Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
