National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: Teterboro, NJ
Incident Number: NYC06IA075
Date & Time: 03/03/2006, 1415 EST
Registration: N973M
Aircraft: Dassault Aviation Falcon 900EX
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The Falcon 900EX, was being flown by the co-pilot from the left seat, and was landing on runway 24, a 6,013-foot-long, 150-foot-wide, asphalt runway.
Witnesses reported the airplane touched down about halfway down the runway, the airplane then traveled off the end, and came to rest in mud, about 330 feet from the end of the runway.
Tire marks consistent with the airplane's tires were observed to begin about 1,000 feet prior to the end of the runway.
The airplane sustained damage to the landing gear assemblies, and the right outboard slat.
Post- incident examination of the braking system did not reveal any evidence of a preimpact malfunction.
It was noted that the landing gear tachometer generators were found to be out-of- tolerance during portions of a test procedure.
The specific reason for the out-of-tolerance condition was not determined; however, it may be attributed to damage sustained during the overrun, or post incident disassembly.
According to the airplane manufacturer, the out-of- tolerance conditions found with respect to the tachometer generators would have resulted in no significant adverse consequence (less than 1-percent) on the overall performance of the braking system.
The airplane's flight data recorder showed that the flight crew did not utilize the airplane's air brake after touchdown, which would have reduced lift, and improved braking effectiveness during the high speed phase of the landing run.
The airplane's total ground roll travel after touchdown was approximately 3,522 feet.
A weather observation taken after the incident reported the winds from 330 degrees, at 19 knots, gusting to 26 knots.
Post-incident friction tests conducted on the runway, revealed friction levels, which would not have required the issuance of a notice to airmen; however, some small patches of snow/ice were observed on the runway surface.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be: The co-pilot's failure to obtain the proper touchdown point, which resulted in an overrun.
Contributing were the gusty wind conditions, the failure of the flight crew to utilize the air brake after touchdown, and a partially contaminated runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - COPILOT/SECOND PILOT 3.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - ICY 4.
(F) FLIGHT CONTROL,SPEED BRAKE - NOT DEPLOYED Factual Information On March 3, 2006, about 1415 eastern standard time, a Dassault Aviation Falcon 900EX, N973M, sustained minor damage during a landing overrun at Teterboro Airport (TEB), Teterboro, New Jersey.
The certificated airline transport rated flight crew and one passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed for the flight that departed Palwaukee Municipal Airport (PWK), Wheeling, Illinois.
The business flight was conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the flight crew, the airplane departed and proceeded to TEB uneventfully.
The airplane was initially cleared for the instrument landing system approach to runway 6, with a circle-to-land on runway 1.
After a wind check reported winds from 290 degrees at 10 knots, the flight crew requested and received clearance to land on runway 24, a 6,013-foot-long, 150- foot-wide, asphalt runway.
Due to the wind conditions, the flight crew added 10 knots to the airplane's landing approach speed of 120 knots.
Shortly prior to touchdown, the control tower reported the winds from 290 degrees at 15 knots, gusting to 20 knots.
Both pilots reported that the airplane touched down on the runway centerline, "close to" or "within" the touchdown landing zone.
The thrust reverser was deployed and the flight crew initially felt the sensation of braking; however, as the airplane continued down the runway, the braking action seemed less effective.
The airplane departed the end of the runway, and came to rest in mud, about 330 feet from the end of the runway.
Tire marks consistent with the airplane's tires were observed to begin about 1,000 feet prior to the end of the runway.
The airplane sustained damage to the landing gear assemblies, and the right outboard slat.
On scene examination of the airplane did not reveal any pre-incident mechanical malfunctions, nor did the pilots report any.
The landing gear legs, telescopic strut, brake assemblies, brake servo valves, and the braking system control box were removed and examined, with no pre-incident discrepancies noted.
The tachometer generators were also examined; however, they were found to be out of tolerance during portions of the test procedure.
The specific reason for the out-of-tolerance condition was not determined.
According to the airplane manufacturer, the out-of-tolerance conditions found with respect to the tachometer generators would have resulted in no significant adverse consequence (less than 1-percent) on the overall performance of the braking system.
Post-incident friction tests conducted on runway 24, by airport personnel, revealed friction levels, which would not have required the issuance of a notice to airmen; however, some small patches of snow/ice were observed on the runway surface.
The pilot seated in the right seat, was the designated pilot-in-command for the flight.
The company reported that he had accumulated about 11,000 hours of total flight experience, which included about 1,500 hours in the Falcon 900EX.
The pilot flying, was seated in the left seat.
The company reported he had accumulated about 6,500 hours of total flight experience, which included about 1,200 combined hours in the Falcon 900EX.
Several witnesses at the airport reported that they observed the airplane touch down about halfway down runway 24.
One witness reported observing smoke from the main landing gear tires as the airplane traveled off the end of the runway surface.
The airplane was equipped with a cockpit voice recorder (CVR) and flight data recorder (FDR), which were retained and forwarded to the National Transportation Safety Board Vehicle Recorders Laboratory, Washington, District of Columbia.
The airplane's engines were also equipped with digital electronic engine controllers (DEECs), which were downloaded under the supervision of a Safety Board investigator.
The data downloaded from the FDR and DEECs did not reveal any evidence of engine or airframe malfunctions.
According to the FDR, the airplane's airspeed just prior to touchdown was about 130 knots, and the ground speed just after touchdown was about 120 knots.
A rollout distance computation conducted by a Safety Board Vehicle Recorder Specialists showed that the airplane's total ground roll travel after touchdown was approximately 3,522 feet.
In addition, the FDR showed the airbrakes were not utilized during the landing.
According to the airplane operating manual, the airbrakes are to be extended after touchdown, and "airbrake extension reduces lift, and improves braking effectiveness during the high speed phase of the landing run."
A weather observation taken after the incident recorded: winds from 330 degrees, at 19 knots, gusting to 26 knots, visibility 10 statue miles, clear skies, temperature 0 degrees Celsius (C), dew point -12 degrees C, altimeter 29.84 inches of mercury.
: 49000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 3 Turbo Fan Airframe Total Time: 4541 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Garrett-AiResearch ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: TFE-731-60 Registered Owner: Motorola, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
