National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: La Vern, CA
Accident Number: ANC06LA023
Date & Time: 03/04/2006, 1403 PST
Registration: N9220P
Aircraft: Piper PA-24
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot reported that after an uneventful landing on Runway 26L, he attempted to exit the runway by making a right turn onto Taxiway Echo.
During the turn, the airplane's left wing struck the surface of the runway and an elevated taxiway light stanchion.
As a result, the airplane's left wing sustained substantial damage.
When asked by the NTSB IIC if there were any preaccident mechanical anomalies that may have contributed to the accident, the pilot said, in part: "No, I guess I was just going a bit fast for the turn."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's excessive taxi speed while turning, which resulted in an on ground collision with a taxiway light and the ground.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
(C) TAXISPEED - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 2.
OBJECT - TAXIWAY LIGHT 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On March 4, 2006, about 1403 pacific standard time, a wheel equipped Piper PA-24 airplane, N9220P, sustained substantial damage while landing at the Brackett Field Airport, La Verne, California.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal cross country flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The private pilot and the sole passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the El Monte Airport, El Monte, California, about 1345.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 4, the pilot reported that after an uneventful landing on Runway 26L, he attempted to exit the runway by making a right turn onto Taxiway Echo.
During the turn, the airplane's left wing struck the surface of the runway and an elevated taxiway light stanchion.
As a result, the airplane's left wing sustained substantial damage.
When asked by the NTSB IIC if there were any preaccident mechanical anomalies that may have contributed to the accident, the pilot said, in part: "No, I guess I was just going a bit fast for the turn."
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
