National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fort Pierce, FL
Accident Number: MIA06LA058
Date & Time: 03/01/2006, 1240 EST
Registration: N511G
Aircraft: Mooney M20J
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that about 8 to 10 minutes after takeoff, while still climbing, at an altitude of about 5,000 feet, the airplane lost engine power.
The pilot further stated that the gauges showed about 1,000 rpm, and the manifold pressure remained at 25 inches.
He turned around and returned to the airport and made attempts to restart the engine, all of which were unsuccessful.
The pilot made a forced landing to a clearing short of the airport property, and the airplane incurred substantial damage.
A postcrash examination of the airplane revealed that the dual magneto had detached from its mounted position, and was hanging by the ignition harness behind the engine.
The magneto had not incurred any damage, and the magneto drive gear was laying in the accessory housing along with one hold-down plate.
The retaining nuts, washers and lock washers were not recovered.
When tested, the magneto operated on all eight distributor outputs.
The impulse coupler was not damaged, and the distributor wiring was intact.
There was engine continuity, proper valve action, and compression on all cylinders.
Engine oil was present, and there was evidence of some oil having leaked at the back of the engine.
No anomalies were noted with either the induction or fuel systems.
The airplane had last received an annual inspection on August 2005 when an overhauled engine had been installed.
It had accumulated 10 hours since the annual inspection.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Improper magneto installation by maintenance personnel, which resulted in the magneto detaching from the engine and subsequent loss of engine power.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CLIMB - TO CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 2.
IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO - LOOSE 3.
IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO - SEPARATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) ---------- Occurrence #4: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 5.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The private-rated pilot received minor injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage.
The flight originated in Fort Pierce, Florida, the same day, about 1230.
According to the pilot, about 8 to 10 minutes after takeoff, while still climbing, at an altitude of about 5,000 feet, the airplane lost engine power.
The pilot further stated that the gauges showed about 1,000 rpm, and the manifold pressure remained at 25 inches.
He said he operated the throttle, and observed instruments while attempting to regain power, but he could not regain power or determine the reason for the power loss.
He said he turned the airplane back towards Fort Pierce, Florida, and as it glided towards the airport, he communicated with the air traffic control tower controller, and declared an emergency.
As the airplane glided toward the airport the pilot said he became less certain that he would reach it, so he selected a clearing in which to execute a forced landing.
Upon reaching 900 feet, he abandoned the approach to the airport and made an approach to a clearing.
While on short final to land in the clearing, the right wing of the airplane impacted the top of a pine tree, which changed the path.
The airplane pan caked into the ground and bounced into an area of numerous 4-foot high sand piles, coming to rest upright on top of one of the piles.
A postcrash examination of the airplane and engine was performed by a FAA licensed mechanic, under the supervision of an FAA inspector.
The examination revealed that the magneto had detached from its mounted position, and was hanging by the ignition harness behind the engine.
The magneto had not been damage, and the magneto drive gear was laying in the accessory housing along with one "hold-down" plate.
The retaining nuts, washers and lock washers were not recovered.
When tested, the magneto operated on all eight distributor outputs, and the impulse coupler and the distributor wiring were intact.
and undamaged.
There was engine continuity as well as valve action and compression on all cylinders.
Engine oil was present, and there was evidence that some oil had leaked at the back of the engine.
No anomalies were noted to exist with the induction or fuel systems.
The airplane and engine had last received an annual inspection in August 2005, when an overhauled engine had been installed.
The airplane and engine had accumulated 10 hours since the annual inspection.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
