National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Manhattan, KS
Accident Number: DEN06LA045
Date & Time: 03/01/2006, 1140 CST
Registration: N7824T
Aircraft: Piper PA-32RT-300T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot said "the engine began to surge in power slightly as the airplane was rotated for liftoff from runway 03.
During climbout, he notified the tower of a "possible engine problem," and the engine continued surging.
As the pilot executed a slow left turn towards runway 13, the engine started losing power.
He managed to land on runway 13 near the intersection with runway 03-21.
The airplane was not aligned with the runway centerline, and went off the side of the runway.
The left wing struck an elevated runway marker and taxiway lights.
Both wing spars were damaged and the left wing was twisted down.
An FAA airworthiness inspector examined the airplane and engine and reported finding an exposed left magneto "P" lead touching the connector shell.
This could "cause an intermittent grounding of the left magneto," and result in the "fuel control[er] hunting to compensate [and] producing an engine power surge."
Contributing factors were the runway sign and taxiway lights.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO GROUNDING LEAD (P-LEAD) - SHORTED 2.
FUEL INJECTION CONTROL/SYSTEM - SURGE ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
(C) PROPER ALIGNMENT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) OBJECT - SIGN 5.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The business flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan had been filed.
The pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The cross-country flight was originating at the time of the accident and was en route to Olathe, Kansas.
According to the pilot's accident report, "the engine began to surge in power slightly" as the airplane was rotated for liftoff from runway 03.
During climbout, the pilot notified the tower of a "possible engine problem," and the engine continued surging.
As the pilot executed a slow left turn towards runway 13, the engine started losing power.
He managed to land on runway 13 near the intersection with runway 03-21.
The airplane was not aligned with the runway centerline, and went off the side of the runway.
The left wing struck an elevated runway marker and taxiway lights.
Both wing spars were damaged and the left wing was twisted down.
On March 8, an FAA airworthiness inspector examined the airplane and engine.
In an e-mail dated March 17, he reported finding an exposed left magneto "P" lead touching the connector shell, which could "cause an intermittent grounding of the left magneto," resulting in the "fuel control[er] hunting to compensate [and] producing an engine power surge."
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
