After requesting fuel availability for various airport's from Savannah Approach Control, the 
pilot declared an emergency and landed at the Hunter Army Air Field. After landing, he taxied 
to a remote part of the airport and removed hand made fuel lines connecting three six gallon 
tanks to the left wing tank. These additional tanks were stored where the rear seat had been 
installed. The pilot did not refuel the aircraft prior to takeoff, and after departure, the engine 
began to run rough. He elected to execute a precautionary landing along Savannah's Highway 
516, where the aircraft collided with a road sign. The pilot then lost control, and the aircraft 
skidded into a guard rail and flipped over. Two pilots were aboard the aircraft. Both repeatedly 
changed their stories concerning who they were, and what transpired prior to the accident. An 
FAA examiner stated that there was approximately fifteen gallons of automotive fuel in the 
aircraft's right wing, and no fuel in the left wing. He also stated that the aircraft appeared to 
have been configured for transportation of unauthorized material. 
The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for a precautionary landing, and his failure to 
maintain clearance from an obstacle (road sign) during the landing. 
 On October 1, 1995, about 1426 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172, N9553H, collided with an 
interstate highway sign, following a loss of engine power, at Savannah, Georgia. The airplane 
was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed. A flight plan was not filed for the personal flight. The pilot 
and one passenger sustained minor injuries, and the airplane was substantially damaged. 
Origination of the flight was Hunter Army Air Field, Savannah, Georgia, moments before the 
accident.
     The inspectors from the Georgia Flight Standards District Office who spoke with the pilot 
and examined the wreckage reported the following. The pilot's statement was inconsistent, 
stating at various times that the flight was destined for various locations. The rear seats had 
been removed from the airplane, having been replaced by a portable tank with connected 
hoses. Additionally, there was a lack of fuel at the accident site, even though the airplane came 
to rest inverted, and one wing was separated.
     Prior to the accident, the flight had been in contact with Savannah Approach Control, 
requesting fuel availability information at certain airports. An engine malfunction was 
reported, and an emergency landing was made at Hunter Army Air Field. Shortly after landing, 
the pilot removed the hoses that were connected to the extra fuel tanks. The pilot stated that 
once the airplane was airborne again, the engine began to run roughly. The pilot elected to 
perform a precautionary landing, where the airplane collided with a highway sign, before 
impacting the ground and nosing over. Local police reported the accident to a Savannah air 
traffic facility. 
     Post crash investigation revealed that fifteen gallons of automotive fuel was found in the 
aircraft's right wing. No fuel was found in the left wing.
