The pilot stated that the airplane was in cruise flight at 2,700 feet MSL when the engine lost 
power. His attempts to restart the engine were unsuccessful, so he made a forced landing on a 
golf course. During landing, the airplane collided with tall trees. The pilot stated that the 
airplane was filled to its capacity (9.5 gallons) at the departure airport. The loss of engine 
power occurred about 1.5 hours after departure. Postaccident examination revealed that there 
was no fuel in the carburetor bowl/fuel system. Expected fuel consumption for the engine was 
6.5 gallons per hour. The aircraft manufacturer recommended installing a low fuel warning 
system, but this aircraft was not so equipped. 
the pilot's improper fuel management which resulted in fuel exhaustion.  A related factor was 
the pilot's inadequate fuel consumption calculations. 
 On October 1, 1995, at 1615 eastern daylight time, a Rudy Kitfox homebuilt airplane, N226WR, 
operated by the airplane owner/builder, lost engine power during cruise flight and collided 
with trees during the forced landing near Charlottesville, Virginia.  The certificated private 
pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  The airplane was destroyed.  The airplane was 
operated as a personal flight under 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the flight, no flight plan was filed.  The flight departed Farmville, Virginia, at approximately 
1445.  The intended destination was New Market, Virginia.
According to the pilot, he departed New Market and flew to Farmville.  He reported that at 
Farmville he "...refueled, topped [the] main tank (9.5 gallon capacity).  It took 7 gallons [of 
fuel] to fill [the] tank." He stated that about 1.5 hours into the flight the engine lost power, and 
his attempts to restart the engine were unsuccessful.  The pilot stated that when the engine lost 
power, the airplane was at 2700 feet Mean Sea Level (MSL) over wooded, hilly terrain.  He 
reported that he tried to land on a golf course, but the airplane touched down in a clump of 
trees short of the intended landing site.
The aircraft was examined at the accident site by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
Inspector.  The examination revealed no fuel in the carburetor bowl.  The FAA Inspector stated 
that the expected fuel consumption for the accident airplane/engine is 6.5 gallons per hour at 
6300-6500 RPM.  He reported that the accident airplane had previously only completed short 
flights, so the actual fuel consumption of that airplane had not been documented.  The FAA 
Inspector also stated that the aircraft manufacturer recommended installing a low fuel warning 
system.  The accident airplane was not equipped with that system.
The pilot reported that there was no mechanical malfunction.
