Witnesses observed that the aircraft began a 'steep climb' after a normal lift-off, then it began 
to drift to the right of the runway. According to one witness, the aircraft leveled off 
approximately 50 to 100 feet above adjacent tall trees, while going 'very slowly,' and then it 
began turning right and descending. The passenger stated that the aircraft's nose dropped after 
takeoff and again during the level-off. Subsequently, the airplane struck treetops and crashed. 
After impacting terrain, the aircraft burst into flames. The airport owner told a sheriff's deputy 
that the pilot usually flew alone; the passenger's weight of 195 pounds represented about 20 
percent of the aircraft's 950-pound maximum gross weight. The kit manufacturer estimated 
that adding a 200-pound passenger would add 3 to 5 MPH to the aircraft's stall speed. 
failure of the pilot to maintain adequate airspeed during the initial climb after takeoff, which 
resulted in a stall/mush and subsequent collision with trees and the ground. 
 On October 1, 1995, approximately 1450 Pacific daylight time, a Rasmussen Kitfox 2, 
N488WR, experienced an inflight loss of control on climbout from Goheen Airport near Battle 
Ground, Washington.  The airplane subsequently struck trees, then impacted terrain; a fire 
erupted immediately upon impact.  The airplane was destroyed and the private pilot, who 
owned but had not built the experimental-category airplane, was fatally injured.  His passenger 
received serious injuries.  The flight had been planned as a local 14 CFR 91 flight out of Goheen 
Airport.  Visual meteorological conditions existed and no flight plan had been filed.
Three individuals who witnessed the accident from various locations on the airport submitted 
statements to the investigator.  These statements were in general agreement as to the accident 
sequence.  The witnesses observed the airplane take off on runway 33, then, after a lift-off 
which appeared normal, pull up into a "steep climb" (all three witnesses used this phrase to 
describe the climb angle; one also reported "The climb angle was steeper than I would consider 
normal", and another stated "I had seen the pilot climb out like that on two previous 
occasions.")  Two of the witnesses reported that during the steep climb, the airplane began to 
drift to the right (east) over tall fir trees.  They stated that the airplane then leveled off between 
50 and 100 feet above the trees (one stated that the plane's airspeed appeared "very slow" at 
this point) and began a right turn and headed east.  They stated that the plane was descending 
by this point and observed its nose and tail to be "bobbing up and down" or "raising and 
lowering."  They reported that the airplane's right wing then dipped and it began a rapid 
descent, or that it entered a "sharp right hand descending turn." These two witnesses reported 
that the aircraft then disappeared from their view, but that they subsequently heard the noise 
of the crash and saw the aircraft engulfed in flames after the impact.  They also reported that 
the engine sounded like it was running at "high RPM" or "full power" throughout the sequence.  
The third witness, who was the airport owner, reported that prior to impact, the aircraft came 
back into his view, "perhaps 30 feet from the ground in a nose up attitude...wings level and at 
full power but still descending or 'mushing' towards the ground."  He then stated, "Perhaps two 
seconds after impact, the aircraft burst into flame.  There was a huge fire ball...."  He stated 
that he then observed the passenger exiting the aircraft.  He observed later that "The pilot was 
still in the aircraft.  The left side of the plane was in a position that precluded the left door from 
opening.  The pilot['s] upper body was through the right door...."
The investigator-in-charge interviewed the passenger by telephone on December 4, 1995.  
During this interview, the passenger stated that the aircraft lifted off smoothly, then the nose 
dropped and the pilot recovered.  He then stated that at an estimated maximum altitude of 150 
feet, while still climbing, the nose dropped again and the aircraft simultaneously turned right.  
The passenger stated that the pilot recovered again and the aircraft was now headed for trees 
straight ahead of it.  He reported that the airplane hit the tops of the trees in a nose-high 
attitude and that the nose subsequently dropped a third time, "straight ahead."  He stated that 
the aircraft did not recover from the third nose drop.  He reported that the aircraft hit on its 
left side with the left wing and the nose impacting nearly simultaneously.  He indicated that at 
the instant of impact, both occupants were soaked with fuel, and that a fire ignited immediately 
upon impact which instantly engulfed the entire cabin.  To the passenger, the fire appeared to 
start in the floorboard area.  The passenger expressed an opinion to the investigator-in-charge 
that the impact force was not severe and that the post-crash fire was the principal source of 
injury to the occupants, stating:  "If there hadn't been a fire, we would probably have just 
gotten out, dusted ourselves off and laughed about it."  
During the phone interview, the passenger stated that he would not have characterized the 
pilot's handling of the aircraft as "showing off", and that he had not felt like the takeoff angle 
was excessively steep or dangerous.  He stated that the pilot performed a conscientious 
preflight walk-around and pre-takeoff engine run-up, that there was no "small talk" during the 
taxi out, and that the pilot appeared to him to take a generally serious approach to the flight.
Photographs taken at the accident site showed that the aircraft had burned.  The aircraft 
impacted in the vicinity of a cluster of trees with one tree behind the wreckage containing a 
scar about 10 feet above the ground, and another being broken completely over onto its side at 
approximately its base.  The downed tree was pointing in approximately the same direction as 
the main wreckage heading.  Sections of both wings had separated from the aircraft.  The right 
wing section was located adjacent to, behind and to the right of the main wreckage, in the 
broken- over tree.  The left wing section was located about 20 feet behind the main wreckage, 
at the base of the tree with the scar 10 feet above the ground.  The main wreckage was in an 
upright position; the FAA coordinator to the accident, who responded to the accident scene, 
stated to the NTSB investigator that the wreckage came to rest headed approximately south.  A 
tree with a scar at its top was observed northwest of the point of ground impact.  The angle 
from the accident site to the scarred tree top was later measured at approximately 30 degrees 
above the horizontal.
The investigator-in-charge and FAA coordinator performed a further examination of the 
aircraft wreckage at Goheen Airport on November 17, 1995.  This examination revealed that the 
aircraft had burned down to the structural tubing back to a point immediately aft of the cabin 
area.  Wood stringers aft of the cabin had survived the fire, as had the empennage structure 
and fabric.  The engine and cabin areas were whitened.  The firewall, which photos from the 
aircraft construction book showed installed, was no longer in place.  The structural tubing 
along the bottom of the left door area was collapsed upward 10 inches and inward 4 inches; the 
right door area was not visibly deformed.  The forward edge of the left horizontal stabilizer was 
bent upward about 90 degrees while the right horizontal stabilizer and vertical tail were 
substantially intact.  The empennage section was bent to the right relative to the forward 
fuselage.  The wings were no longer attached to the fuselage.  The engine was in place in its 
mount.  The engine, reduction gearbox and propeller hub remained together as a unit.  Less 
than approximately 12 inches of each of the three propeller blades remained on the hub; all 
three blade remnants were charred.
In a report on the accident, a Clark County sheriff's deputy stated that the airport owner told 
him that the airport owner had usually observed the pilot flying his aircraft alone.  The 
passenger gave his weight as 195 pounds during the telephone interview with the investigator.  
A weight addition of 195 pounds represents approximately 20.5 percent of the aircraft's 950-
pound maximum gross weight.  In a letter to the investigator dated December 5, 1995, the 
president of SkyStar stated:  "We estimate that the addition of a 200 pound passenger would 
result in an increase of the stall speed of 3-5 miles per hour."  SkyStar also indicated that the 
Kitfox 2 operating handbook gives the power-on stall speed at maximum gross weight as 32 
MPH, and the best rate-of-climb speed at maximum gross weight as 55 MPH with a climb rate 
of 1,200 feet per minute at that weight and speed for a Kitfox 2 with a Rotax 582 engine.  The 
climb angle for a 1,200- foot-per-minute climb at an airspeed of 55 MPH was calculated to be 
14.4 degrees.  One of the witnesses, in a statement to responding law enforcement officers, 
estimated the aircraft's speed at 40 to 50 MPH when it started its steep climb.
The investigator used information obtained from the aircraft construction book, SkyStar 
shipping records, the airport owner, the aircraft logbook, and the wreckage examination to 
determine the aircraft's fuel system configuration.  The information indicated that at the time 
of the accident, the aircraft was equipped with a 6-gallon-capacity tank in each wing and a 1.1- 
gallon-capacity header tank mounted behind the seats.
Toxicology tests on the pilot conducted by the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, detected 23.200 micrograms per milliliter of salicylate in the pilot's urine.
