Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
High Island 573, GM
Accident Number:
FTW04FA029
Date & Time:
12/01/2003, 0821 CST 
Registration:
N457PH
Aircraft:
Bell 407
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The helicopter, which had a FADEC controlled turboshaft engine installed, was in cruise flight 
over open ocean water in the Gulf of Mexico when the 14,000-hour helicopter pilot radioed a 
brief MAYDAY distress call on an area operating frequency.  Details of the in-flight emergency 
were not relayed by the pilot, and no further communications were heard.  Three hours later, 
the pilot's body was found floating in the area the helicopter was operating.  After 3 days of 
search, the submerged helicopter wreckage was recovered from approximately 240 feet of 
water.  Deformations of the airframe, along with the lack of damage to the main rotor blades, 
showed evidence that the helicopter impacted the water at a high vertical rate with low rotor 
RPM.  Teardown examination of the engine revealed a catastrophic failure of the power turbine 
assembly (N2).  Metallurgical examinations by the NTSB and Rolls Royce revealed evidence 
that the 3rd stage turbine wheel airfoil(s) had failed.  A root cause of the failure was not 
determined, and further testing was conducted at Rolls Royce.  As a result of some of the 
dynamic test results, Rolls Royce issued several Commercial Engine Bulletins (CEBs) regarding 
inspection of in-service turbine assemblies.  Additionally, Bell Helicopter issued an Alert 
Service Bulletin (ASB), which introduced flight manual revisions to avoid power turbine RPM 
(Np) steady state operation between 68% and 97%.  After examinations of the airframe (fuel 
system, rotor systems, flight control systems, drive systems, electronic control systems), no 
anomalies were found other than within the power turbine assembly.
 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power due to the failure of the 3rd stage turbine wheel and subsequent 
catastrophic failure of the turbine assembly.
Page 2 of 10FTW04FA029
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) TURBINE ASSEMBLY,TURBINE WHEEL - FAILURE
2. (C) TURBINE ASSEMBLY - FAILURE,TOTAL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER
Page 3 of 10FTW04FA029
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 1, 2003, at 0821 central standard time, a Bell 407 single-engine helicopter, 
N457PH, registered to and operated by Petroleum Helicopters Inc. (PHI), of Lafayette, 
Louisiana, was destroyed when it impacted water following a loss of power while operating 
over open ocean water in the Gulf of Mexico in the vicinity of offshore platform High Island 
560 (HI 560).  The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant, sustained fatal injuries.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the Title 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 135 on-demand air taxi cargo flight.  The flight departed from 
offshore platform, High Island 573, at 0814, and was en route to offshore platform High Island 
264 when the accident occurred.  The call sign for the flight was "El Paso 63."
The following is a chronology of the helicopter's flight activity on the morning of the accident:
0700 - Departed offshore platform, High Island 264A, with no passengers.
0702 - Landed on High Island 264C and picked up 5 passengers.
0705 - Departed High Island 264C
0723 - Landed on High Island 573 and dropped off 2 passengers.
0725 - Departed High Island 573 with 3 passengers.
0737 - Landed on High Island 582 and dropped off 3 passengers.
0739 - Departed High Island 582 with no passengers.
0754 - Landed on High Island 573 and shut down. The shut down was due to a wait for cargo.
0814 - Departed High Island 573 with cargo (5, ten-pound safety valves which were placed in 
the baggage department).
0821 - A "Mayday" call received was on company operating frequency 122.82mhz.  The call was 
digitally recorded by the operator's communications center: "Mayday, Mayday, Mayday," and 
then a short pause, following by, "El Paso six-three, Mayday, Mayday, Mayday."  
No further radio transmissions were received and response from the communications center 
was unanswered.  Approximately 1150, the pilot™s body was found floating and recovered by a 
rescue vessel.  Three days later, the submerged helicopter wreckage was recovered from 
approximately 240 feet of water.    
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a valid commercial pilot certificate with rotorcraft and instrument helicopter 
ratings.  His most recent second-class medical certificate was issued on November 13, 2003, 
with the limitation to wear corrective lenses.  The pilot had accumulated over 14,000 hours of 
flight time in his career as a pilot, 10,700 hours of which were as pilot- in-command (PIC) of 
single-engine turbine helicopters while employed by PHI.  He had accumulated 844 hours in 
the Bell 407 as PIC.  Most of the pilot's flight time was accumulated flying offshore in the Gulf 
of Mexico.  The pilot's most recent airman proficiency check was successfully completed on 
December 11, 2002.  The pilot had 151 hours in the Bell 407 in the previous 90 days before the 
accident and 52 hours in the previous 30 days. 
Page 4 of 10FTW04FA029
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter, serial number 53147, was manufactured in March of 1997, received its initial 
airworthiness certificate on May 23, 1997, and was delivered to the operator on May 30, 1997.  
At the time of the accident, the aircraft had accumulated a total time of 4600.1 hours.  The 
engine, a Rolls Royce model 250-C47B, serial number CAE-847043, had accumulated a total 
time of 4647.2 hours.  Research of the airframe records showed the last major inspection 
accomplished was the 300-hour/3-month inspection at 4576.55 total airframe time on 
November 11, 2003.  All of the life limited components were within limits and verified.  Part 
numbers and serial numbers of actual installed components was verified.  The last inspection 
of the aircraft was accomplished on November 11, 2003 (daily inspection).  In addition, the 
600-hour Lead The Fleet (LTF) inspection was accomplished on November 11, 2003, and the 
25/50 LTF inspection was accomplished on November 11, 2003.  The last major component 
change was the 1800-hour rotor brake overhaul accomplished on November 11, 2003 at 
4537.05 total airframe hours.  Airworthiness Directive research showed that all directives were 
accomplished prior to their required due date.
Engine records research showed the last major engine inspection was the 150-hour inspection 
accomplished at 4520.2 total airframe time.  In addition, the 300-hour inspection was 
accomplished at 4528.55 total airframe time.  The 2000-hour inspection was accomplished at 
3489.0 total airframe time.  The 100-hour Hydro-Mechanical Unit (HMU) inspection was 
accomplished at 4557.0 total airframe hours.  The bleed valve was overhauled and replaced at 
4378.55 airframe total time.  Critical turbine component cycles (comprised of 4 turbine wheels) 
as of December 1, 2003, were:  1st stage wheel - 1,826 cycles; 2nd stage wheel - 1,826 cycles; 
3rd stage wheel - 1,882 cycles; 4th stage wheel - 4,818 cycles.  According to records, the turbine 
assembly p/n-23063354, s/n-CAT44419, had 3,940.5 hours of operation, and 890.1 hours 
remaining until the next overhaul.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Recovery:  When the helicopter was raised by the recovery crew and placed on the barge, it was 
washed with fresh water.  The general condition of the wreckage as it lay in-situ on the ocean 
floor was documented by divers as follows:  All 4 main rotor blades were found attached to 
their respective grips and displayed minimal damage.  The main rotor mast was not damaged 
and the main rotor pitch change links and horns were all attached and not damaged.  The tail 
boom was attached to the fuselage and the tail rotor hub and blade assembly was intact.  
Several holes and dents were noted on the engine exhaust stack.  Straps were attached around 
the main rotor mast, pitch change links, pitch change horns, and under the bottom of the 
fuselage to raise the wreckage to the surface.  As the wreckage was brought to the surface and 
placed on the barge, it was noted that the main rotor pitch change links and pitch change horns 
were bent.  The skid mounted floats were attached to the skids, not deployed, and the float 
inflation bottles were found fully charged.  When the helicopter was removed from the barge 
and placed on the truck for transport, the four main rotor blades were removed from their 
respective grips, the skid assembly was removed, and the float bottles were discharged.  The 
Electronic Control Unit (ECU) and HMU canon plugs were disconnected and washed with 
fresh water and covered with plastic.  The ECU was preserved and shipped to Goodrich, West 
Hartford, Connecticut, for data retrieval. 
An examination of the airframe and engine was conducted at the PHI facility, located in 
Lafayette, Louisiana, on December 5-7, 2003.
Page 5 of 10FTW04FA029
Airframe/ Main Fuselage:  The fuselage was collapsed from impact forces, and the roof 
structure was fractured laterally in three different locations; in front of the forward 
transmission support legs, the aft passenger bulkhead, and behind the aft firewall.  Associated 
with the aft roof fracture was a complete fracture of the aft fuselage, which was held together 
with mangled wires.  The floor structure was also found fractured in three locations and a 
portion of the floor was missing on the pilot's side just ahead of the forward seat-frame 
support.  The vertical tunnel was found fractured and deformed consistent with overload 
forces, and the nose exhibited significant crushing.  All doors were missing except the latch 
portion of the right passenger door.  The pilot's seat pan and seat structure were deformed 
downward.  Several punctures were observed protruding through the bottom of the seat pan, 
and their respective imprints corresponded to several items under the seat pan (cyclic 
centering support, sensor for cyclic metering, and a heater hose T-connection).  The pilot's left 
seat belt attachment fitting was found fractured at the hinge connection on the forward 
bulkhead.  The seat buckle was found still buckled with the shoulder harness straps attached.
Landing Gear:  The skid landing gear was mostly intact with all four saddles attached to 
corresponding skids and crosstubes, however, both crosstubes were spread consistent with 
high vertical loads at impact with the water.  Both float steps were fractured and were missing 
except the forward section of the left step.  Flattening of the crosstubes was more prevalent on 
the forward crosstube and on the right side of both crosstubes, which was consistent with 
airframe damage being more severe on the forward right side of the helicopter.  The float bags 
had not deployed, and were secure in their skid mounted enclosures.
Tailboom & Tail Rotor:  The tail boom was mostly intact with the exception that the right 
horizontal stabilizer was fractured in an upward direction.  The bottoms of the right and left 
stabilizer endplates were bent inboard near the stabilizer attach points.  Tail boom skin was 
deformed in two locations on its bottom right side consistent with water impact.  The bottom of 
the vertical fin was bent left at the bottom of the support cast, and upward crushing of the fin 
honeycomb structure.  The tail rotor driveshafts were found disconnected on either side of the 
oil cooler driveshaft consistent with impact forces.  Drive continuity in the tail rotor drive 
system was established and all hangar bearings rotated freely.  The tail rotor blades were found 
attached and secure in the hub.  Free pitch change movement in the tail rotor hub was 
observed and transmitted forward through the control tube to the fracture  at the aft portion of 
the fuselage.  
Flight Controls:  Numerous separations in the fixed flight controls were observed at locations 
associated with airframe deformations, fractures, and damage.  The throttle cable was 
fractured consistent with impact forces.  Control continuity was established from the collective 
and cyclic to the main rotor hub assembly.  The collective was fractured at its base, and the 
collective jack-shaft was fractured away from its mount on the pilot seat bulkhead.  The pilot's 
cyclic stick also was fractured at its base and was missing.  The tail rotor pedal assembly was 
missing, as was the honeycomb floor structure where the pedals were attached.
Drive System:  Salt water corrosion damage was observed on the transmission case that 
resulted in corrosion by-products being present in the internal transmission gear systems.  As a 
result, the transmission would not turn prior to disassembly and cleaning.  After disassembly, 
no distress was noted on any of the internal gears.  Once the transmission was cleaned of 
corrosion by-products, the components were able to be rotated by hand.  When the chip 
detectors were removed from the transmission, oil residue and corrosion was observed on the 
Page 6 of 10FTW04FA029
detector ends, but no metal chips were noted.  The freewheeling unit was not disassembled  but 
rotated in the freewheeling direction and the spraggs engaged in the drive direction.
Main Rotor Blades and Hub Assembly:  Initial photos taken during recovery showed that the 
main rotor blades remained attached to the main rotor hub assembly, and two of the blades 
exhibited downward bending.  The Green blade (s/n A-176) had a downward bend 
approximately 71-inches outboard from the blade bolt hole.  The Red blade (s/n A-192) had a 
downward bend about 72-inches outboard from the blade bolt hole.  Both the Orange blade 
(s/n A-74) and the Blue blade (s/n A-295) exhibited tailing edge root closure damage and some 
minor delaminations on their blade skins.  The lack of leading edge damage was consistent 
with a relatively lower rotor RPM at impact.  The Blue and Orange yoke arms on the main rotor 
hub assembly exhibited significant delaminations and fractures in the flexures.  The Red 
flexure arm also exhibited delaminations and fractures on the bottom outboard surfaces.  The 
Green flexure arms, on both the leading edge and trailing edge inboard surfaces near the 
lead/lag bearing, exhibited yoke fractures on the top surface of the yoke.  Each of the four 
outboard elastomeric bearings on the adapter showed delaminations.  Additionally, contact by 
all four sets of the upstops and downstops were observed on the pitch horn contact plate.  All 
four main rotor hub flapping elastomeric bearings exhibited movement when the swashplate 
was manipulated by hand.   
Servos/Hydraulic Pump:  All servos were bench tested for functionality at an operating 
pressure of 1,000 pounds per square inch (psi).  The left lateral , right lateral, and collective 
servos appeared to function within the manufacturer's tolerance.  The hydraulic pump was 
tested at 4,300 rpm with an input pressure of 12 psi.  The pump showed an output pressure of 
1,000 psi (+or- 25 psi) at a flow rate of 2.0 gallons per minute (gpm). No anomalies were 
noted.  The manufacturers requirements for this same type pump in a new/overhauled 
condition are 1,000 psi output pressure with a minimum flow rate of 2.85 gpm.
Fuel System:  The airframe fuel filter was examined and the canister was full of a mixture of 
water, fuel, and mud.  The filter element did not exhibit significant particulates between the 
fuel filter element folds.  The main fuel tank was compromised, consistent with impact forces.
Engine:  After recovery, visual inspection showed heavy salt-water corrosion.  N1 and N2 were 
found locked and would not rotate.  All rigid and flexible oil and fuel lines were intact and all 
fittings were found to be tight.  All engine controls, HMU, ECU, and CEFA were found intact 
and attached.  The fuel nozzle inlet line contained approximately two teaspoons of fuel and the 
fuel filter was free of debris.  Mechanical rotation exit damage was found inside the exhaust 
collector at the 4-o'clock to 7-o'clock position.  Exit damage was also found on the exhaust 
stack near the forward left side.  The NTSB IIC determined, and parties concurred, that the 
engine assembly required a complete teardown examination.
Engine Teardown Examination:  Visible turbine wheel blade exit damage was observed to the 
exhaust collector.  The compressor was free to rotate when separated from the turbine, and the 
gearbox was free to rotate when the compressor was removed.  All gears and bearings were 
found intact in the gearbox, and the spur adapter gear shaft and retaining ring were in place.  
Disassembly of the gas producer (N1) revealed no unusual conditions to the wheels.  Slight rub 
marks were observed on the turbine to compressor coupling approximately 2.5-inches from the 
turbine end.  The containment ring was found with two tangs broken.  Disassembly of the 
power turbine assembly (N2) revealed the 3rd stage wheel was missing all airfoils.  Five of the 
airfoils had about 1/2-inch from the blade root remaining, and all other airfoils were sheared 
Page 7 of 10FTW04FA029
down to the wheel hub.  The 3rd stage wheel hub was intact.  The 4th stage nozzle had all vanes 
intact, and the leading edges and trailing edges of the vanes had sustained impact damage.  The 
trailing edges also had approximately 1/4-inches of material missing around the entire 
circumference.  Heavy damage to the 3rd stage tip path was noted with the tip path extended 
outward with pieces of material missing.  The 4th stage wheel had approximately 3/4 of the 
blade tips missing for 360-degrees, with one blade missing.
Hydro-mechanical Unit (HMU) / Electronic Control Unit (ECU):  No anomalies were noted 
during examination/testing/download of the HMU and ECU, at the Goodrich facility.  Incident 
recorder (IR) data from the ECU showed that a Np hard fault occurred between records #9 and 
#10.  No prior history faults were recorded on the IR maintenance page.
After examinations of the airframe (fuel system, rotor systems, flight control systems, drive 
systems, electronic control systems), no anomalies were found other than within the power 
turbine assembly.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Metallurgical examinations by the NTSB and Rolls Royce revealed evidence that the 3rd stage 
turbine wheel airfoil(s) had failed.  A root cause of the failure was not determined, and further 
testing was conducted at Rolls Royce.  As a result of some of the dynamic test results, Rolls 
Royce issued several Commercial Engine Bulletins (CEBs) regarding inspection of in-service 
turbine assemblies.  Additionally, Bell Helicopter issued an Alert Service Bulletin (ASB), which 
introduced flight manual revisions to avoid power turbine RPM (Np) steady state operation 
between 68% and 97%.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGOCAL
An autopsy of the pilot was conducted at Jefferson County Morgue, Beaumont, Texas, on 
December 2, 2003.  The cause of death was listed as, "multiple injuries including basal skull 
fractures, ruptured heart, and transected aorta.  Toxicological tests, conducted at the Civil 
Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma, City, Oklahoma, were negative.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to the owner's representative.
Page 8 of 10FTW04FA029
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/01/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/01/2002
Flight Time:
14191 hours (Total, all aircraft), 844 hours (Total, this make and model), 11631 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 151 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 52 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N457PH
Model/Series:
407 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
53147
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/01/2003, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5250 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
22 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
4577 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C47B
Registered Owner:
PETROLEUM HELICOPTERS 
INC
Rated Power:
710 hp
Operator:
PETROLEUM HELICOPTERS 
INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
HEEA
Page 9 of 10FTW04FA029
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
15 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
60°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.32 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
High Island 573, GM 
(NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
High Island 264, GM 
(NONE)
Type of Clearance:
Unknown
Departure Time:
0814 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
28.000278, -93.918889
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alexander Lemishko
Adopted Date:
09/13/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Tom R Stunda; FAA; Houston, TX
Mark Stuntzner; Bell Helicopter; Hurst, TX
Bob Ketchum; Rolls Royce; Indianapolis, IN
Glenn Cornett; PHI; Lafayette, LA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 10 of 10FTW04FA029
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
