National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Moneta, VA
Accident Number: NYC02LA091
Date & Time: 05/01/2002, 0855 EDT
Registration: N5198D
Aircraft: Cessna 182A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot had just landed, and made a left turn onto the "teardrop" taxiway.
The right brake failed, and the airplane departed the taxiway, went into a ditch, and nosed over.
Post- accident examination revealed that the right brake cylinder was out of fluid, and other than a small amount of fluid up on the cylinder shaft, there were no holes or leaks noted.
The brake system had been last checked about 4 1/2 months earlier, during the airplane's latest annual inspection.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A slow leak of brake fluid from the right brake cylinder, which eventually resulted in a loss of right brake effectiveness.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 1.
(C) HYDRAULIC SYSTEM,ACTUATOR - LEAK 2.
LANDING GEAR,NORMAL BRAKE SYSTEM - INOPERATIVE ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAXI Factual Information On May 1, 2002, at 0855 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 182A, N5198D, was substantially damaged while taxiing after landing at Smith Mountain Lake Airport (W91), Moneta, Virginia.
The certificated student pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time, and no flight plan was filed for the solo instructional flight from a private airstrip in Rocky Mount, Virginia, that was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the student pilot, he had just landed on runway 23.
He made a left turn onto the "teardrop" taxiway, to back taxi down runway 05, when the right brake failed.
The airplane then departed the taxiway, went into a ditch, and nosed over.
An examination of the airplane after the accident by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed that the right brake cylinder was out of fluid, and other than a small amount of fluid up on the cylinder shaft, there were no holes or leaks noted.
According to the airplane's maintenance logbook, new wheels and brakes were installed on October 10, 1999.
There was also a "check brakes" notation, dated December 22, 2001, as part of the logbook entry for the airplane's latest annual inspection.
Student Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 50, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
