National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Teterboro, NJ
Accident Number: NYC02LA101
Date & Time: 05/01/2002, 1325 EDT
Registration: N4468N
Aircraft: Cessna 182Q
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was performing a crosswind landing to runway 1.
The pilot reported that the airplane landed hard, veered to the right and began to bounce, before coming to rest on the runway.
The pilot described the bounces as "hard."
Examination of the airplane revealed damage to the propeller, nose landing gear, and the firewall.
The pilot did not report any mechanical problems with the airplane.
Winds reported at the airport about the time of the accident were from 350 degrees at 15 knots, with 20 knot gusts.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper flare and his improper recovery from a bounced landing, which resulted in a hard landing.
A factor in this accident was the crosswind condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On May 1, 2002, about 1325 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 182Q, N4468N, was substantially damaged while landing at the Teterboro Airport (TEB), Teterboro, New Jersey.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot was landing on runway 1, a 7,000-foot long, 150-foot wide, asphalt runway.
In a written statement, the pilot said he experienced a strong crosswind, which required a "very distinct left-hand crab."
The airplane landed hard, veered to the right, and began to bounce.
The pilot described the bounces as "hard;" however, the airplane came to rest on the runway, and he taxied to a parking area.
Examination of the airplane by a  Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed damage to the propeller, nose landing gear, and the firewall.
The pilot did not report any mechanical problems with the airplane.
The pilot reported 220 hours of total flight experience, which included about 9 hours in make and model.
Winds reported at TEB, at 1351, were from 350 degrees at 15 knots, with 20 knot gusts.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
