National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lansing, IL
Accident Number: CHI04LA124
Date & Time: 05/01/2002, 1505 CDT
Registration: N4097S
Aircraft: Beech 58
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane was damaged during a wheels-up landing.
The flight was a non-revenue dual- instruction flight and the left seat pilot was flying the airplane at the time of the accident.
The instructor, seated in the right seat, did not possess a multi-engine flight instructor rating.
In a notarized questionnaire, the left seat pilot stated that the accident, "...would not have happened had each of us been alone.
We got involved with each other and we both missed the final check."
The repair work order did not list any landing gear components that were repaired or replaced.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The flight crew's failure to follow the checklist resulting in a landing without the landing gear extended.
Findings Occurrence #1: WHEELS UP LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR - NOT DEPLOYED - FLIGHTCREW 2.
LACK OF CERTIFICATION - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 3.
(C) CHECKLIST - NOT FOLLOWED - FLIGHTCREW Factual Information On May 1, 2002, about 1505 central daylight time, a Beech BE58, N4097S, was substantially damaged during a wheels-up landing on runway 09 (3,395 feet by 75 feet, asphalt) at the Lansing Municipal Airport, Lansing, Illinois.
The 14 CFR Part 91 positioning flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The flight was being conducted by an airline transport pilot seated in the right seat and a commercial pilot seated in the left seat.
It was reported that the right seat pilot was providing flight instruction to the left seat pilot.
Neither pilot was injured.
The flight originated from Detroit, Michigan, at an undetermined time.
The extent of the aircraft damage was originally reported to have been minor.
The National Transportation Safety Board was not informed of the true extent of the damage until April of 2004.
A work order provided by the aircraft owner indicates that the repairs to the airplane included lower fuselage skins, angles, stiffeners, and stringers.
No repairs or replacement of landing gear components was indicated on the work order.
As of August 20, 2004, the right seat pilot has not submitted a report of the accident.
The aircraft owner provided a notarized questionnaire signed by the pilot that was seated in the left seat.
The left seat pilot stated that the airplane was landed with the landing gear still in the retracted position.
He also stated that he was the pilot flying the airplane and receiving dual- instruction on a non-revenue flight when the accident occurred.
The left seat pilot stated that the accident, "...would not have happened had each of us been alone.
We got involved with each other and we both missed the final check."
At the time of the accident, the pilot-in-command did not possess a multi-engine flight instructor rating.
At the time of the accident, both pilot's possessed pilot certificates with multi-engine ratings.
Flight Instructor Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 60, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
