Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fort Pierce, FL
Accident Number:
MIA06LA058
Date & Time:
03/01/2006, 1240 EST 
Registration:
N511G
Aircraft:
Mooney M20J
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that about 8 to 10 minutes after takeoff, while still climbing, at an altitude of 
about 5,000 feet, the airplane lost engine power. The pilot further stated that the gauges 
showed about 1,000 rpm, and the manifold pressure remained at 25 inches. He turned around 
and returned to the airport and made attempts to restart the engine, all of which were 
unsuccessful. The pilot made a forced landing to a clearing short of the airport property, and 
the airplane incurred substantial damage. A postcrash examination of the airplane revealed 
that the dual magneto had detached from its mounted position, and was hanging by the 
ignition harness behind the engine. The magneto had not incurred any damage, and the 
magneto drive gear was laying in the accessory housing along with one hold-down plate. The 
retaining nuts, washers and lock washers were not recovered. When tested, the magneto 
operated on all eight distributor outputs. The impulse coupler was not damaged, and the 
distributor wiring was intact. There was engine continuity, proper valve action, and 
compression on all cylinders. Engine oil was present, and there was evidence of some oil 
having leaked at the back of the engine. No anomalies were noted with either the induction or 
fuel systems.  The airplane had last received an annual inspection on August 2005 when an 
overhauled engine had been installed. It had accumulated 10 hours since the annual 
inspection.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Improper magneto installation by maintenance personnel, which resulted in the magneto 
detaching from the engine and subsequent loss of engine power.
Page 2 of 6MIA06LA058
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CLIMB - TO CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
2. IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO - LOOSE
3. IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO - SEPARATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
4. OBJECT - TREE(S)
----------
Occurrence #4: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - BERM
Page 3 of 6MIA06LA058
Factual Information
On March 1, 2006, about 1240 eastern standard time, a Mooney M-20J, N511G, registered to 
and operated by a private individual, as a Title 14 CFR part 91 personal flight, incurred a loss of 
engine power while climbing to cruise altitude, and the pilot made a forced landing in Fort 
Pierce Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The 
private-rated pilot received minor injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage.  The 
flight originated in Fort Pierce, Florida, the same day, about 1230.
According to the pilot, about 8 to 10 minutes after takeoff, while still climbing, at an altitude of 
about 5,000 feet, the airplane lost engine power. The pilot further stated that the gauges 
showed about 1,000 rpm, and the manifold pressure remained at 25 inches. He said he 
operated the throttle, and observed instruments while attempting to regain power, but he could 
not regain power or determine the reason for the power loss. He said he turned the airplane 
back towards Fort Pierce, Florida, and as it glided towards the airport, he communicated with 
the air traffic control tower controller, and declared an emergency. As the airplane glided 
toward the airport the pilot said he became less certain that he would reach it, so he selected a 
clearing in which to execute a forced landing. Upon reaching 900 feet, he abandoned the 
approach to the airport and made an approach to a clearing. While on short final to land in the 
clearing, the right wing of the airplane impacted the top of a pine tree, which changed the path. 
The airplane pan caked into the ground and bounced into an area of numerous 4-foot high 
sand piles, coming to rest upright on top of one of the piles. 
A postcrash examination of the airplane and engine was performed by a FAA licensed 
mechanic, under the supervision of an FAA inspector. The examination revealed that the 
magneto had detached from its mounted position, and was hanging by the ignition harness 
behind the engine. The magneto had not been damage, and the magneto drive gear was laying 
in the accessory housing along with one "hold-down" plate. The retaining nuts, washers and 
lock washers were not recovered. When tested, the magneto operated on all eight distributor 
outputs, and the impulse coupler and the distributor wiring were intact. and undamaged. 
There was engine continuity as well as valve action and compression on all cylinders. Engine 
oil was present, and there was evidence that some oil had leaked at the back of the engine. No 
anomalies were noted to exist with the induction or fuel systems.
The airplane and engine had last received an annual inspection in August 2005, when an 
overhauled engine had been installed. The airplane and engine had accumulated 10 hours since 
the annual inspection.
Page 4 of 6MIA06LA058
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
65, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1212 hours (Total, all aircraft), 465 hours (Total, this make and model), 1170 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Mooney
Registration:
N511G
Model/Series:
M20J 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
24-1207
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2740 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3525 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-3B6D
Registered Owner:
Alton F. Robertson
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
Alton F. Robertson
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA06LA058
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FPR, 23 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
170°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
240°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.12 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Fort Pierce, FL (FPR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1230 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
St. Lucie County International (FPR)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
23 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
32
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4756 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
27.490278, -80.368333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John W Lovell
Adopted Date:
08/29/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael Cichanowski; FAA FSDO; Orlando, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA06LA058
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
