Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Huntsville, TX
Accident Number:
CEN16FA001
Date & Time:
10/02/2015, 1030 CST 
Registration:
N3552K
Aircraft:
PIPER PA 28-140
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel starvation
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A mechanic who worked for the fixed-based operator (FBO) at the airport reported that, on the 
day of the accident, the private pilot taxied the airplane to the maintenance hangar where he 
inflated the nose tire. The pilot told the mechanic he was flying the airplane to a nearby airport 
because someone there was interested in purchasing the airplane. No known witnesses saw the 
airplane take off. The air traffic control tower at the nearby airport did not have a record of the 
airplane landing there. The pilot was reported missing, and the wreckage was located later that 
evening on property adjacent to the departure airport.
The airplane came to rest inverted in a small clearing in a wooded area. The fuel selector was 
found in the "off" position. The left-wing fuel tank contained 2 cups of fuel, and the right-wing 
fuel tank contained about 4 gallons of fuel. A small amount of fuel was dripping from the right 
fuel cap before the airplane was righted. No evidence of fuel drainage from the left fuel tank 
was found. The airplane was not equipped with an ELT which likely contributed to the delay in 
locating the airplane. An examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any anomalies 
that would have prevented normal operation. Damage to the starter housing from impact with 
the ring gear was consistent with slow rotation/no power at the time of impact. Based on the 
evidence, it is likely the engine lost power due to fuel starvation, which resulted from the pilot 
shutting off the fuel supply to the engine.
Although the autopsy and medical records showed that the pilot had arteriosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and kidney stones, there was no evidence to suggest the pilot 
suffered an acute cardiac event or other medical incapacitation during the accident flight. A 
low therapeutic level of diphenhydramine, a sedating common over-the-counter antihistamine 
used to treat the common cold and hay fever, was detected in the pilot's heart and urine; 
however, it could not be determined whether the pilot was impaired by the effects of the drug 
at the time of the accident.
Page 2 of 8CEN16FA001
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's mismanagement off the fuel supply to the engine, which resulted in fuel starvation.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Personnel issues
Incorrect action selection - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 8CEN16FA001
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute
Fuel starvation (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On October 2, 2015, about 1030 central daylight time, a Piper PA-28-140 airplane, N3552K, 
collided with terrain near Huntsville Municipal Airport (UTS), Huntsville, Texas. The private 
pilot was fatally injured, and the airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was 
registered to a private individual and was being operated by the pilot as a 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 personal flight. Visual flight rules conditions existed near the accident site 
at the time of the accident, and a flight plan had not been filed. The airplane departed UTS just 
before the accident and was destined for Lone Star Municipal Airport (CXO), Conroe, Texas.
A mechanic who worked for the fixed-base operator (FBO) reported that, on the day before the 
accident, the pilot was at UTS and that he replaced the airplane's battery. He added that, on the 
day of the accident, the pilot taxied the airplane to the maintenance hangar where he inflated 
the nose tire. The pilot told him that he was flying the airplane to Conroe because someone 
there was interested in purchasing the airplane. The mechanic stated that he told the pilot that 
the airplane had not been flown in a while, and the pilot stated that he might fly it around the 
area before heading to Conroe. The mechanic stated he did not see the pilot taxi the airplane 
nor take off, and no known witnesses saw the airplane take off.
CXO air traffic control tower personnel reported that the airplane did not land at the airport on 
the day of the accident.
The airplane owner, who was the pilot's brother-in-law, confirmed that the pilot replaced the 
airplane's battery on the day before the accident. He stated that the pilot was going to check the 
radios on the day of the accident, but that he was not supposed to fly the airplane.
About 1900, the pilot's family notified the Walker County Sheriff's Office that the pilot was 
missing. A search was initiated, and the wreckage was located about 2130 on a law 
enforcement shooting range that bordered the east side of UTS.
Page 4 of 8CEN16FA001
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
80
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/13/2006
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1550 hours (Total, all aircraft)
The pilot's last Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third-class medical certificate was 
issued on July 13, 2006. The medical certificate contained the limitation, "Not valid for any 
class after 07/31/2007. Must have available glasses for near vision."
On the application for his last FAA medical certificate, the pilot reported having 1,550 hours of 
flight time, 26 hours of which were flown in the preceding 6 months. The pilot's current flight 
time could not be determined because no personal flight records were located during this 
investigation.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N3552K
Model/Series:
PA 28-140 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1967
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-23623
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/15/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3942 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-E2A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 8CEN16FA001
The airplane was a low-wing, four-seat, fixed-tricycle-landing gear airplane, serial number 28-
23623, manufactured in 1967. The engine, serial number L19195-27A, was installed in the 
airplane on June 11, 2003, in accordance with Supplemental Type Certificate SE367CH, which 
increased the horsepower to 160.
The last annual inspection was completed on February 15, 2014, at a tachometer time of 48.2 
hours. The tachometer time at the time of the accident was 49.5 hours. The aircraft total time 
at the time of the accident was calculated to be 3,942 hours.
An employee of the FBO at UTS reported that the airplane was last fueled at UTS on February 
14, 2014. The amount of fuel added to the airplane is unknown. The airplane was kept in a 
hangar until May 5, 2015, when it was relocated to a ramp tie-down space.
The airplane owner stated that it had been about 1 year since the airplane was last flown. He 
reported that he and the pilot were planning on getting a ferry permit on October 5, 2015, so 
they could fly the airplane to Conroe for an annual inspection and to park the airplane outside 
the FBO to sell it. FBO personnel reported that the owner had rented a tie down space on their 
ramp, but as far as they knew, the airplane had not been parked there.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
UTS, 363 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1053 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
270°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 14 
knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.06 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Huntsville, TX (UTS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Conroe, TX (CXO)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1030 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Page 6 of 8CEN16FA001
Airport Information
Airport:
Huntsville (UTS)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
363 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
30.751944, -95.582500
The wreckage was located in a narrow clearing in a wooded area about 1/4 mile east of the 
approach end of runway 18 at UTC. The wreckage was inverted and on a heading of 10°. Tree 
branches were embedded in the bottom of the fuselage.
The aircraft battery power was found in the "on" position, and the wingtip lights were 
illuminated. The cockpit switches for the fuel boost pump, strobes, and instrument lights were 
in the "on" position. The magneto switch was in the "both" position. The carburetor heat knob 
was broken off, and the control cable appeared to be in the "off" (cold) position. The mixture 
control was full rich, and the throttle was at idle. The fuel selector was in the "off" position.
Examination of the airframe revealed that both sides of the aft fuselage were crushed inward 
and that the left-side crushing was more extensive. The top of the cockpit area was crushed 
downward to the top of the seats, but the remainder of the cockpit area was not compromised. 
All four seats were intact. The seats were equipped with seat belts, but shoulder harnesses were 
not installed. The airplane was not equipped with an electronic locator transmitter.
Both wings sustained impact damage, but they remained attached to the fuselage. The ailerons 
and flaps remained attached to their respective wings. Both the left and right fuel tanks were 
intact, and their fuel caps were secured. The right wing fuel tank contained about 4 gallons of 
fuel, and the left wing fuel tank contained about 16 ounces of fuel. A slow drip of fuel was 
observed coming from the right fuel tank filler cap before the airplane was righted. There was 
no evidence of fuel leakage from the left fuel tank. The fuel was clean and consistent with 
100LL aviation fuel.
The horizontal stabilator, rudder, and vertical stabilizer sustained minor damage, and all 
remained attached to the empennage. The top of both the rudder and vertical stabilizer were 
Page 7 of 8CEN16FA001
crushed. The pitch trim drum displayed nine threads upper extension of the inner shaft, which 
was consistent with a trim setting of about 50% or 6° of the available 12° nose-up trim.
Flight control continuity was established from each flight control surface to their respective 
cockpit controls. Both the left and right flaps were in place, and the flaps were extended about 
40°. All three landing gears remained attached.
The gascolator bowl was removed, and it was about three-quarters full of clean fuel that was 
consistent with 100LL aviation fuel. The gascolator screen and fuel boost pump filter were free 
of debris. The carburetor was removed and disassembled. Metal floats and a one-piece venturi 
were installed. No fuel was present in the carburetor bowl. The carburetor fuel inlet screen was 
examined, and it was free of debris.
The engine was rotated by hand using the propeller. Thumb compression, suction, and valve 
train continuity were confirmed to all cylinders. Accessory gear rotation was verified, and both 
magnetos sparked all leads when the engine was manually rotated. All spark plugs, Champion 
(REM40E) were removed and were light grey. All of the spark plugs were mid- to late-service 
life per the manufacturer's chart. Damage to the starter housing from impact with the ring gear 
was consistent with slow rotation/no power at the time of impact.
The propeller remained attached to the propeller flange. One propeller blade was straight. The 
other blade had a slight bend near its tip. No anomalies were identified with the airframe, flight 
controls, engine, engine components, or the propeller that would have prevented their normal 
operation.
Medical And Pathological Information
The Montgomery County Forensic Services Department conducted an autopsy on the pilot. The 
manner of death was attributed to "multiple blunt force injuries." The autopsy report stated the 
pilot had arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and kidney stones. The autopsy, FAA 
medical records, and the pilot's medical records from his personal physician were reviewed, 
and no evidence was found to suggest that the pilot suffered an acute cardiac event at the time 
of the accident.
Toxicology testing performed by the FAA's Bioaeronautical Research Sciences Laboratory 
identified 0.088 ug/ml of diphenhydramine in heart blood, and tamsulosin and yohimbine in 
cavity blood. All three drugs were also identified in urine. In addition, 366 mg/dl of glucose 
was confirmed in urine (normal is 0). Clinical lab tests performed on the pilot's vitreous found 
8 mg/dl of glucose and his blood revealed a hemoglobin A1C of 9 %.
Diphenhydramine is a sedating common over-the-counter antihistamine used to treat the 
common cold and hay fever and as a sleep aid. Diphenhydramine carries the following FDA 
warning: may impair mental and/or physical ability required for the performance of potentially 
Page 8 of 8CEN16FA001
hazardous tasks (e.g. driving, operating heavy machinery). The therapeutic range for 
diphenhydramine is 0.0250 to 0.1120 ug/ml. Tamsulosin is an alpha blocker used in the 
symptomatic treatment of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Yohimbine is an alkaloid with 
stimulant and aphrodisiac effects found naturally in Pausinystalia Yohimbe. Neither causes 
significant sedation or other psychoactive effects.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Pamela S Sullivan
Adopted Date:
04/20/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Casey Storm; FAA; Houston, TX
Mike McClure; Piper Aircraft; Vero Beach, FL
John Butler; Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
04/20/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92104
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
