Page 1 of 15
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Kodiak, AK
Accident Number:
ANC08MA038
Date & Time:
01/05/2008, 1343 AST 
Registration:
N509FN
Aircraft:
PIPER PA-31-350
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Injuries:
6 Fatal, 3 Serious, 1 
Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The airline transport pilot and nine passengers were departing in a twin-engine airplane on a 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 air taxi flight from a runway adjacent to an ocean bay. 
According to the air traffic control tower specialist on duty, the airplane became airborne about 
midway down the runway. As it approached the end of the runway, the pilot said he needed to 
return to the airport, but gave no reason. The specialist cleared the airplane to land on any 
runway. As the airplane began a right turn, it rolled sharply to the right and began a rapid, 
nose- and right-wing-low descent. The airplane crashed about 200 yards offshore and the 
fragmented wreckage sank in the 10-foot-deep water. Survivors were rescued by a private float 
plane. A passenger reported that the airplane's nose baggage door partially opened just after 
takeoff, and fully opened into a locked position when the pilot initiated a right turn towards the 
airport. The nose baggage door is mounted on the left side of the nose, just forward of the 
pilot's windscreen. When the door is opened, it swings upward, and is held open by a latching 
device. To lock the baggage door, the handle is placed in the closed position and the handle is 
then locked by rotating a key lock, engaging a locking cam. With the locking cam in the locked 
position, removal of the key prevents the locking cam from moving. The original equipment 
key lock is designed so the key can only be removed when the locking cam is engaged. 
Investigation revealed that the original key lock on the airplane's forward baggage door had 
been replaced with an unapproved thumb-latch device. A Safety Board materials engineer's 
examination revealed evidence that a plastic guard inside the baggage compartment, which is 
designed to protect the door's locking mechanism from baggage/cargo, appeared not to be 
installed at the time of the accident. The airplane manufacturer's only required inspection of 
the latching system was a visual inspection every 100 hours of service. Additionally, the 
mechanical components of the forward baggage door latch mechanism were considered "on 
condition" items, with no predetermined life-limit. On May 29, 2008, the Federal Aviation 
Administration issued a safety alert for operators (SAFO 08013), recommending a visual 
inspection of the baggage door latches and locks, additional training of flight and ground 
crews, and the removal of unapproved lock devices. In July 2008, Piper Aircraft issued a 
mandatory service bulletin (SB 1194, later 1194A), requiring the installation of a key lock 
device, mandatory recurring inspection intervals, life-limits on safety-critical parts of forward 
Page 2 of 15ANC08MA038
baggage door components, and the installation of a placard on the forward baggage door with 
instructions for closing and locking the door to preclude an in-flight opening. Postaccident 
inspection discovered no mechanical discrepancies with the airplane other than the baggage 
door latch. The airplane manufacturer's pilot operating handbook did not contain emergency 
procedures for an in-flight opening of the nose baggage door, nor did the operator's pilot 
training program include instruction on the proper operation of the nose baggage door or 
procedures to follow in case of an in-flight opening of the door. Absent findings of any other 
mechanical issues, it is likely the door locking mechanism was not fully engaged and/or the 
baggage shifted during takeoff, and contacted the exposed internal latching mechanism, 
allowing the cargo door to open. With the airplane operating at a low airspeed and altitude, the 
open baggage door would have incurred additional aerodynamic drag and further reduced the 
airspeed. The pilot's immediate turn towards the airport, with the now fully open baggage 
door, likely resulted in a sudden increase in drag, with a substantive decrease in airspeed, and 
an aerodynamic stall.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of company maintenance personnel to ensure that the airplane's nose baggage door 
latching mechanism was properly configured and maintained, resulting in an inadvertent 
opening of the nose baggage door in flight. Contributing to the accident were the lack of 
information and guidance available to the operator and pilot regarding procedures to follow 
should a baggage door open in flight and an inadvertent aerodynamic stall.
Findings
Aircraft
Cargo/baggage doors - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Factor)
Personnel issues
Repair - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Organizational issues
Emergency proc training - Manufacturer (Factor)
Availability of policy/proc - Manufacturer (Factor)
Page 3 of 15ANC08MA038
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 5, 2008, about 1343 Alaska standard time, a twin-engine Piper PA-31-350 
airplane, N509FN, received substantial damage when it collided with ocean water following a 
loss of control shortly after takeoff from Runway 36 at the Kodiak Airport, Kodiak, Alaska. The 
airplane was being operated by Servant Air, Inc., Kodiak, as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-
demand charter flight under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 
135, when the accident occurred. Of the 10 people aboard, the airline transport pilot and 5 
passengers died at the scene, 3 passengers sustained serious injuries, and 1 passenger 
sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company flight 
following procedures were in effect.  The flight was en route to Homer, Alaska.  
During an initial hospital room interview with the National Transportation Safety Board 
(NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on January 5, about 2200, a passenger related that the 
purpose of the flight was to transport a group of commercial fishermen from Kodiak to Homer 
for Russian Christmas. He added that many of the passengers were family members that lived 
in the same community near Homer.     
The passenger stated that he was seated in the third row on the right side of the airplane. He 
said that shortly after becoming airborne, he saw the airplane's nose baggage door open 
slightly, which he said initially startled the pilot.  He said that while the airplane was still over 
the departure end of Runway 36, the pilot initiated a shallow right turn, presumably to return 
to the airport.  He said that as soon as the pilot started the right turn, the baggage door swung 
open to the full open position, and it remained in that position. The passenger said that as the 
airplane continued the right turn, it rolled sharply to the right, and began a rapid, nose and 
right wing low descent. It collided with the water adjacent to the departure end of Runway 36.  
The passenger said that during the collision the fuselage fragmented, and the airplane sank 
shortly after impact. He said that he was able to free himself from the sinking wreckage by 
swimming though a large void in the airplane's fuselage. 
According to the contract Air Traffic Control Tower (ATCT) specialist that was on duty at the 
time of the accident, the accident airplane departed from runway 36, and became airborne 
about midway along the 5,013-foot long runway. The ATCT specialist said that as the airplane 
continued to climb approaching the departure end of the runway, the pilot calmly stated that 
he needed to return to the airport, but gave no reason for his need to return. The ATCT 
specialist reported that as the airplane began a right turn, it began a steep roll to the right, and 
descended nose-low into the water. He said that immediately after witnessing the accident, he 
alerted airport fire rescue crew of the accident, and contacted the U.S. Coast Guard's Air 
Station Kodiak, which is located adjacent to the Kodiak airport.   
The ATCT specialist noted that just after the accident, another Kodiak-based operator in a 
float-equipped de Havilland DHC-2 Beaver airplane contacted him on the tower radio 
frequency and said, in part: "[Kodiak] tower, Beaver five forty five's by the Crash Harbor, um 
can I help there?" The ATCT specialist responded by saying: "Beaver five forty five, yeah, you 
may be able to uh, you may be the first one that can get to those people that are in the water, 
they are right off the approach end of runway one eight, just off Buskin Beach, and uh you can 
transition into the airspace at your discretion." The ATCT specialist said that the pilot of the 
float-equipped de Havilland DHC-2 went directly to the accident site, then landed near the 
Page 4 of 15ANC08MA038
partially submerged wreckage. 
During an interview with the NTSB IIC, on January 8, the pilot of the de Havilland DHC-2 
Beaver airplane reported that at the time of the accident he was doing a postmaintenance 
engine run following a 100-hour inspection of his airplane. He said that while parked in a bay 
locally known as "Crash Harbor" adjacent to the Kodiak Airport, he initially overheard the 
radio conversation between the accident pilot and ATCT specialist, followed by the 
conversations between the ATCT specialist and the fire rescue crews, so he offered his 
assistance.  
The pilot said that once he found the partially submerged wreckage, he landed, and then taxied 
close as he could to the sinking wreckage. He said he discovered two passengers swimming in 
the water next to the submerged wreckage, and two other passengers clinging to the airplane's 
exposed vertical stabilizer. He said that wind conditions at the time of the rescue made it very 
difficult to maneuver his airplane next to the wreckage. Once he had the four severely 
hypothermic passengers aboard, he departed to the north, and flew directly to the Kodiak boat 
harbor where an ambulance was waiting. The pilot noted that when he departed the accident 
site, no other passengers were visible on the surface of the water.       
Pilot Preflight 
During an interview with the NTSB IIC on January 8, an employee of Servant Air reported that 
the accident pilot loaded the airplane himself, while his passengers waited in the operator's 
lounge. The employee noted that he watched the pilot load various items into the forward 
baggage area, closed and latched the baggage door, then continued loading the remaining 
items in the aft baggage area, and wing lockers. He said that when the pilot was done loading 
the airplane, he saw him do a "walk around" the entire airplane. He said that when the pilot 
approached the forward baggage area, the pilot slide his open left hand across the closed door, 
then while making a loose fist, he lightly tapped the door, just above the door's handle and lock 
assembly, then continued around the airplane's right wing.            
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Pilot Information 
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate with airplane multiengine land and sea, and 
helicopter ratings. He also held a flight instructor certificate with airplane single-engine land, 
multiengine land, instrument airplane, and helicopter ratings. His most recent first-class 
medical certificate was issued August 7, 2007, and contained no limitations.
According to the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) 
submitted by Servant Air, dated January 18, 2008, the pilot's total flight time was 9,437 hours, 
of which 400 were in the accident airplane make and model, and 1,108 in multiengine 
airplanes. 
His most recent airman competency/proficiency check (CFR Part 135.293) check ride was on 
September 1, 2007, the company president, who was a company check airman, administered 
the check ride in the accident airplane.  
A review of the flight and duty records for the pilot revealed in the 30 days before the accident, 
he flew about 47.5 hours. His flight time in the previous 90 days was about 179.6 hours.     
According to the operator, the company hired the pilot on June 1, 2004, and at that time, his 
Page 5 of 15ANC08MA038
total combined (helicopter and airplane) flight experience was about 6,555 flight hours, with 36 
hours in multiengine airplanes. 
Before being hired by Servant Air, the pilot was a full-time helicopter pilot for the United States 
Coast Guard.  During his time in service with the Coast Guard, he was stationed in various 
theaters around the world, including Alaska. While in the Coast Guard, he accumulated about 
6,000 flight hours in helicopters, and about 465 hours in airplanes.  
Company Information 
The operator is a Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 135 Air Carrier, and holds scheduled 
commuter and on-demand operations specifications. Company facilities are in Kodiak and 
Anchorage, Alaska. The president/director of maintenance and chief pilot reside in Kodiak. 
The vice president/director of operations resides in Anchorage. A review of the company's 
operations specification, issued by the FAA, indicate that flights shall only be initiated, 
diverted, or terminated under the authority of the director of operations, who may delegate his 
authority, but retains responsibility. At the time of the accident, the company president was out 
of town, and the vice president/director of operations was in Kodiak in his absence. 
A review of Servant Air's FAA approved training program revealed no specific training 
requirements concerning the proper operation of the nose baggage door. In addition, there 
were no emergency procedures training concerning an inadvertent opening of the nose baggage 
door.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION 
 
The airplane was equipped with two Lycoming TIO-540-J2B engines that were each rated at 
350 horsepower. 
The airplane's original maximum gross weight was 7,000 pounds, but it had been modified to 
7,368 pounds in accordance with an FAA-approved supplemental type certificate (STC).
According to the load manifest computed by the pilot just before departure, the airplane's gross 
weight was 7,221 pounds, or 147 pounds below its maximum gross weight.   
The airplane was not equipped with a cockpit voice recorder, or a flight data recorder.  
Maintenance records revealed that the last recorded inspection event of the engine and 
airframe was a 100-hour inspection, completed on December 18, 2007, 18 days and 27 service 
hours before the accident. At that time, the airplane had a total of 13,102 service hours. The left 
engine had about 615 service hours since the last major overhaul, and the right engine had 
about 1,151 service hours since the last major overhaul.  
The most recent annual inspection of the engines and airframe was on August 15, 2007, at 
which the airplane had 12,914 service hours. The left engine had about 427 service hours since 
a major overhaul, and the right engine had about 1,363 service hours since major overhaul.     
The left engine overhaul was done by Aero Recip Alaska, on June 14, 2006. The engine was 
installed on the accident airplane on June 29, 2006, and remained there until the accident.    
The right engine overhaul was done by Aero Recip Alaska, on December 8, 2003. The engine 
was installed on the accident airplane on January 5 2004, and remained there until the 
accident.    
Page 6 of 15ANC08MA038
 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest official weather observation station is located at the Kodiak Airport.  At 1353, an 
Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) was reporting, in part: Wind, 300 degrees (true) at 
17 knots with gusts to 26 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, 1,600 feet 
few, 25,000 feet scattered; temperature, 25 degrees F; dew point, 14 degrees F; altimeter, 
29.96 inHg.   
COMMUNICATIONS
 
Review of the air-ground radio communications tapes maintained by the FAA at the Kodiak 
Airport, revealed the pilot contacted the Kodiak Air Traffic Control Tower (ATCT), about 1337, 
and requested a clearance to taxi from the commercial ramp for a northbound departure. The 
ATCT specialist on duty responded by saying: "Navajo niner Foxtrot November Kodiak tower, 
runway three six position and hold, taxi via the runways." According to the ATCT specialist, the 
airplane taxied to runway 36 as instructed, then held short at the end of the runway.    
At 1340, the ATCT specialist said: "Navajo niner Foxtrot November, wind two eight zero at one 
six, runway three six, cleared for takeoff." The pilot said: "Cleared for takeoff, [runway] three 
six, nine foxtrot November."   
At 1342, the pilot said: "and tower, nine foxtrot November, I need to return for landing." The 
ATCT specialist on duty responded by saying: "Navajo niner Foxtrot November, wind three 
zero zero at one seven, and you can land on any runway you please." The pilot responded and 
said: "nine fox November."  No further radio contact from the accident airplane was received.
A transcript of all communications between the accident pilot and the ATCT specialist is 
included in the public docket of this accident. 
AERODROME AND GROUND FACILITIES
The Kodiak airport, elevation 73 feet msl, is equipped with three, intersecting hard-surfaced 
runways. Runway 36 is 5,013 feet long by 150 feet wide. The departure end of runway 36 is 
positioned at the edge of Chiniak Bay.  
The airport is near the base of Barometer Mountain, which rises to 2,506 feet west of the 
airport. 
The Kodiak Airport is the home of the U.S. Coast Guard's Air Station Kodiak. The Air Station is 
the major tenant of Integrated Support Command (ISC) Kodiak, and the largest Coast Guard 
command in the Pacific area. Air Station Kodiak operates a fleet of HC-130H's airplanes, as 
well as a fleet of HH-60J, and HH-65A rescue helicopters.   
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
 
The NTSB IIC, and a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector, 
Anchorage Flight Standards District Office, traveled to Kodiak on January 5. The NTSB IIC and 
the FAA inspector were aboard the recovery vessel when the airplane wreckage was recovered 
January 6. 
Page 7 of 15ANC08MA038
All of the airplane's major components were found at the main wreckage site. The airplane's 
fragmented wreckage sank in the shallow, tidal waters of Chiniak Bay, about 200 yards 
offshore, and about 30 degrees to the right of the centerline of Runway 36. 
The airplane received substantial damage during impact and recovery.  Divers who arrived on 
scene shortly after the accident described the condition of the airplane as severely damaged. 
The divers described the nose and forward section of the airplane as "fragmented." The 
airplane was found resting upright on the ocean floor in 10 feet of water at high tide. The divers 
noted that the upper portion of the airplane was visible during low tide. 
The airplane's landing gear was in the extended position. 
The airplane's right wing remained partially attached to the fuselage by cables, and the 
fragmented left wing was found torn from its fuselage to wing attachment points.   
The airplane's right engine assembly was torn from the airplane's firewall, and was found 
among the submerged wreckage. The right engine sustained impact damage to the front and 
underside portions. The exhaust tubes were crushed upward, and the folded edges of the 
exhaust tubes did not exhibit any cracking or bending. The right propeller hub remained 
attached to the crankshaft flange. All three propeller blades were loose in the propeller hub, but 
remained attached to the propeller hub assembly. The three propeller blades were bent aft, and 
all had torsional "S" twisting.
The airplane's left engine assembly remained attached to the airplane's firewall. The engine 
sustained impact damage to the front and underside portions. The exhaust tubes were crushed 
upward, and the folded edges of the exhaust tubes did not exhibit any cracking or bending. The 
left propeller hub remained attached to the crankshaft flange. All three propeller blades were 
loose in the propeller hub, but remained attached to the propeller hub assembly. The three 
propeller blades were bent aft, and all had torsional "S" twisting.
  
During recovery efforts, ropes and cables were attached to the engine nacelles, fuselage, and 
landing gear to hoist the wreckage onto a recovery barge. While being hoisted, the airplane 
broke apart in numerous areas, and the left wing separated. The right wing remained attached 
by cables.
The accident airplane's nose baggage door was recovered along with the main wreckage, and it 
sustained relatively minor damage. The twisted, broken, and distorted nose baggage doorframe 
was found in the fragmented wreckage of the nose section.  The nose baggage door handle was 
found in the closed position, and both the forward and aft latching arms were extended [closed 
position]. The nose baggage door lock cam assembly was found partially engaged into the 
baggage door handle slot. The plastic guard, which is designed to cover the door's locking 
mechanism components and the latch tube assembly on the inside portion of the door, was 
missing. The painted surface of the latch tube assembly had areas of chipped paint, with areas 
of corrosion and rust on the exposed areas. 
During recovery, it was noted that the nose baggage door's original equipment key lock had 
been replaced with a thumb-latching device, which does not utilize a removable key. 
Additionally, there was a 6-inch aluminum fabricated fastening device mounted on the lower 
portion of the nose baggage door, which was severely distorted.       
After the airplane was recovered, it was transported to a nearby State of Alaska airport 
Page 8 of 15ANC08MA038
maintenance building for the postaccident examination.
On January 7 and 8, 2008, a wreckage examination and layout was done under the direction of 
the NTSB IIC. An FAA airworthiness inspector, Anchorage Flight Standards District Office, and 
an air safety investigator from Piper Aircraft also assisted the NTSB IIC.   
Both the right and left throttle and propeller controls were full forward.  The left engine 
mixture control was full forward, and the right mixture was extended about 1/2 inch from full 
forward. The fuel selectors were on the inboard tanks. The fuel cross-feed was in the off 
position. 
 
The airplane's flight control system cable continuity was established to the point of impact 
related damage. The flap mechanism in each wing was in the flaps-up position.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The air temperature at the time of the accident was about 25 degrees F, and the water 
temperature was about 34 degrees F. A review of U.S. Coast Guard survivability data revealed 
that in 32-degree water, the time to a loss of useful consciousness is about 30 minutes. The 
operator reported that the airplane was equipped with personal flotation equipment, but 
passengers were not required to wear the equipment during the flight.   
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted under the authority of the Alaska State 
Medical Examiner, 4500 South Boniface Parkway, Anchorage, Alaska, on January 7, 2008. The 
cause of death for the pilot was attributed to blunt force, traumatic injuries.
The FAA's Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI) did a toxicological examination on February 5, 
2007, and was negative for alcohol or illicit drugs. An unspecified amount of Ibuprofen, an 
over-the-counter pain reliever, was detected in the pilot's blood.   
SEARCH AND RESCUE
 
According to the FAA's ATCT records, emergency notification of the accident was reported to 
the Kodiak Airport fire department, via the direct-dial "crash" phone, at 1343. Rescue 
personnel from the Alaska State Trooper's dive rescue team, Kodiak Airport fire department, 
Kodiak fire department, and Kodiak police department responded to the departure end of 
Runway 36, but they were unable to reach the accident site.    
The U.S. Coast Guard's Air Station Kodiak was notified at 1343, that an airplane had crashed in 
the waters of Chiniak Bay, just north of the departure end of runway 36. The Coast Guard 
initiated an emergency response and immediately dispatched an HH-60J rescue helicopter 
from Air Station Kodiak, and a small Coast Guard boat to aid in the rescue.  
According to U.S. Coast Guard mission logs the helicopter arrived on scene about 1404, and the 
Coast Guard small boat arrived on scene about 1412. Once the Coast Guard rescue swimmers 
entered the water they were able to free one victim that was restrained within the submerged 
wreckage. The unconscious and unresponsive passenger was transported to a local hospital, 
Page 9 of 15ANC08MA038
but attempts to revive him were unsuccessful. The rescue swimmers confirmed that the pilot 
and four passengers were still in the submerged wreckage, and that they had sustained fatal 
injuries. The report noted that the four surviving passengers had been picked up by another 
float-equipped airplane and transported them to the Kodiak boat harbor, before the Coast 
Guard's helicopter arrived.  
Kodiak Airport Emergency Plan
The Kodiak Airport's Emergency Plan (AEP) does not contain a water rescue plan. It does 
contain a Water Rescue Notification document, which is pages 21 through 23, within the AEP.  
The document outlines the airport's responsibility, and lists other agencies and their rescue 
assets. The document states, in part: "Water rescue equipment is not stationed at the Kodiak 
Airport. In the event an aircraft accident occurs in the surrounding waters, the U.S. Coast 
Guard will respond to the scene of the accident. In addition, local emergency agencies will also 
respond to the scene depending on the distance from the airport." 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Engines
 
On February 8, 2008, at the direction and under the supervision of the NTSB IIC, both engines 
were disassembled and inspected at Alaskan Aircraft Engines, Inc., Anchorage. The engine 
inspections revealed no preaccident mechanical anomalies.   
 
Nose Baggage Area and Door
The nose baggage compartment door is mounted on the left side of the nose, just forward of the 
pilot's windscreen, and measures about 28 inches long by 24 inches tall. The baggage door is 
hinged at the top on two hinges, allowing it to swing upward when opened. When the door is in 
the fully open position, it is held open by a latching device. To close the baggage door, a latch 
release lever must be pushed, which releases the latching device. The nose baggage 
compartment has a loading capacity of 200 pounds, and a volume of 14 cubic feet.
 
When the baggage door is closed and the handle is placed in the closed position [flush with the 
surface of the door], a mechanical linkage rotates two latch arms mounted on the lower portion 
of the door [one forward and one aft] and extends them both outward. The latching arms then 
contact two nylon striker plates mounted on the forward and aft portions of the baggage door 
doorframe. With the door handle in the closed position, the baggage door key lock mechanism 
can be rotated counterclockwise, engaging the locking cam into a slot on the baggage door 
handle. With the locking cam in the locked position, removal of the key prevents the locking 
cam from moving out of the slot door in the door handle, which in turn prevents the door 
handle from opening. Piper's original equipment key lock is designed so the key can only be 
removed when the lock is in the locked position.  
Thumb Latch vs. Key Lock
During the postaccident inspection of the accident airplane's forward baggage door, it was 
discovered that Piper's original equipment key lock mechanism had been replaced with a 
Page 10 of 15ANC08MA038
thumb-latch device. In postaccident interviews with other Piper PA-31 operators it was 
revealed that many of them have also modified the baggage doors by replacing the key lock 
mechanism with a latching mechanism that does not require a key. 
According to FAA inspectors, this modification is considered to be a minor alteration that 
requires maintenance personnel to make only a logbook entry. The FAA inspectors explained 
that a supplementary latch typically accompanies the installation of a keyless lock. The 
supplementary latch is commonly known to Piper PA-31 operators in Alaska as the "Peebles 
Latch." The safety latch, fabricated from 0.040" Alclad Aluminum, is installed above the 
forward baggage door handle, and provides a secondary, external latching system once the 
latch is placed over the door handle. The accident airplane's forward baggage door was not 
equipped with a secondary latch.     
During an interview with the NTSB IIC on January 8, the company's president reported that 
the accident airplane was purchased from an Anchorage based aircraft broker in November 
2004. He said that the thumb-latch device was already installed on the airplane when the 
company purchased the airplane.   
Baggage Door Guard
During the postaccident inspection of the accident airplane's forward baggage door it was 
discovered that the plastic guard was missing. The guard is designed to protect the door's 
locking mechanism components, which are positioned on the interior portion of the baggage 
door. According to the on scene air safety investigator from Piper Aircraft, the guard is 
designed to prevent items that are placed in the forward baggage area from interfering with 
door's locking mechanism during flight. He noted that operating the airplane without the 
guard might result in an inadvertent opening of the baggage door.      
During an interview with the NTSB IIC on January 8, the company president, who also serves 
as the director of maintenance and is a company pilot, reported that the last time he flew the 
accident airplane the plastic guard was in place. He added that even more recently the guard 
was in place on December 10, 2007, 18 days and 27 service hours before the accident, at which 
time he completed a 100-hour inspection.  
The airplane's forward baggage door was sent to the NTSB's materials laboratory for 
examination.
The accident airplane's forward baggage door was inspected on July 1, 2008, at the NTSB's 
Washington D.C. materials laboratory. The examination was done at the direction of a Safety 
Board senior materials research engineer. The Safety Board engineer reported that the plastic 
guard is held in place by six #6-32 screws that screw into corresponding rivnuts mounted on 
the interior portion of the baggage door. He said that five of the six rivnuts were empty, and 
one rivnut contained a screw and a fractured piece of the plastic cover. He added that the 
empty rivnuts holes were cleaned and examined with an optical microscope, and none of the 
threads within the rivnuts were stripped. 
The Safety Board engineer also noted in his report that both the latch mechanism and the 
[thumb] lock mechanism were operational. If the lock was not engaged, the latch could be 
opened by an aft force applied along the latch tube assembly.     
A complete copy of the NTSB's materials laboratory factual report is included in the public 
docket for this accident.
Page 11 of 15ANC08MA038
Previous Accident History
A review of NTSB's database shows seven previous accidents which resulted from inadvertent 
in-flight openings of nose baggage doors on Piper PA-31 Navajo, Piper PA-23 Aztec, and Piper 
PA-31T Cheyenne series airplanes, all of which share a similar baggage door design. Common 
findings among most of the previous accidents related to airplanes operating at or near the 
airplane's maximum gross weight, and/or during takeoff.     
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on January 10, the manager of Piper 
Aircraft's air safety division said that his research revealed that during the original certification 
process of the Piper PA-31 series airplane, no flight testing was conducted, nor was it required, 
concerning the adverse aerodynamic effects of a nose baggage door opening in-flight.   
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC on January 15, the director of operations 
for a Part 135 cargo operator, which operates 41 Piper PA-31-350 airplanes, reported that in the 
past, his company has had the nose baggage doors open in-flight, but none resulted in an 
accident since the airplanes were operating at relatively low gross weights, and none occurred 
during takeoff. He said that after installing a secondary latch device on all of its airplanes about 
10 years ago, no inadvertent baggage door openings have occurred since. The director of 
operations said that the secondary latch device his company uses mounts to the lower portion 
of the nose baggage door, and with the door closed, a quick release Camlock wing-stud is 
inserted into a receptacle that's mounted into the lower doorframe, and locked into place.    
 
Forward Baggage Door Latch Mechanism Inspection Requirements 
The NTSB IIC reviewed Piper Aircraft's recommended inspection and maintenance intervals 
contained within the FAA approved Piper PA-31-350 maintenance service manual. The review 
revealed that a visual inspection of the forward baggage door latch mechanism is required 
every 100-hours of service. The Piper PA-31-350 100-hour checklist, item E, labeled Fuselage 
and Empennage Group, item number 15, states, in part: "Inspect forward baggage door latch 
and hinge operation and security."  
An air safety investigator from Piper Aircraft reported that the mechanical components of the 
forward baggage door latch mechanism are considered "on condition" items, with no 
predetermined life-limit.  
In conjunction with the NTSB's investigation, Piper Aircraft did a random fleet survey, which 
identified several common aging-fleet related conditions that can hamper the door's latching 
capability. The conditions were, in part: Worn/non-conforming key locks, worn/corroded 
clevis pins, bent/deformed/non-conforming baggage door brackets, and damaged/corroded 
door locking springs. 
FAA Safety Alert for Operators
On May 29, 2008, the FAA's Flight Standards Service, Washington D.C., issued a safety alert 
for operators (SAFO number 08013), which alerts operators of Piper PA-31 Navajo, Piper PA-
23 Aztec, and Piper PA-31T Cheyenne series airplanes, concerning the risks associated with an 
inadvertent opening for the forward baggage doors. 
Page 12 of 15ANC08MA038
The SAFO recommends, in part: 
"Operators should develop procedures to routinely inspect the baggage door and associated 
latches and locks during the normal aircraft inspection process."  
"The operator's training programs should ensure that flight crews, ground handlers, and 
maintenance personnel understand the proper operation of the forward baggage door." 
"The baggage door key should only be allowed to be removed when the lock is fully engaged or 
fully disengaged. The operator's pilot training program should include emergency procedures 
training on how to react should a baggage door open during take-off or in flight. The training 
should include a description of what to expect such as noise, vibration, handling, and potential 
secondary damage from baggage hitting props." 
"Operators need to remove any "permanent key" installations. This defeats the safety feature of 
having a removable key. The key can only be removed when the lock is either totally open or 
completely engaged. With a "permanent key" installed, the lock is free to rotate." 
"Make sure latch and lock mechanisms conform to original type design and are in a condition 
for safe operation." 
The FAA SAFO also states: "FAA Aircraft Certification is currently working with Piper Aircraft 
to develop additional certification requirements pertaining to this issue.  Until such time as the 
additional requirements are published, operators should consider the recommendations 
contained herein."    
On July 15, 2008, Piper Aircraft issued a mandatory service bulletin (SB 1194), which was later 
revised (SB 1194A) on November 10, 2008, requiring, in part, the following:
 
The installation of a key lock device on all Piper PA-31 Navajo, Piper PA-23 Aztec, and Piper 
PA-31T Cheyenne series airplanes. (The key can only be removed from the lock after the key is 
placed in the locked position)
Establishes mandatory recurring inspection intervals of the forward baggage door latching 
mechanism and lock assembly.
Establishes life-limits on safety-critical parts of forward baggage door components.
Requires the installation of a placard on the forward baggage door that provides instructions 
for closing and locking the door.   
 
A complete copy of Piper's mandatory service bulletin is included in the public docket for this 
accident.
WRECKAGE RELEASE
The Safety Board released the wreckage to the owner's insurance representative on January 9, 
2008. The Safety Board retained the forward baggage door until December 17, 2008 when it 
was also released to the owner's insurance representative.
Page 13 of 15ANC08MA038
History of Flight
Initial climb
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power) (Defining event)
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/07/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2007
Flight Time:
9437 hours (Total, all aircraft), 400 hours (Total, this make and model), 179 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 74 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N509FN
Model/Series:
PA-31-350 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
31-7952162
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
10
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/18/2007, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7368 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
27 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
13130 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540 Serie
Registered Owner:
OSOWSKI WES A
Rated Power:
350 hp
Operator:
Servant Air, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Commuter Air Carrier 
(135); On-demand Air Taxi 
(135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
S4EA
Page 14 of 15ANC08MA038
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ADQ, 78 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1353 AST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 1600 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
17 knots / 26 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
28.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-4°C / -10°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
KODIAK, AK (ADQ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
HOMER, AK (HOM)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1343 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Kodiak (ADQ)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
78 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5013 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
5 Fatal, 3 Serious, 1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
6 Fatal, 3 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
57.750556, -152.468611 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Clinton O Johnson
Adopted Date:
04/15/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
John P Jones; Federal Aviation Administration (Airworthiness); Anchorage, AK
George Hollingsworth; Piper Aircraft, Inc.; Vero Beach, FL
Troy R Helgeson; Textron Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Wes Osowski; Servant Air; Kodiak, AK
Publish Date:
08/04/2011
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 15 of 15ANC08MA038
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
