Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Oklahoma City, OK
Accident Number:
DFW08LA055
Date & Time:
01/03/2008, 0225 CST 
Registration:
N398J
Aircraft:
Pilatus PC-12/45
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 8 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
After an uneventful landing at night, the commercial rated pilot taxied the single-engine turbo 
propeller equipped airplane to a FBO based at the airport.  Upon reaching the FBO's dimly lit 
ramp, a line technician, who was employed by the FBO, used lighted wands to marshal the 
airplane to a parking spot.  When the airplane came to a complete stop, the pilot set the 
parking brake.  As the pilot was initiating the engine shut down procedures, he heard a loud 
"thud" and felt the engine, propeller, and airplane begin to vibrate.  He looked up and saw the 
line technician rolling on the ramp toward the airplane's left wing tip.  Upon exiting the 
airplane, the pilot and one of the passengers, who was a physician, noted that the line 
technician was critically wounded and immediately initiated first aid.  It was also noted that a 
set of wheel chocks and the severed sections of the two lighted wands were near the propeller 
at the front of the airplane.  The line technician had received a written warning from his 
employer approximately three months before the accident for attempting to chock the nose 
wheel of another airplane while the engines were operating.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The line technician's failure to remain clear of the propeller.  A factor was the night lighting 
conditions.
Page 2 of 6DFW08LA055
Findings
Occurrence #1: PROPELLER/ROTOR CONTACT TO PERSON
Phase of Operation: STANDING - ENGINE(S) OPERATING
Findings
1. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - NIGHT
2. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - NOT MAINTAINED - GROUND PERSONNEL
Page 3 of 6DFW08LA055
Factual Information
On January 3, 2008, approximately 0225 central standard time, a Pilatus PC-12/45, N398J, a 
single-engine turbo-prop airplane, was not damaged when a line technician was struck and 
killed by its moving propeller while parked at the ramp at Wiley Post Airport, Oklahoma City 
(PWA), Oklahoma.  The commercial pilot and the 7 passengers were not injured.  The airplane 
was operated by and registered to Oklahoma Cardiovascular Associates, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma.   An instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the flight that had departed the 
Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport (PHX), Phoenix, Arizona, about 2200.  Night visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross country flight that was conducted under 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to the Oklahoma City Police Department report, the pilot stated that after landing, 
he taxied to the fixed base operator (FBO) located at the airport.  When he reached the FBO's 
dimly lit ramp, the line technician used lighted wands to guide the airplane to a parking spot.  
Once the line technician gave the pilot the "stop" hand signal, the pilot stopped the airplane, 
set the brake, and began shutting down the engine.  The pilot said that when he was about to 
move the throttle to the fuel-cut-off position, he heard a loud "thud" and the engine, airplane 
and propeller began to "vibrate badly."  He looked up and saw a "rapid movement" out of the 
corner of his eye to the left of the airplane and realized it was the line attendant tumbling along 
the ramp surface.  The pilot  immediately engaged the fuel-cut-off switch, and waited for the 
propeller to stop turning.  At that point, the pilot and a passenger, who was a physician, exited 
the aircraft and immediately administered first aid to the technician until emergency response 
personnel arrived.  
The police report also reported that a set of wheel chocks, a shoe, and broken pieces of the 
lighted wands were found near the propeller.
The FBO's third shift supervisor was on the ramp when the accident occurred, but he did not 
witness the line technician being struck by the propeller.  According to the supervisor, he was 
operating an airplane tug and had last observed the line technician marshalling the airplane.  
The supervisor had turned away from the airplane when he heard a loud "thud."   When he 
turned around, he saw that the line technician was critically injured and was rolling on the 
ground toward the airplane's left wing tip.  
Although there were seven passengers on board the airplane, none of them witnessed the 
accident.
A review of training records provided by the FBO revealed that the line technician had 
successfully completed Professional Line Service Training (PLST) on September 4, 2007.  This 
training included the dangers associated when working around propellers.  According to the 
PLST Training Manual, Section 2.2.5, titled Propeller Danger, it stated, "The propeller blades 
spin at a high rpm and may present a significant hazard to ramp workers.  Line service 
personnel have been killed by spinning propellers.  Because propellers can become invisible 
when spinning at high revolution, it is easy to become distracted and forget that the aircraft's 
engine is, indeed, running."  In addition, section 2.5 of the manual, titled Aircraft Marshaling 
and Hand Signals, stated, "...Some additional rules which must be followed when marshaling 
and parking of all types of aircraft...Propellers and rotors must be completely stopped before 
positioning the chocks."
Page 4 of 6DFW08LA055
Further review of the line technician's training file revealed that he received a Disciplinary 
Action from his employer on October 11, 2007.  The reason for the action was defined as,"[Line 
technician] chocked the nose wheel of [registration number] (King Air) while the engines were 
still running.  This violates previous training he has received."  The Disciplinary Action was 
signed by the Line Technician, his supervisor, the General Manager of the FBO, and a witness.
As a result of this accident, The FBO issued training Bulletin #08-001, titled Aircraft Propeller 
Safety, to its 2,600 employees.  This purpose of the bulletin was to "Ensure all personnel, who 
work, provide service or transition near aircraft, recognize the potential danger which exists 
with aircraft propellers, whether moving or stationary, and always observe propeller safety 
operating procedures."
Weather reported at Wiley Post Airport at 0253 included wind from 170 degrees at 16 knots, 
visibility 10 miles, clear skies, and a barometric pressure setting of 30.65 inches of Mercury.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/01/2007
Flight Time:
10571 hours (Total, all aircraft), 475 hours (Total, this make and model), 17 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6DFW08LA055
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Pilatus
Registration:
N398J
Model/Series:
PC-12/45 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
398
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
9
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9920 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
1871 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney Canada
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-67A
Registered Owner:
Oklahoma cardiovascular 
Associates PC
Rated Power:
1200 hp
Operator:
Oklahoma cardiovascular 
Associates PC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PWA, 1299 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0253 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
16 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.65 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Phoenix, CA (PHX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Oklahoma City, OK (PWA)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2200 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Wiley Post (PWA)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
1299 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 6 of 6DFW08LA055
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
7 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 8 None
Latitude, Longitude:
35.533611, -97.641389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Leah D Yeager
Adopted Date:
03/31/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Don Cook; FAA/FSDO; Oklahoma City, OK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
