Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Boise, ID
Accident Number:
SEA02FA023
Date & Time:
01/02/2002, 1045 MST 
Registration:
N132Z
Aircraft:
Beech 58P
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
Analysis 
Shortly after takeoff for an after maintenance test flight, the pilot noted a fire in the left engine.  
The pilot reduced power and landed the aircraft on the remaining runway without further 
incident.  The engine and systems were shut down prior to the pilot and passenger evacuating 
the aircraft.  Fire personnel responded and applied a small amount of foam on the engine, 
which was at the time, only smoking.  Inspection of the engine revealed that the fire was 
contained to the accessory section of the engine.  Heat distress was found to the outboard 
nacelle web assembly and the top wing skin under the nacelle was warped.  Further inspection 
found that an electrical arc in the alternator wiring due to chafing against a pneumatic tube 
was responsible for the ignition of the fire.  Accumulated fuel vapor from a fuel cell leak that 
was an on-going maintenance discrepancy for approximately three weeks preceding the 
accident, and eventually fixed, was most probable the source of the fuel.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Improper clearance between an alternator wire and a pneumatic line and fuel fumes.  The 
alternator wire chafe and arcing  were factors.
Findings
Occurrence #1: FIRE
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM,ELECTRIC WIRING - CHAFED
2. (F) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM,ELECTRIC WIRING - ARCING
3. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - CLEARANCE
4. (C) FLUID,FUEL - FUMES
Page 2 of 6SEA02FA023
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 2002, at 1045 mountain standard time, a Beech 58P, N132Z, registered to and 
operated by U.S. Department of Agriculture, as a 14 CFR Part 91 maintenance test flight, 
experienced an in-flight fire in the left engine shortly after takeoff from Boise Air Terminal 
(Gowen Field), Boise, Idaho.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no 
flight plan was filed for the local flight.  The aircraft was substantially damaged and neither the 
airline transport pilot nor the mechanic passenger were injured.
The pilot reported that the aircraft had just come out of heavy maintenance and he and the 
mechanic were taking the aircraft for a test flight.  The start, taxi and takeoff were normal.  The 
pilot reported that after the aircraft lifted off and attained an altitude of about 20 feet above 
ground level, he noticed a fire in the left engine.  The pilot immediately reduced power and 
landed the aircraft on the runway.   After landing and coming to a stop on the runway, the pilot 
shut off the aircraft systems and he and the mechanic evacuated the aircraft with the engine 
still on fire and smoke coming into the cockpit.  Airport fire personnel arrived shortly 
thereafter and applied a small amount of foam on the engine, which was now only smoking.
DAMAGE TO AIRCRAFT
A Federal Aviation Administration Inspector from the Boise Flight Standards District Office 
reported that the fire damage was contained to the accessory section aft of the firewall.   
Inspection by maintenance personnel reported that the fire heat distressed the outboard 
nacelle web assembly which discolored the primer paint on both sides.  The paint had turned 
black inside the compartment and was brown on the side outside the compartment.   
Maintenance personnel reported that doublers on both sides of the web assembly were 
required for reinforcing the structure.  It was also noted that the top wing skin under the 
nacelle was warped.  The primer paint was discolored black and the paint was bubbled.   An 
approximate 12 inch by 12 inch patch bonded and riveted to the area was required for the 
repair.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot holds certificates for commercial operations, airline transport pilot and flight 
instructor.  The pilot is rated in single-engine land and sea, and multi-engine aircraft with 
instrument privileges.  At the time, the pilot held a class 1 medical certificate with no waivers or 
limitations.  The pilot reported a total flight time of 6,701 hours in all aircraft and 2,100 hours 
in the Beech 58P.  A total of 180 hours was as pilot-in-command.  The pilot successfully 
accomplished a flight review in a Cessna Citation on October 15, 2001. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
A review of the maintenance records revealed that the left wing fuel cell was removed to repair 
the "T" plate on November 7, 2001.  A new cell was ordered as the old cell was old and stiff.  On 
December 6, 2001, a new cell was installed.   On December 12, 2001, the fuel cell was filled 
with fuel.  A slow leak was detected from the inboard end of the front spar and appeared to be 
running along the lower forward face spar in the channel formed by the lower spar cap angle, 
and front spar face.  Four gallons of fuel were removed from the cell and the leak stopped.  
From December 13 to December 20, maintenance personnel continued to troubleshoot the 
Page 3 of 6SEA02FA023
problem as the cell continued to leak.   On December 21, 2001, the fuel cell was defueled and 
maintenance personnel found that a lap seam on the upper outboard corner was leaking which 
was determined to be a manufacturing defect.  A new cell was ordered and installed in the 
aircraft on December 26, 2001.  The cell was fueled and no leaks were noted.  The aircraft set 
for 36 hours fully fueled with the access covers removed to observe for leaks.  On December 28, 
2001, the access hole covers were installed as no leaks were detected.  The accident test flight 
was conducted on January 2, 2002.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
A National Transportation Safety Board Fire and Explosion Specialist inspected the aircraft's 
fire damaged structure and components.  During the inspection, the specialist noted a burned 
area on the wing skin about 12 inches aft from the leading edge of the wing.  The primer paint 
was discolored and the paint was bubbled.  The skin surface was wavy in appearance.  The air 
conditioning system and alternator wire were located in the accessory compartment above this 
location.  The cowling was removed and damage to the nacelle outboard web and other wing 
support structure was noted in the area of the air-conditioning blower and condensers.  A 
section of the primer paint on the outboard web was discolored on both sides.  The air 
conditioning system was severely fire damaged, sooted and the plastic casing was melted.  One 
of the coolant lines had fractured during the fire.  The system contained approximately 13-15 
ounces of lubricating oil.  The specialist reported that this oil would have been under pressure 
and would have misted upon release.  In the mist form, the oil would have been easily ignited 
even though its flashpoint is 392 degrees F.   The specialist reported that the small amount of 
oil would have produced a blowtorch effect, which could explain the intense localized damage 
to the fins of the condenser.  The aluminum fins on the condenser was sooted and melted.  
Towards the trailing edge of the wing, the alternator wire and a pneumatic line was located.  
The specialist reported, "In the middle of the section of wire, an area of insulation was missing.  
The surrounding intact insulation was charred and melted.  The exposed conductor had areas 
where the tin coating was missing and the copper wire underneath was visible.  There was an 
eroded pit in the conductor that was visible without magnification.  Upon magnification, it was 
noted that several strands of the conductor had lost material and had a decrease diameter.  The 
pneumatic tube was found in contact with the alternator wire.  In the area where the tube had 
touched the wire, the tube exhibited signs of melting and missing material to the point that the 
tube had been melted through."   The specialist also reported that accumulated fuel vapor from 
the fuel cell leak was most probable source of fuel.
.
Page 4 of 6SEA02FA023
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/04/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/15/2001
Flight Time:
6701 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2100 hours (Total, this make and model), 3763 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 24 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N132Z
Model/Series:
58P 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
TJ-284
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/14/2001, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
6240 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
11 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6083 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-WB3F
Registered Owner:
US Department of Agriculture
Rated Power:
325 hp
Operator:
US Department of Agriculture
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6SEA02FA023
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 5000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.13 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C / -2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Boise, ID (BOI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1045 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
Boise Air Terminal (Gowen Fld) 
(BOI)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2868 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
10R
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
9763 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
In-Flight
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Debra J Eckrote
Adopted Date:
11/04/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael Misnick; FAA-FSDO; Boise, ID
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA02FA023
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
