The pilot reported that as the airplane was taking off, a deer hit the left side of the empennage, 
causing a violent yaw to the left, but the airplane continued to fly. Passengers in the rear seat 
used a flashlight to inspect the damage. They discovered that the left horizontal stabilizer, 
elevator and empennage were damaged. The pilot was concerned about tail flutter and possible 
stalling of the airplane. He determined that he would maintain 100 knots and continue in the 
same direction to the nearest airport, where he could make a straight-in landing, and 
emergency services were available. An uneventful landing was made. 
A deer that wandered onto the runway.  Darkness was a related factor. 
 On April 2, 1996, at 2130 eastern standard time, a Cessna 210 sustained substantial damage 
after gaining 10 to 15 feet of altitude during takeoff when it was struck by a deer.  The private 
pilot and the three passengers were not injured.  The pilot elected to continue the flight to 
Pontiac, Michigan, where he performed an emergency landing.  The 14 CFR 91 flight was 
departing Brooks Field Airport, Marshall, Michigan, en route to New Hudson, Michigan.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that during takeoff a deer hit the airplane on the left side of the empennage, 
causing a violent yaw to the left. He thought at first that the deer had hit the left landing gear.  
The passengers in the rear seat used a flashlight to inspect the damage to the aircraft.  It was 
discovered that the left horizontal stabilizer, elevator and empennage were damaged.  The pilot 
reported that he was concerned about tail flutter and stalling the airplane.  He determined that 
he would maintain 100 knots per hour and continue in the same direction to the nearest 
airport where he could make a straight in landing, and where there were emergency services at 
the field.  He continued on to Pontiac, Michigan, and maintained 100 knots during landing and 
made an uneventful landing.
