During an instrument landing system (ILS) approach the airline transport pilot noticed a 
discrepancy in the landing gear indicators. He raised the landing gear and lowered it again. The 
main landing gear indicator lights were illuminated, indicating that the main gear was 
extended and locked, but the nose gear light was extinguished. The light in the gear handle was 
off, indicating that the system was functioning properly. The pilot did not use the emergency 
landing gear extension system. The aircraft was landed, and the nose gear collapsed. 
Subsequent examination revealed an intermittently operating extend solenoid in the nose gear 
selector valve. 
the flight crew's inadequate emergency procedure in that they did not manually extend the 
landing gear, as specified in the airplane flight manual.  A factor relating to the accident was: 
the intermittent operation of the extend solenoid in the nose gear selector valve. 
 On April 1, 1996, about 1004 eastern standard time, Canadair CL-600-1A11, N999TF, 
nose landing gear collapsed on landing at the Raleigh-Durham Airport, Raleigh, North 
Carolina. The aircraft was being operated by Pal-Waukee Aviation under the provisions of 14 
CFR Part 135 and instrument flight rules. Instrument meteorological conditions existed at the 
time of the accident, and an instrument flight rules flight plan was in effect. The airline 
transport pilot, his co-pilot, the cabin attendant, and the six passengers were not injured; the 
aircraft was substantially damaged. The flight departed Milwaukee, Wisconsin at 0830 the 
same day.
The pilot stated that when the landing gear was extended, the landing gear position 
indicating system presented conflicting information regarding the position of the nose landing 
gear. The landing gear was then raised, and the indicator lights were all extinguished. The gear 
was again extended. The main gear indicator lights were illuminated, indicating that the main 
gear was down, but the nose gear light was extinguished. The light in the gear handle was off, 
indicating that the system was functioning properly. The pilot did not use the emergency 
landing gear extension system. The aircraft was landed and the nose gear collapsed. The pilot 
stated that the clouds and visibility precluded any observation of the landing gear by airport 
tower personnel.
Post accident examination of the nose gear selector valve revealed an intermittently 
inoperative extend solenoid valve. According to the failure analysis report, the solenoid valve 
most likely experienced moisture entry. The manufacturer reported that the selector valve was 
repaired with an upgraded solenoid to preclude recurrence of the failure.
