The flight was returning to the departure airport when the airplane experienced a loss of 
engine power . According to the pilot, he attempted to restart the engine several times, but was 
unable to. The pilot reported that the carburetor heat was applied during the restart attempts, 
but there was no report by the pilot of the application of carburetor heat prior to the loss of 
engine power.  The airplane collided with trees one mile east of the airport. The examination of 
the engine assembly, after the accident, failed to disclose a mechanical problem. A review of 
weather data at the approximate time of the accident disclosed that conditions were favorable 
for the formation of carburetor icing. 
The pilot's failure to obtain a preflight weather briefing and his failure to apply carburetor heat 
that resulted in a loss of engine power. A factor was weather conditions were favorable for the 
formation of carburetor icing at cruise flight. 
 On April 2, 1996, at 1550 eastern standard time, a Cessna 182P, N7355S, collided with trees 
during an attempted emergency landing to Flagler County Airport in Bunnell, Florida. The 
personal flight operated under the provisions of  Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed. 
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage. The pilot received serious injuries, and the passenger received minor 
injuries. The flight departed Bunnell, Florida, at 1530 hours.
Reportedly, the flight was returning to Flagler County Airport when the pilot experienced a loss 
of engine power. According to the pilot, he attempted to restart the engine several times, but 
failed. The pilot reported that the carburetor heat was applied during the restart attempts, but 
there was no report by the pilot of the application of carburetor heat prior to the loss of engine 
power.  The airplane collided with trees one mile east of the Flagler County Airport.
The examination of the engine assembly, after the accident, failed to disclose a mechanical 
problem. A review of weather data at the approximate time of the accident disclosed that 
conditions were favorable formation of carburetor icing (see attached icing probability curves).
