After landing the Captain was taxiing the airplane to the parking area to off load his cargo of 
fuel.  While the Captain was maneuvering the airplane in the parking area the left wingtip 
struck a vertical steel building support. The Captain attempted to back up the airplane through 
the use of reverse thrust.  While backing up, the left elevator, stabilizer, and vertical fin struck a 
steel fuel tank being stored near the parking area.  The Captain stated that the parking area is 
tight for a DC-6 airplane. 
The Pilot-in-Command's selection of an unsuitable terrain area for taxi/parking and his 
misjudgment of the clearance required. 
 On April 1, 1996, at 1100 Alaska standard time, a retractable gear, wheel equipped DC-6-B 
airplane, N861TA, registered to and operated by Woods Air Fuel, Inc., of Palmer, Alaska, 
collided with ground fuel tanks at Beluga, Alaska, during taxi after landing.  The business 
flight, operating under 14 CFR Part 91, departed Palmer and the destination was Beluga, 
Alaska.  A company flight plan was in effect and visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  
The certificated airline transport pilot- in-command, the first officer, and the flight engineer 
were not injured and the airplane received substantial damage.  
       During a telephone interview with the crew on April 4, 1996, they stated that the Captain 
was taxiing the airplane because he had control of the nose gear steering wheel.  They were 
making a right turn in the parking area attempting to position the airplane close to the ground 
fuel tanks in order to off load their fuel cargo.  The Captain stated in the NTSB Form 6120.1/2 
that the area is very tight for a DC-6 airplane.  During the right turn, the left wing tip struck a 
steel upright support for an open building.  The Captain stopped the airplane and called for 
reverse.  As the Captain backed up the airplane, the left elevator, left stabilizer, and vertical fin 
struck a steel fuel tank being stored near the parking area.  The Captain stated that the airplane 
did not back up along the same ground track made during the forward taxi.  He stated that 
when operating in reverse, the weight on the nose wheel is reduced.
