The pilot (part owner of the aircraft) held an A&P certificate & had completed a 
condition/annual inspection of the aircraft before the flight. The aircraft co-owner stated there 
was a problem with the throttle cable, & the pilot was going to order a new one, but had not yet 
done so. Witnesses said the aircraft departed straight out after takeoff. About 4 minutes later, it 
entered a downwind to the pattern, low & very close to the runway. The witnesses estimated 
the aircraft's altitude was between 200 and 300 feet agl. At first, some witnesses thought the 
pilot was going to make a downwind landing on the runway. The witnesses said the aircraft 
made a tight turn from downwind to base. During the base-to-final turn, the right wing 
dropped, and the aircraft entered a nose-down descent and crashed. The witnesses heard the 
engine running before impact, but they described the sound as 'not full power.'  An 
examination of the engine & controls revealed that a clip, which secured the accelerator pump 
plunger to its actuation shaft in the carburetor, was missing & the pump was inoperative. The 
throttle cable housing/actuating shaft at the carburetor end was found separated from the 
cable sheath, exposing the unsupported inside cable. A piece of welding rod was found bent 
around the housing end & taped to the sheath. The cable was removed from the aircraft & 
operationally tested. During push-pull tests, the carburetor end would sometimes move an 
amount corresponding to the cockpit end input; at other times, the carburetor end would move 
only slightly. 
the pilot's decision to fly the aircraft with a known mechanical discrepancy in the throttle 
linkage, which resulted in a partial loss of engine power; and his failure to maintain an 
adequate airspeed while maneuvering for an emergency landing, which resulted in an 
inadvertent stall/spin.  Inadequate maintenance/annual inspection was a related factor. 
 On April 2, 1996, at 1058 hours Pacific standard time, a Powell Glasair homebuilt 
experimental airplane, N59LP, collided with trees and the ground following a loss of control 
during the base-to-final turn at the Pine Mountain Lake Airport, Groveland, California.  The 
aircraft was owned and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and 
no flight plan was filed for the local area personal flight.  The aircraft was destroyed in the 
collision sequence.  The private pilot, the sole occupant, sustained fatal injuries.  The flight 
originated from the airport about 4 minutes prior to the accident.
Ground witnesses said the aircraft departed straight out following takeoff.  About 4 minutes 
later, it made a downwind entry to the pattern "low and very close to the runway."  The 
witnesses consistently estimated the aircraft's altitude as between 200 and 300 feet agl.  One 
witness said the aircraft was so close that at first he thought the pilot was going to make a 
downwind landing on the runway.  The witnesses said the aircraft made a tight turn from 
downwind to base.  During the base-to-final turn, the right wing dropped and the aircraft 
entered a nose-down vertical descent to ground impact in a tree.  The witnesses said they heard 
engine sounds throughout, however, they were described as "not full power."
The pilot holds an FAA Airframe and Powerplant mechanics certificate.  Immediately prior to 
the accident flight, the pilot completed a condition/annual inspection on the aircraft and the 
airframe and engine logbooks were annotated to reflect the inspection.  During a telephone 
interview, the aircraft co-owner stated that they had been having problems with the throttle 
cable and the pilot was going to order a new one.
An FAA airworthiness inspector responded to the accident site and interviewed witnesses and 
examined the wreckage.  The engine portion of the wreckage examination was conducted with 
the assistance of  a technical representative from Textron Lycoming Engines.  Their respective 
reports are attached to this report.
The FAA inspector reported that he found no discrepancies with the aircraft's control system.  
Fuel was found in the aircraft tanks and all lines to the carburetor.
The engine crankshaft rotated easily by hand, with compression developed in each cylinder.  
Accessory gear and valve train continuity was established throughout the engine, with normal 
valve lift developed.  Both magnetos were timed to 25 degrees before top dead center and 
produced strong sparks at each ignition lead.  The examination report notes that the spark 
plugs exhibited normal operating signatures and the induction system was free of obstructions.  
No discrepancies were found with the fuel pump.  Disassembly of the carburetor revealed that 
the clip which secures the accelerator pump plunger to its actuation shaft was missing and the 
pump was inoperative.
The throttle cable was examined in detail.  The cable housing/actuating shaft at the carburetor 
end was found separated from the cable sheath, exposing the unsupported inside cable.  A 
piece of welding rod was found bent around the housing end and taped to the sheath.  The 
cable was removed from the aircraft and subjected to a series of operational tests.  For the 
tests, the cable was supported by hand at each housing end and then the cockpit end was 
actuated, with no resistance on the carburetor end.  In both push and pull directions, the 
carburetor end was observed to move intermittently.  On some occasions, the carburetor end 
would move an amount corresponding to the cockpit end input; however, at other times, the 
carburetor end would only move slightly if at all.
The pilot sustained fatal injuries in the accident and an autopsy was conducted by the 
Tuolumne County Sheriff/Coroner with specimens retained for toxicological analysis.  The 
results of the toxicological tests were negative for alcohol and all screened drug substances.
