Upon arriving at the destination airport from a local cross country flight, the pilot performed 
three touch and go landings.  While on the crosswind leg of the fourth pattern circuit, which 
was to culminate in a full stop landing, the engine lost power and the pilot made an emergency 
landing in a plowed field.  During the landing roll, one main landing gear collapsed and the 
airplane nosed over.  The flight originated with 11 gallons of fuel on board, and the duration of 
the flight was 54 minutes.  According to the pertinent Lycoming engine chart, the fuel 
consumption at 75 percent power (2,450 rpm) is 10.5 gallons per hour. A review of the pilot's 
aero/medical data revealed him to be non-current in flight proficiency and medical 
certification. 
the pilot's inadequate preflight planning and preparation in that he failed to ensure the aircraft 
had sufficient fuel to complete the flight.  A factor was the soft terrain. 
 On April 1, 1996, at 1449 mountain standard time, a Stafford RV-4 home built, N84PS, nosed 
over in a field near Longmont, Colorado, during an emergency landing following a complete 
loss of power. The two pilots aboard received minor injuries, and the aircraft sustained 
substantial damage.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area personal 
flight operating under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  No flight plan was filed.  The flight originated from 
Greeley, Colorado, (GXY) approximately 54 minutes prior to the accident.  The pilot said that 
at the time of the flight's departure, the airplane had 11 gallons of fuel on board.  
According to the pilot, after arriving in the Longmont area they conducted three touch-and-go 
landings and were on a cross wind leg for a full stop when the engine "abruptly" quit.  The pilot 
said three restarts of the engine were attempted without success, and he conducted a forced 
landing to a plowed field.  During landing roll, the right main landing gear collapsed and the 
aircraft nosed over.
Following the accident, two FAA inspectors examined the aircraft on two occasions.  The first 
examination took place the day of the accident.  According to the attached statement provided 
by the FAA inspectors, they found no evidence of fuel in or around the aircraft.  In addition, in 
a statement made to the FAA inspectors, the pilot stated he should have had approximately 12 
gallons of fuel on board at the time of the accident.
The same inspectors returned the following day, April 2nd, and at that time found fuel in the 
left tank.  In addition, the right magneto was inoperative.  This was attributed to impact 
damage by the inspectors.  No other evidence was found to prevent the engine from operating.
A review of the O-360-A1D engine performance information was conducted.  According to the 
Lycoming  manual (page attached) the engine at 75 percent power (2450 rpm) burns 
approximately 10.5 gallons per hour.
A review of pilot information produced evidence that the pilot's medical certificate and his 
biennial flight review were not current.  Attached is information provided by the pilot to 
document a current biennial flight review and medical certificate.  Both were executed after the 
accident date.  Also, according to the information provided in the Pilot Operator Report, the 
pilot had not flown in the previous 90 days prior to this flight.
The pilot/passenger in the rear seat owned the airplane.  He was a certified flight instructor 
(CFI), and was current in all respects.  The flying pilot said that he was the pilot in command 
and that the CFI was a "passenger."  
The rear cockpit in this aircraft was equipped with aileron and elevator controls only.  There 
are no rudders, throttle, mixture control, flap control or instruments.
