After touchdown from a left wing low landing, the student pilot, who was flying the airplane 
from the front seat, allowed the airplane to veer left. The instructor pilot, who was in the back 
seat, took control of the airplane, added full power, and pulled back on the stick in an attempt 
to avoid a runway light. The airplane cleared the light at a slow airspeed; however, its right 
wing immediately dipped and struck the terrain. The airplane then spun around and came to a 
stop. Examination of the airplane revealed no anomalies which could have contributed to the 
accident. 
failure of the dual student to maintain directional control of the airplane during the landing, 
and inadequate supervision by the flight instructor. 
 On April 1, 1996, at 1030 eastern standard time (est), a Piper, PA-18A, N454Q, operated by a 
commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when during landing, the airplane impacted 
the terrain.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 
instructional flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.  No flight plan was on file.  The 
instructor pilot and dual student reported no injuries.  The flight originated at Grand Haven, 
Michigan, at 1025 est.
The pilot stated that after touchdown from a left wing low landing, the student pilot, flying the 
airplane from the front seat, relaxed the controls, so as to dissipate enough speed to allow the 
tailwheel to touch down on the runway.  The dual student said the airplane weathervaned and 
veered left.  The instructor pilot, in the rear seat, took control of the airplane, added full power, 
and pulled back on the stick in an attempt to avoid a runway light.  The airplane cleared the 
light at a slow airspeed.  The airplane's right wing immediately dipped and struck the terrain.  
The airplane looped around and came to a stop near the runway.     
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector who examined the wreckage found the 
airplane resting upright.  The right wing frame was bent and the fabric was torn at the tip.  The 
rear right wing spar was bent aft.  The left wing tip showed scraping damage to the fabric and 
frame.  The left main gear was bent outward and the left wheel was bent.  The fuselage frame 
exhibited minor bending and fabric wrinkling throughout.  The frame tubing over the cockpit 
had bent inward and the plexiglass overhead window was cracked.   Flight control continuity 
was confirmed.  No anomalies were found in the engine, engine controls or other airplane 
systems.
