Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Peachtree City, GA
Accident Number:
ATL06FA030
Date & Time:
01/01/2006, 2007 EST 
Registration:
N2169T
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28-180
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot requested the localizer 10-approach to the Macon Downtown Airport, Macon, 
Georgia (MAC). The pilot was radar vectored to intercept the localizer, and cleared for the 
localizer 10-approach.  Shortly thereafter, the pilot advised approach control that he had over 
flown the localizer.  The approach control specialist issued vectors back to the localizer, and he 
was cleared for another localizer 10-approach. The pilot reported to approach control that he 
was having trouble staying on the localizer, and requested to go to the Middle Georgia Airport, 
Macon, Georgia (MCN).  He was subsequently cleared for the ILS runway 5-approach to MCN.  
The MCN tower advised approach control that the pilot had panicked during his approach, and 
went missed approach. The pilot contacted the MCN tower, reported that he had lost the 
localizer, and requested if he could be taken around to do the approach again.  He was issued 
radar vectors back to the ILS runway 5-approach, and about one-half mile from the approach, 
the pilot requested to come around for another approach after drifting off course.  The pilot 
made two more attempts to land at MCN before being radar vectored to the Peachtree City 
Airport-Falcon (FFC) localizer 31-approach.  During the approach into FFC, radar contact was 
lost with the airplane.  The airplane had collided with trees about 1 mile from the approach end 
of runway 31.  Postcrash examination of the aircraft structure, flight controls, systems, engine, 
and propeller showed no anomalies.  The pilot received his instrument rating less than 6 
months before the accident, and had accumulated 17.1 total hours of actual instrument flight 
time.  He had 133 hours of simulated instrument flight hours.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain sufficient altitude while performing an instrument approach in 
instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in an in-flight collision with trees and 
terrain.
Page 2 of 8ATL06FA030
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - IAF TO FAF/OUTER MARKER (IFR)
Findings
1. WEATHER CONDITION - FOG
2. LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
3. WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
4. (C) ALTITUDE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. OBJECT - TREE(S)
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 8ATL06FA030
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2006, at 2007 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-180, N2169T, registered to 
Haskell Aircraft Enterprises LLC and operated by a private-rated pilot, as a 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight, collided with trees during an approach into Falcon Field, Peachtree City, 
Georgia. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and 
instrument flight rules flight plan was filed. The airplane was destroyed by impact forces, and 
the private pilot was fatally injured. The flight originated from Craig Municipal Airport, 
Jacksonville, Florida, on January 1, 2006 at 1536.
At 1708, the pilot checked in with Atlanta Approach Control, and requested the localizer 10-
approach at the Macon Downtown Airport, Macon, Georgia (MAC). The pilot was radar 
vectored to intercept the localizer, and cleared for the localizer 10-approach at MAC. At 1745, 
the pilot contacted the Atlanta Approach Control, and advised that he had over flown the 
localizer. Atlanta Approach advised the pilot that he was about a mile north of the localizer, 
and issued vectors back to the localizer 10-approach. The pilot was cleared for the localizer 10-
approach, and established on the localizer. Atlanta Approach Control advised the pilot he could 
cancel IFR and change to advisory frequency. At 1756, the pilot advised Atlanta Approach 
Control that he was having trouble staying on the localizer and requested to go to the Middle 
Georgia Airport, Macon, Georgia (MCN). Atlanta Approach Control issued vectors for MCN, 
and advised the pilot to expect the ILS runway 5-approach. 
At 1819, Atlanta Approach Control cleared the pilot for the ILS runway 5-approach to MCN. 
The MCN tower advised Atlanta Approach Control that the pilot had panicked and went missed 
approach. Atlanta Approach Control contacted the pilot, and asked if he was all right. The pilot 
responded "that he was a little worn out from flying, and would try to get it under control". At 
1830, the pilot contacted the MCN tower, reported that he had lost the localizer, and had flown 
through it. The pilot requested if he could be taken around to do the approach again. He was 
issued radar vectors back to the ILS runway 5-approach. At 1844, about one half mile from the 
approach the pilot requested to come around for another approach after drifting off course. 
At 1859, Atlanta Approach Control cleared the pilot for the ILS runway 5-approach, and was 
given instructions to keep him from drifting off course. At 1903, the MCN tower had the 
airplane insight over the runway, and reported that he was climbing back out. The pilot advised 
Atlanta Approach that he needed to try it again because he had totally missed it. The pilot was 
issued radar vectors again for the ILS runway 5-approach. 
At 1922, the pilot apologized for turning off of the localizer course, and Atlanta Approach 
issued a climb to 2,000 feet. Atlanta Approach requested the fuel status of the airplane. The 
pilot replied that the right tank was getting low, and left tank was half full. Atlanta Approach 
Control advised the pilot that he could go to another airport where the weather was better. The 
pilot acknowledged, and was radar vectored to the Peachtree City Airport-Falcon Field (FFC) 
localizer 31-approach. At 2004, Atlanta Approach cleared the pilot for the approach, one-mile 
from the final approach fix, and the pilot acknowledged. 
At 2007, the controller lost radar and radio contact with the flight, and a search was initiated to 
locate the airplane. At 2105, the airplane was located one mile southeast of the approach end of 
the runway 31.
Page 4 of 8ATL06FA030
PILOT INFORMATION
Review of the pilot's FAA records revealed, that he was issued a private pilot certificate on 
March 3, 2003, for airplane single- engine land. The pilot was issued an instrument rating on 
June 10, 2005. Review of the pilot's logbook revealed, he had a total flight time of 437.8 flight 
hours. The pilot logged 17.1 flight hours of actual instrument flight time, and 133 flight hours of 
simulated instrument time. The private pilot held a third class medical certificate dated June 
25, 2004, and was valid when wearing corrective lenses.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was a 1971 Piper PA-28-180 Cherokee (serial number 28-7205019). It 
was a four-place; low-wing aircraft of predominantly aluminum construction with a fixed 
tricycle landing gear configuration. A 180-horsepower Lycoming O-360-A4A engine (serial 
number L-15971-36A) powered the airplane.
Review of aircraft maintenance logbooks indicated that the last recorded altimeter, static, and 
transponder system checks were completed on August 23, 2005. The last annual inspection 
was conducted on March 10, 2005. The tachometer time at the annual inspection was 2008.55 
hours. At the time of the accident the tachometer  indicated  2071.88 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Selected surface weather observations for the destination and accident area, in part, follow. No 
observations were available for Macon Downtown Airport (MAC).
Peachtree City Airport/Falcon Field (KFFC), Atlanta, Georgia: field elevation 808 feet msl, 
located approximately 331 degrees at 1 nautical mile from the accident location, Automated 
Surface Observing System (ASOS), alternate airport:
Time-1953; wind-variable at 3 knots; visibility-4 miles; present weather-mist; sky condition-
overcast 800 feet; temperature-13 degrees Celsius; dew point-13 degrees
Celsius; altimeter setting-30.00 inches hg; remarks-rain ended 1923 ceiling 500 feet
variable 1,100 feet
Middle Georgia Regional Airport (KMCN), Macon, Georgia: field elevation 354 feet msl, 
augmented ASOS, alternate airport
Time-1753; wind-calm; visibility-2 miles; present weather-mist; sky condition-overcast 600 
feet; temperature-14 degrees Celsius; dew point-13 degrees Celsius; altimeter setting-30.02 
inches hg; remarks-rain ended 1735 ceiling 200 feet variable 700 feet
WRECKAGE EXAMINATION
The main wreckage was located at 33.21:16N, 084.34:11W, one mile from the approach end of 
runway 31 in a heavily wooded area. Examination of the crash site revealed that the airplane 
collided with trees and the ground. The crash debris line was 300 feet in length on a heading of 
330-degrees magnetic.
 
The cockpit section of the airplane was crushed. The flight, and communication instruments 
were destroyed. The throttle position was aft and bent. The mixture control was full rich, and 
the ignition switch was in the both position. The fuel selector was on the left tank, and the fuel 
Page 5 of 8ATL06FA030
primer was in the locked position. The flap handle was down, indicating flaps up. 
The fuselage was split vertically at the forward edge of the baggage area. The right side of the 
fuselage, aft of the baggage area was crushed inward. The entry door at the right side of the 
fuselage was detached and damaged. Flight control continuity was established to all flight 
controls in the cockpit. The Gascolator was disassembled and one ounce of fuel was observed in 
the unit. The nose wheel assembly was still attached to the engine mounts.
All components of the left wing were located at the crash site. The left wing separated from 
fuselage at the wing root and separated into two pieces. The aileron was attached to the 
outboard 4-foot section of wing, with the aileron weight attached. The inboard portion of wing 
had the flap attached. The fuel tank bladder was separated, and located in the debris field. The 
left flap mechanism indicated that the flaps were in the up position. The aileron cables were 
attached to the bellcrank, and separated at the wing root. The left main landing gear was 
separated from the wing, and located in the debris field.
All components of the right wing assembly were located at the crash site. The right wing was 
fragmented into several pieces throughout the wreckage debris field. The inboard section of 
flap was attached to the outboard wing section. The detached outboard flap section was located 
in the debris field. The right fuel tank bladder was fragmented throughout the debris field. A 
detached five-foot section of the main spar was located in the debris field with the main 
landing gear attached. The outboard four-foot section of the wing had parts of aileron attached. 
The main section of the aileron was located in the debris field, and damaged. The aileron cable 
was attached to the aileron bellcrank, which was attached to a small separated section of wing. 
The aileron cable was intact to the center fuselage; the balance cable was broken. The right flap 
mechanism was in the up position. 
The vertical stabilizer had impact damage on the top 18 inches of the leading edge, and the 
rudder remained attached to the vertical stabilizer. The rudder cables were attached to the 
rudder horn and intact to the center fuselage. The left hand portion of the stabilator was 
detached, and had impact damage. The control arm of the anti-servo tab remained attached to 
the fuselage. The right-hand section of the stabilator was detached and fragmented into several 
pieces. The stabilator cables were attached to the balance bar and intact to the center fuselage. 
The propeller revealed one blade was bent rearward 90-degrees 14 inches from the tip. "S" 
bending, and chordwise scoring was evident in the bent section of the blade. The second blade 
was bent rearward approximately 15-degrees, showed chordwise scoring, and "S" bending 
along the entire length. The engine remained partially attached to the firewall. Impact damage 
was noted on the right side, and bottom of the engine. The exhaust system was crushed. The 
crankshaft was rotated 360-degrees; which established valve train continuity. All four cylinders 
produced compression, and boroscope examination did not reveal any anomalies. Both 
magnetos were removed from the engine, and produced spark from all towers when rotated. 
All spark plugs were removed for examination, and exhibited light gray deposits. Seven of the 
eight spark plugs were Champion REM38E. The number 3 bottom plug was an Autolite 
Urem40E.
The carburetor was intact and secure on the manifold, and residual fuel was observed inside 
the throttle body. The throttle lever on the carburetor was at idle. The mixture control was full 
rich. The carburetor heat valve was in the cold position. No external stains were observed on 
the carburetor. The carburetor was opened, and removed for examination. The plastic float was 
Page 6 of 8ATL06FA030
intact. The needle valve and seat was free to move and operated normally. The main nozzle, 
and internal passages were clear of obstructions. The inlet screen was clean. The fuel pump was 
intact and secure on the case and removed for examination. The pump was found to contain 
residual clean fuel. The pump arm was manipulated by hand and pumping action was noted. 
The induction air box was impact damaged. The induction air filter was intact.
PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Office of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation preformed a postmortem, and Toxicological 
examination of the private pilot on January 2, 2006. The reported cause of death was blunt 
force trauma. The Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Federal Aviation Administration, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed postmortem toxicology of specimens from the pilot. The 
results were negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, and ethanol.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage of the airplane was released to CTC Aviation, Atlanta, Georgia, on September 5, 
2006.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
65, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/01/2005
Flight Time:
437 hours (Total, all aircraft), 299 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, 
all aircraft)
Page 7 of 8ATL06FA030
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N2169T
Model/Series:
PA-28-180 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-7205019
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
2008.55 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2071.88 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-SER
Registered Owner:
George Owens Haskell III
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
George Owens Haskell III
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ATL, 1026 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1951 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 13000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Unknown 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
10°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Heavy - Fog
Departure Point: 
JACKSONVILLE, FL (CRG)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
MACON, GA (MAC)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1536 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
PEACHTREE CITY-FALCON FIELD 
(FFC)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
808 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
31
IFR Approach:
ASR; ILS
Runway Length/Width:
5220 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 8 of 8ATL06FA030
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.354444, -84.569722
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eric H Alleyne
Adopted Date:
04/25/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Danny Arnold; Atlanta FSDO-11; Atlanta, GA
Edward Rogalski; Lycoming textron; Williamsport, PA
George Hollingsworth; New Piper; Vero Beach, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
