National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Pell City, AL
Accident Number: MIA03LA010
Date & Time: 11/02/2002, 1530 CST
Registration: N9558E
Aircraft: Bellanca 17-30A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, he flared a little high on his landing attempt, and, "The minute the plane hit the ground, it shot off to the left".
Despite his using right rudder to retain control, the airplane exited the runway off the left edge, into the grass, and encountered a ditch.
The landing gear were sheared off, and the airplane sustained a propeller strike.
The FAA inspector stated that postcrash investigation of the accident revealed no malfunctions with any airplane components or systems.
Reported winds in the area were from 30 degrees left of runway heading at 6 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control following landing touchdown, resulting in a runway excursion and collision with a ditch off the left side of the runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
FLARE - HIGH - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On November 2, 2002, about 1530 central standard time, a Bellanca BL-17-30A Viking, N9558E, registered to Burrus and Associates, Inc., operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, sustained a runway excursion during landing at St.
Cloud County Airport, Pell City, Alabama.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane received substantial damage, and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The flight originated from the same airport about 30 minutes before the accident.
According to the pilot, he made a normal approach at St.
Cloud County Airport.
He stated he, "Flared plane out a little high.
Pulled back on yoke and it settled down.
The minute the plane hit the ground, it shot off to the left.
Pushed in right rudder to get control.
At that time I was in the grass and the rudder had no control.
I ran across a ditch.
This is when landing gear and prop were damaged."
According to an FAA inspector, the pilot was landing on runway 02, lost directional control, and the aircraft exited the runway to the left, into the grass, and continued on, through a ditch, which sheared off the nose and main landing gear.
His examination of the airplane revealed that there was no mechanical failure of the aircraft components or systems, and that the pilot failed to control the airplane on the active runway.
Reported surface winds at 1553 for the Birmingham area were from 350 degrees at 6 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 76, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 3325 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 18 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2276.61 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-520-R Registered Owner: Burrus and Associates, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
