National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Pollock Pines, CA
Accident Number: LAX03LA019
Date & Time: 11/02/2002, 0910 PST
Registration: N2616B
Aircraft: Bell 47G-2
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Other Work Use
 Analysis During initial climb from a 3,500-foot mean sea level plateau, the helicopter's skid collided with a 3-foot-high bush.
The helicopter yawed and impacted the ground.
The pilot reported that the collision occurred after he had increased the helicopter's collective pitch and accelerated to about 20 knots, thereby starting to acquire effective translational lift.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain adequate obstruction clearance during initial climb, which resulted in a collision with vegetation.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION 2.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ROLL OVER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Factual Information On November 2, 2002, about 0910 Pacific standard time, a Bell 47G-2, N2616B, collided with a bush and terrain during an attempted takeoff from a plateau near Pollock Pines, California.
The helicopter was substantially damaged.
The commercial pilot and one passenger were not injured.
The second passenger received a minor injury.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The helicopter was operated for hire on a photography flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, by D. C. Rotor & Wing, Rancho Murieta, California.
The flight originated from Rancho Murieta about 0810.
The pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that he flew to the plateau and landed.
The two passengers exited the helicopter to take pictures.
The helicopter's engine was kept running.
Thereafter, the passengers reboarded the helicopter to continue their flight.
The pilot stated that because of the ambient conditions, including the 3,500-foot mean sea level elevation and estimated 40-degree Fahrenheit temperature, the helicopter did not have adequate power to make a normal departure from a hover.
However, the pilot indicated that he believed there was sufficient clear area over the rocky terrain to perform a running takeoff.
According to the pilot, during the accident sequence he increased the helicopter's collective pitch and accelerated to about 20 knots thereby starting to acquire effective translational lift.
During this initial climb a skid collided with a 3-foot-tall bush.
The helicopter suddenly yawed and impacted the ground.
In the pilot's completed "Aircraft Accident Report" he stated that "...the purpose of the flight was to encourage [one of the passengers] to resume her flight training with D.C.
Rotor."
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Helicopter Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
