National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Fairbanks, AK
Accident Number: ANC03LA010
Date & Time: 11/03/2002, 1038 AST
Registration: N1933B
Aircraft: Luscombe 8A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The solo commercial pilot was landing a wheel-equipped airplane on a paved, dry runway.
The pilot reported that just after touchdown, he was requested by the tower controller to use, if possible, the first available exit off of the active runway.
The pilot said that when he applied the airplane's toe brakes, the wheels stopped turning, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings, fuselage, and empennage.
An FAA inspector examined the airplane and reported no preaccident mechanical anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's excessive use of brakes during the landing roll, which resulted in the nose over of the airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) BRAKES(NORMAL) - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On November 3, 2002, about 1038 Alaska standard time, a wheel-equipped Luscombe 8A airplane, N1933B, sustained substantial damage when it nosed over while landing on a paved, dry runway, at the Fairbanks International Airport, Fairbanks, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The solo commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated about 1030, from the Chena Marina Airport, Fairbanks.
The pilot said that when he applied the airplane's toe brakes, the wheels stopped turning, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings, fuselage, and empennage.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations inspector, Fairbanks Flight Standards District Office, inspected the airplane.
He reported that there no preaccident mechanical anomalies noted with the accident airplane.
The pilot did not submit an NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.
1).
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
