When the pilot turned onto final approach to runway 21, he had to lower the left wing and 
apply right rudder to maintain runway alignment.  He said the wind had generally been from 
the south between 15 and 18 knots.  As the airplane touched down, a wind gust 'in excess of 20 
knots cocked the airplane to the left,' causing the right main landing gear to buckle and 
separate.  According to a Cessna Airplane Company spokesperson, the airplane owner's manual 
contains no maximum crosswind component data. 
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control.  Factors were his inadequate compensation for 
the gusty crosswind conditions, and the airplane manufacturer's failure to provide adequate 
performance data. 
 On October 1, 1998, approximately 1330 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 140A, N9403A, 
registered to and operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged when it collided with terrain 
while landing at Alexander Municipal Airport, Belen, New Mexico.  The private pilot, the sole 
occupant aboard, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight 
plan had been filed for the personal flight being conducted under title 14 CFR Part 91.  The 
flight originated at Deming, New Mexico, at 1130.
According to the pilot's accident report, he turned onto final approach to runway 21 (6,600 ft. x 
60 ft, asphalt) and had to lower the left wing and apply right rudder to maintain runway 
alignment.  He said the wind had generally been from the south between 15 and 18 knots.  As 
the airplane touched down, a wind gust "in excess of 20 knots cocked the airplane to the left," 
causing the right main landing gear to buckle and separate.
An FAA inspector who went to the scene reported finding the right wing spar fractured.  He 
said that shortly after the accident, a rain squall passed through the area.
The wind at Albuquerque International Airport, located about 26 miles north of Belen, was 
from 140 degrees at 15 knots, with gusts to 18 knots.  There were distant cumulonimbus clouds 
and rain shafts from the southwest through the north quadrants.
According to a Cessna Airplane Company spokesperson, the airplane owner's manual contains 
no maximum crosswind component data.
