During takeoff, at about 400 feet, the canopy separated from the airplane.  The pilot turned the 
airplane back towards the airport and landed without further incident.  The pilot reported that 
he did not explain to the passenger that the right side of the canopy needed to be latched before 
takeoff.  The pilot also reported that he did not observe the canopy warning light during taxi to 
the runway, nor did he complete the 'Canopy-Secure' portion of the pre-takeoff checklist. 
The pilot's failure to follow the checklist and secure the canopy, which resulted in the canopy 
separating from the airplane during takeoff initial climb.  A factor was the pilot's failure to 
detect the canopy warning light prior to takeoff. 
 On October 1, 1998, at 1230 central daylight time, a Diamond Aircraft Industries DA 20-A1 
single-engine airplane, N527SS, was substantially damaged when the canopy separated during 
takeoff from David Wayne Hooks Memorial Airport near Tomball, Texas.  The private pilot and 
his passenger were not injured.  The airplane was registered to MDFC Equipment Leasing 
Corporation of Long Beach, California, and operated by Flight Academy International of 
Spring, Texas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for 
the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal flight, which was originating at the 
time of the accident.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot did 
not explain to the passenger that the right side of the canopy needed to be latched before 
takeoff.  The pilot stated that he did not observe the canopy warning light during taxi to the 
runway, nor did he complete the "Canopy-Secure" portion of the pre-takeoff checklist.  The 
pilot also stated that after takeoff from runway 17L, at about 400 feet, he heard a "rapid-
sounding noise for several repetitions, followed by the canopy disengaging itself from the 
fuselage."  
Following the separation of the canopy, the pilot's headset was lost from the "burst of wind."  
As a result, tower communication was not possible.  The pilot turned the aircraft back towards 
the airport and landed on runway 35L "without further damage to [the] aircraft."
The canopy was recovered approximately 1/4 mile south of the localizer antennas for runway 
17R.  
According to the FAA inspector, the main structural spar behind the cockpit, to which the 
canopy was attached, sustained damage.
