While departing on a local area aircraft checkout flight the aircraft stayed low and the pilot 
advised the tower that he had a fuel problem.  The aircraft had been fueled with aviation grade 
100LL twice the day before in preparation for a trip.  The pilot attempted to return to the 
airport, but collided with power lines 1.5 miles north.  Examination of the engines revealed 
severe detonation had occurred.  A fuel sample was obtained from the aircraft and tested 
negative for jet fuel contamination.  The aircraft had been modified by installation of higher 
horsepower engines and turbochargers with manual wastegates.  During postaccident 
examination of the aircraft systems the manual wastegates were found partially closed; a 
position that can provide additional manifold pressure.  The engines are restricted to a 
maximum of 29.5 inHg. 
The pilot's failure to properly use the manual turbocharger wastegates and to monitor the 
manifold pressure during takeoff. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 1, 1998, at 1005 hours Pacific daylight time, an Aero Commander 680 FPL, N5YZ, 
was destroyed during a forced landing at Palm Springs, California.  The pilot was fatally 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight and no flight plan 
was filed.  The flight, operated by Desert Aircraft Sales, originated at Palm Springs as a local 
area flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  After a northbound departure from runway 
31L, the pilot stayed low and reported a fuel problem.  The aircraft collided with power lines 
and terrain about 1.5 miles north of the airport.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot's logbook was not recovered.  According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
records, the pilot held a private pilot's certificate for airplane single and multiengine land 
airplanes.  He also held an instrument airplane rating.  The pilot reported a total of 3,200 flight 
hours at his third-class flight physical on October 23, 1996.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
No aircraft records were recovered.  The aircraft had been modified by installation of higher 
horsepower engines and turbochargers with manual wastegates.  An aircraft sales specification 
sheet was obtained and represented the aircraft as having a Mr. RPM Turbo 800 Conversion.  
The conversion replaces the Lycoming IGSO-540-B1A 380 horsepower supercharged engines 
with Lycoming IO-720-B1B 400 horsepower engines.  Turbochargers are installed with manual 
exhaust bypass valves.  There are no manifold pressure overboost protection systems. 
The aircraft had been fueled twice the day before the accident with aviation grade 100LL fuel in 
preparation for a trip.
The specification sheet stated that the total aircraft time was 5,420 hours, and that both 
engines had 1,390 total hours since new.  The left engine had zero hours since major overhaul, 
and the right engine had 70 hours since top overhaul. 
Aircraft information was obtained from a prospective buyer who had declined the purchase 
because, according to him, 10 years of aircraft records were missing.  
METEORLOGICAL CONDITIONS
At 0953, Palm Springs weather was reporting: clear, 10 miles visibility; wind calm; 
temperature 79 degrees Fahrenheit; dew point 52 degrees Fahrenheit; altimeter 29.89 inHg.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was located 1.5 miles north of the Palm Springs Regional Airport in an area of 
sand dunes.  The heading of the aircraft was measured about 230 degrees magnetic.  Witnesses 
reported seeing the aircraft rotate about 360 degrees during collision with the power lines and 
ground.  A section of right outer wing leading edge was found under the wire location with wire 
imprints.  A postcrash fire nearly consumed the aircraft structure. 
The on-scene examination of the wreckage revealed engine oil trailing across both the right and 
left horizontal stabilizers and elevators.  Preliminary examination of the engines revealed mild 
peening of the No. 6 cylinder top and bottom spark plugs from the left engine.  The engine 
manual wastegates were found partially closed.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On October 2, 1998, the Riverside County Medical Examiner performed an autopsy on the 
pilot.  During the course of the procedure samples were obtained for toxicological analysis by 
the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
The analyses were negative for cyanide and ethanol; carbon monoxide measured 18 percent; 
Diphenhydramine (Benedril) was detected in the liver, blood, and urine; and Acetaminophen 
(Tylenol) was detected in the urine.  Details of the analysis are attached to this report. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH INFORMATION
Postaccident engine examination revealed evidence of over-temping (see note 1 regarding 
detonation under Additional Information) within the engine cylinders.  Examination of the left 
engine cylinders revealed holes burnt through six pistons; the right engine had four pistons 
with holes burnt through.  Valve and ring damage was also noted in the cylinders.
A fuel sample was obtained from the right wing fuel tank cell and was taken to a fuel-testing 
laboratory for analysis.  The report confirmed that the fuel was uncontaminated 100LL-
aviation fuel.  The refueling FBO also tested their fuel to specification.  The fuel sample tests 
are attached to this report.
Both RSA Fuel Injection Servos were sent to Precision Airmotive Corporation for examination 
and testing.  One servo was functional tested and one was not due to damage.  Both were 
disassembled and examined and there were no conditions or discrepancies found.  
During postaccident examination of the aircraft systems the manual wastegates were found 
partially closed; a position that can provide additional manifold pressure.  The engines are 
restricted to a maximum manifold pressure of 29.5 inHg.  
Postaccident propeller examination revealed that both propellers were rotating at the time of 
impact and were not feathered.  According to the Hartzell Propeller Company report, no 
preimpact discrepancies were noted on either propeller that would have precluded normal 
operation. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
1) Detonation (a reciprocating engine condition).  An explosion or uncontrolled burning inside 
the cylinder or cylinders of a reciprocating engine.  Detonation occurs when the pressure and 
temperature inside the cylinder becomes higher than the critical pressure and temperature of 
the fuel, and may be caused by using fuel that has a lower octane rating, or performance 
number, than is specified for the engine. 
The pressure rise inside the cylinder caused by the fast-moving flame front can heat and 
compress the unburned fuel-air mixture enough for it to explode, or release its energy faster 
than the engine can accept it. This causes a rapid rise in cylinder pressure, excessive cylinder 
head temperature, and a decrease in engine power.
