During the fourth and final landing, the airplane touched down and bounced 2 or 3 times; 
during this time the throttle was at idle and the elevator control was full aft.  After the airplane 
landed on the runway, he elected to perform a go-around and applied power but there was no 
response from the elevator.  He aborted the takeoff and the airplane veered off the left side of 
the runway near the departure end of the runway.  The pilot further stated that there was no 
preimpact failure or malfunction of the engine or flight controls.  Postcrash inspection of the 
airplane revealed that the elevator flight control cables were binding due to the buckled floor in 
the cockpit area. 
The pilot's improper flare and improper recovery from a bounced landing. 
 On October 1, 1998, about 1700 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172N, N733HK, registered to 
Huffman Aviation, Inc., dba Venice Flying Service, experienced a hard landing at the Venice 
Municipal Airport, Venice, Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and 
no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The airplane was substantially 
damaged and the private-rated pilot and one passenger were not injured.  The flight had 
originated about 1550 from the Venice Municipal Airport.
     The pilot stated that he had performed three stop-and-go landings and after touchdown for 
a planned full stop landing, the airplane touched down and bounced two or three times.  
During this time, the throttle was at idle and the elevator control was full aft.  He then elected 
to perform a go-around while on the ground and applied full power, but the airplane would not 
become airborne.  He then aborted the go-around and the airplane veered off the left side of 
the runway near the departure end of the runway.  The pilot further stated that there was no 
flight control or engine preimpact failure or malfunction.  Postcrash inspection of the airplane 
revealed that the elevator flight controls were binding due to a buckled floor in the cockpit 
area.
