According to the pilot, after about nine touch and go landings on Lake Geneva, he noticed the 
tenth takeoff was sluggish and required more time to get off the water. Once airborne the 
aircraft began a left bank, and aileron control would not correct for it. The aircraft spiraled left 
until the left wingtip and nose contacted the water. The pilot stated that he may not have 
reached minimum control speed before takeoff and stalled the aircraft. Examination of the 
airplane found no mechanical defects. 
The pilots failure to attain adequate airspeed, which resulted in a stall, and loss of control. 
 On October 2, 1998, about 1030 Eastern Standard Time an Auxier Herschel A. Jr. Sea Rey 
Amphibian homebuilt airplane, N54114, collided with water shortly after takeoff at Lake 
Geneva, in Keystone Heights, Florida. The airplane was operated by the pilot under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local flight. The private pilot was not injured, and 
the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight originated from Melrose, Florida, about 
0930.
According to the pilot, after about nine touch and go landings on Lake Geneva, he noticed the 
tenth takeoff was sluggish and required more time to get off the water. Once airborne at about 
20 to 30 feet above the ground the aircraft began a left turn, and aileron input would not 
correct for it. The aircraft spiraled left until the left wingtip and nose contacted the water. Just 
prior to impact the pilot stated that he pulled the throttle back when he realized he had no 
aileron control to minimize the impact with the water. He estimated the speed at impact at 
about 40 to 45 miles per hour.
According to the FAA Inspector on-scene, the pilot stated to him that he may not have reached 
minimum control speed before takeoff and stalled the aircraft. Examination of the airplane 
found no mechanical defects, and the pilot was not certificated for a single engine sea plane.
