The pilot was approaching from the northeast for a swath spray, waiting to fly over power lines 
that intersected a cotton field at the arrival end. The pilot thought that he was clear to push 
over into the cotton field to start his spray run. However, he was not completely clear of the 
power lines and on the push over became entangled with the ridge wire that runs from one pole 
to another giving the poles stability. The wire tangled between the propeller blades and around 
the propeller shaft slowing the engine to a stop. While tethered by the cable the aircraft fell 
approximately 250 to 300 feet, striking a slope and turning almost 180 degrees from the 
direction of impact. 
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from a utility line while conducting a swath run. 
 On October 2, 1998 about 0835 Central Daylight Time, a Cessna 188B agricultural airplane, 
N4832R, collided with a high tension line and subsequently the ground while spraying a field 
in Tellasse, Alabama. The airplane was operated by Morris Flying Services, Inc., under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137, and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local flight. The commercial pilot sustained minor 
injuries and the airplane received substantial damage. The flight originated from Shorter, 
Alabama, at 0750.
  According to the FAA Inspector, who interviewed the pilot, the pilot was approaching from 
the northeast for a swath spray, waiting to fly over power lines that intersected a cotton field at 
the arrival end. The pilot thought that he was clear to push over into the cotton field to start his 
spray run. However, he was not completely clear of the power lines and on the push over 
became entangled with the ridge wire that runs from one pole to another giving the poles 
stability.
  The wire tangled between the propeller blades and around the propeller shaft slowing the 
engine to a stop. While tethered by the cable the aircraft fell approximately 250 to 300 feet, 
striking a slope and turning almost 180 degrees from the direction of impact, substantially 
damaging the airplane.
