The airplane impacted terrain following a forced landing resulting from a loss of engine power 
while in cruise flight. The airplane underwent 'extensive' modification and repair for five to six 
months prior to the flight. Several maintenance personnel, who were working on the airplane 
the morning of the accident, stated that the pilot wanted the airplane back, even though he was 
told that maintenance was not complete. Also, one maintenance person reported that the pilot 
said, 'no matter what, I'm pulling this airplane out and flying to Albuquerque.' After about 30 
minutes of flight, the engine 'quit.' The left wing tank fuel quantity gauge indicated '3/4 full.' 
The pilot then switched the fuel tank selector switch from the left main wing tank to the right 
main wing tank and attempted to restart the engine, but was unsuccessful. He then tried to 
restart the engine with the auxiliary tank selected, but was unsuccessful. A forced landing was 
executed to a paved, country road. The airplane veered to the right into a ditch, subsequently 
the right wing dug into the ground and turned the airplane 180 degrees into a ditch. 
Fuel starvation. Factors were; the pilot's self induced pressure to fly the aircraft when 
maintenance had not been completed, poor judgement by the pilot to commence and continue 
flight with known deficiencies in the aircraft, and the lack of suitable terrain for a forced 
landing. 
 On October 2, 1998, at 1430 central daylight time, a Beech M35 single engine airplane, 
N9838R, owned and operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain 
during a forced landing following a loss of engine power near Carter, Oklahoma.  The private 
pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan was filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The flight originated 
from the Clinton/Sherman Municipal Airport, Clinton, Oklahoma, at 1400.
The pilot intended to remain in the traffic pattern at the Clinton/Sherman Municipal Airport, 
but on the initial climb passing through 800 feet AGL he observed clouds "hanging down into 
the downwind leg," and decided to climb above the clouds.  The pilot referenced the vertical 
speed indicator and interpreted its display as indicating a 500 foot per minute descent, which 
contradicted the readings the attitude indicator and altimeter were displaying.  He leveled the 
airplane at 8,500 feet and began to evaluate the situation.
"Approximately, 30 minutes into the flight the engine sputtered and quit."  The pilot noticed 
that the fuel gauge for the selected tank (left main) was reading 3/4 full and then he verified 
that the fuel selector was on the left main.  He switched the fuel selector to the right main fuel 
tank and attempted to restart the engine, but was unsuccessful.  He then switched to the 
auxiliary fuel tank and attempted to restart the engine and was unsuccessful.  Subsequently, he 
descended the airplane through several cloud layers, lowered the landing gear and attempted 
to land on a small, paved road.  Upon touchdown, the airplane was 10 to 20 degrees out of 
alignment with the road.  Subsequently, the airplane veered to the right into a ditch, whereby 
the right wing dug into the ground and spun the airplane 180 degrees.
According to the pilot the airplane underwent "extensive modifications," during the 5 to 6 
months prior to the flight.  An FAA certified airframe and powerplant mechanic who was 
working on the airplane stated that he informed the pilot that the oil temperature gauge was 
inoperative.  The pilot asked the mechanic if "anything quickee could be done?"  The mechanic 
attempted to correct the problem, but told the pilot, "I'm not finished with this aircraft."  A few 
minutes later he observed the airplane take off.  
Another mechanic who was installing equipment on the airplane the morning of the accident 
stated that the pilot appeared in the hangar at 0830 on the morning of the accident.  The pilot 
complained because the work on the airplane was not complete.  The pilot then began working 
on the airplane.  The mechanic reported that the pilot stated "No matter what I'm pulling this 
airplane out and flying to Albuquerque."  
A witness who conversed with the pilot at the airport the morning of the accident reported that 
the pilot stated that "he was going to fly his airplane whether the airplane was finished or not."        
According to a work order provided by Gipson Aviation located at the Clinton Municipal 
Airport, Clinton, Oklahoma, and the airplane's discrepancy log, the instrument panel was 
repaired and reinstalled.  At the time of the accident the installation work, which requires an 
FAA field approval before the airplane returns to service, had not been inspected by the FAA. 
An FAA inspector examined the airplane at the site and reported that the left wing fuel tank 
was empty.  The right wing fuel tank was full and the left and right auxiliary fuel tanks were 
full.
The aircraft is equipped with two switches for selecting a fuel tank.  One switch indicates right 
or left and the second switch indicates main or auxiliary.
