National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Camerson, TX
Accident Number: DFW07CA033
Date & Time: 12/02/2006, 1130 CST
Registration: N3129
Aircraft: Stits Flut-R-Bug SA6B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis With the eventual goal of earning a sport pilot certificate, an ultralight pilot and a 1,141-hour flight instructor planned to conduct a familiarization training flight in an experimental, tandem seat airplane.
During the take-off roll, with the ultralight pilot occupying the front seat and operating the controls, the airplane "ballooned."
The ultralight pilot reduced engine power and performed a normal landing.
During the second take-off from Runway 16 (a 3,200-foot long by 50-foot wide asphalt runway), "the airplane ballooned more than before" and the pilot elected to reduce the engine power and land.
The ultralight pilot stated that "the flare did not fully develop and [the airplane] landed harder than usual."
During the landing, the right main landing gear and the nose landing gear collapsed.
In the Recommendation section of the NTSB Form 6120.1, (How could this accident have been prevented ?
), the ultralight pilot stated that the accident could have been prevented " with the judicious use of throttle in the flare, or if I had carried more airspeed to compensate for the possible loss of a gusting headwind."
The winds at the time of the accident were reported as variable at 8 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper landing flare and inadequate recovery from a bounced landing which resulted in a hard landing.
A factor was the delayed remedial action by the flight instructor.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - DUAL STUDENT 2.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - INADEQUATE - DUAL STUDENT 3.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
