National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Point Roberts, WA
Accident Number: SEA07CA032
Date & Time: 12/01/2006, 1415 PST
Registration: N119N
Aircraft: Riley D-16A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, during the takeoff roll at about rotation speed, he felt the nose landing gear of the airplane "give way" and the airplane began to drift to the left.
As he applied right rudder to correct the yaw, he felt "a continued collapse" of the nose landing gear and elected to abort the takeoff.
The airplane's nose and both propellers struck the ground.
Examination of photos provided by an insurance adjustor revealed that both engines were displaced down and to the right.
The right engine firewall was torn from the engine nacelle, and the left engine firewall was buckled and distorted.
Additionally, the photos revealed that the nose landing gear fork had broken into two pieces, which allowed the nose wheel to separate from the airplane, resulting in collapse of the nose landing gear.
The pilot reported that "an aircraft structural engineer made the observation that my nose gear fork had an old hidden crack that could have contributed to the failure."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pre-existing crack in the nose wheel fork, which allowed separation of the nose wheel during the takeoff roll, resulting in collapse of the nose landing gear.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - CRACKED 2.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
