The commercial pilot was receiving flight-following services. He advised an air traffic 
controller that he had the airport in sight, and the controller acknowledged and told the pilot 
that radar services were terminated. The airport had an unimproved grass strip and runway 
lights. Two witnesses who lived next to the airport said thick fog quickly enveloped the area 
shortly before the accident. Another witness said that visibility had dropped to less than 1/4 
mile and that he heard the airplane fly low over his house but could not see it. On the approach 
to land, the airplane struck trees and terrain about 1/4 mile northeast of the airport. A 
postimpact fire ensued. A postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no anomalies that 
would have precluded normal operation. The airplane was instrument equipped and the 
commercial pilot held an instrument rating.
The pilot™s failure to perform a go-around after encountering thick fog at night. 
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 1, 2012, about 1950 central standard time, a Beech P35, N1566Z, collided with 
trees and terrain while maneuvering near a private airstrip near Correctionville, Iowa. The 
pilot was seriously injured and two passengers were fatally injured. The airplane was 
substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Night, instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no flight plan had been 
filed. The local flight originated from Grand Island, Nebraska, at an undetermined time.
The pilot and a passenger had flown from Correctionville to Grand Island, Nebraska, earlier 
that day to pick up a second passenger. During the latter portion of the return flight to 
Correctionville, the pilot received flight following services from the Sioux City (SUX), Iowa, 
Terminal Radar Approach Control (TRACON). At 1938, the pilot advised SUX TRACON that he 
had the Correctionville Airport in sight, and radar services were terminated. The airplane 
struck trees and terrain about 1/2-mile northwest of the airport. A post-impact fire ensued. A 
motorist and his wife, who were driving south on the highway, saw a fire on the hillside. When 
they slowed down to investigate, they came upon the pilot on the side of road and called 9-1-1.
Two residents whose home borders and faces the airstrip said they saw the pilot depart earlier 
that day. They were standing in their front yard about 1930 when thick fog quickly enveloped 
the area and they were unable to see the airstrip which was about 125 feet away. A resident, 
who was visiting friends about a mile east of the accident site, said the weather was clear at 
1800, but fog moved in soon thereafter and visibility dropped to less than 1/4-mile. He heard 
an airplane pass low over the house. The engine was ﬁrunning fastﬂ and the airplane was 
moving slowly because it took ﬁawhile to pass over the house.ﬂ He said he never saw, but only 
heard, the airplane.
The Woodbury County Sheriff said first responders were hampered by darkness and fog that 
reduced visibility to about 50 feet. He said the reduced visibility contributed to an accident 
involving a Correctionville ambulance that was transporting the pilot to a hospital and a 
Moville police car. A second ambulance was summoned to transport the pilot.
PERSONNEL (CREW) INFORMATION
The pilot, age 70, held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single-engine, multiengine, 
and instrument ratings, dated February 28, 2010. He also held a second class airman medical 
certificate, dated December 13, 2011, with the restriction, ﬁMust have available glasses for near 
vision.ﬂ The medical certificate was valid for 12 months. At the time the medical certificate was 
issued, the pilot estimated his total flight time as 2,400 hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N1566Z (serial number D-6868), a model P35, was manufactured by the Beech Aircraft 
Corporation in 1961. It was powered by a Continental IO-470-N engine (serial number 52117-
D-N), rated at 260 horsepower, driving a McCauley 2-blade, all-metal, constant speed 
propeller (model number 2A36C23-P-CE).
According to the airplane maintenance records, the last annual and 100-hour inspections were 
performed on August 30, 2012. At that time the tachometer read 1,812 hours; the airframe had 
accrued 6,091.6 hours and the engine had accrued 6,079.8 hours. The engine was overhauled 
on March 17, 1993, at a tachometer time of 435.3 hours, and had accrued 1,338.5 hours since 
major overhaul. The altimeter, encoder and transponder were certified for flight in IFR 
(instrument flight rules) conditions on June 27, 2011.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Weather recorded at the Sioux Gateway Airport-Colonel Bud Day Field (SUX), Sioux City, 
Iowa, located about 30 miles west of the accident site, was as follows:
1852: Wind, 120 degrees at 3 knots; visibility, 7 statute miles;; sky condition, clear; 
temperature, 4 degrees Celsius (C.); dew point, 3 degrees C.; altimeter, 29.81 inches of 
mercury.
2036: Wind, calm; visibility, 5 statute miles, mist; sky condition, few clouds , 300 feet; 
temperature,2 degrees C.; dew point, 1 degree C.; altimeter, 29.83 inches of mercury.
AERODROME INFORMATION
Correctionville Airport is an unpublished and unimproved airstrip, located about 2 miles south 
of the town of Correctionville. It has a single runway, aligned on a magnetic heading of about 
140-320 degrees. The grass runway is about 2,000 feet long and 120 feet wide, and is equipped 
with runway lights. It is situated at an elevation of about 1,200 feet above mean sea level.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The accident site was located about 1 mile southwest of the town of Correctionville in the 1700 
block of Highway 31, and about 1/4-mile northeast of the airstrip. The wreckage was in a field 
west of and adjacent to Highway 31. The terrain sloped upward with multiple embankments. 
The debris path was approximately 200 to 250 feet in length, and aligned on a magnetic 
heading of 324°. The initial impact point was a small group of trees at an elevation of 1,122 feet. 
A portion of the right wing and extended right main landing gear and portions of the right fuel 
bladder were at the base of the trees. An odor of fuel was noted.
After striking the trees, the airplane impacted a terraced embankment at an elevation was 1,156 
feet. The airplane came to rest on a magnetic heading of 062°. The engine separated from the 
airplane at the firewall and was next to the fuselage, pointed in the opposite direction. The 
propeller separated from the engine at the flange. Both blades showed s-bending and 
chordwise scratches.
The main body of wreckage consisted of the fuselage aft of the firewall, the empennage, and the 
left wing. Extensive fire damage was noted. The landing gear was down and the flaps were 
extended, the amount of which was not determined. Control continuity was partially 
established. The two passengers were located next to and aft of the trailing edge of the left 
wing. The altimeter faceplate, bearing the Kollsman window, was set to 29.80 inches of 
mercury. No other anomalies were noted with the airplane during the postaccident 
examination.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The pilot succumbed to his injuries on February 11, 2013. Because more than 30 days had 
elapsed since the accident, his injuries did not meet the criteria for ﬁfatal injuryﬂ as defined in 
Title 49 CFR Part 830.2. Autopsy and toxicology protocols were not performed. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
SUX TRACON confirmed that N1566Z was tracked as a VFR primary target with no 
transponder-encoder data. They advised that radar detection of an airplane at low altitude was 
unavailable for that area. Correctionville Airport is not depicted on the TRACON radar or on 
sectional charts.
