During cruise flight, the engine began losing power. The pilot in the front seat, who was flying 
the airplane, attempted to troubleshoot the engine issue, including activating the carburetor 
heat; however, the engine continued to run roughly, so he chose to divert to a nearby airport. 
The rear-seat pilot then took control of the airplane. While on final approach to the runway, 
the rear-seat pilot asked the front-seat pilot, who was seated near the wing flap control, to 
configure the flaps for landing. After the flaps fully extended, they retracted. The rear-seat pilot 
then asked the front-seat pilot to re-extend the flaps. About this time, the rear-seat pilot 
noticed that people and vehicles were at the end of the runway and chose to abort the landing 
by increasing engine power and turning the airplane toward an adjacent field. However, the 
airplane had sufficient altitude and power, so the pilot should have been able to make the 
runway and land safely. During the subsequent attempt to land the airplane, it stalled and then 
touched down hard. The airplane was substantially damaged, and both pilots were seriously 
injured.
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that the wing flaps appeared to be fully 
extended. The front-seat pilot, who was a co-owner, had been working to rectify several 
maintenance discrepancies he had identified after purchasing the airplane 2 months earlier, 
one of which included a leaking right fuel tank; he had repaired the exterior of the tank. 
Examination of the engine and fuel system identified the presence of fuel tank sealant on the 
exterior of the steel braid of both fuel tanks™ flexible pick-up tubes and flaked pieces of fuel 
tank sealant and other contaminants within the gascolator. However, examinations revealed 
that the fuel screens at the engine-driven fuel pump and the carburetor were not contaminated. 
Both fuel tanks were found breached. An examination of the engine did not reveal any 
preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. 
Although the temperature and dew point about the time of the accident were conducive to the 
formation of carburetor ice, it unlikely that carburetor ice played a role in the loss of engine 
power because the pilots™ reported using carburetor heat following the loss of engine power.
Page 2 of 7ERA13LA072
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examinations of the engine and fuel system revealed no anomalies that would have precluded 
normal operation. Contributing to the severity of the accident was the rear-seat pilots' decision 
to abort the landing with partial engine power and his failure to successfully perform a forced 
landing to an available airfield. 
On December 1, 2012, about 1030 eastern standard time, an experimental amateur-built RV-4, 
N416DH, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during a forced landing 
following a partial loss of engine power near McConnell Airfield (5NC3), Carthage, North 
Carolina. The certificated commercial pilot/co-owner of the airplane and the certificated airline 
transport pilot were seriously injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight 
plan was filed for the flight, which originated from Long Island Airport (NC26), Long Island, 
North Carolina, and was destined for Rowan County Airport (RUQ), Salisbury, North Carolina. 
The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91. 
According to the commercial pilot, he had purchased the airplane about two months prior to 
the accident and had flown it home from Utah. Since then, he had been trying to identify and 
rectify some "squawks" he had noted with the airplane. One of the issues he had observed was 
that fuel seemed to be seeping from the right wing fuel tank, and he had been attempting to 
identify the source of the leak. About one week prior to the accident flight, he re-sealed all of 
the rivet lines on the fuel tank from the outside. The purpose of the accident flight was to test 
fly the airplane and determine if the leak had been fixed.
The commercial pilot, was seated in the front seat of the airplane, which was equipped with a 
fully functional set of flight/engine controls and instrumentation, while the airline transport 
pilot was seated in the rear seat, which was only equipped with basic flight and engine controls, 
and did not include flap or brake controls. The pilots planned to fly around the local area, and 
had anticipated stopping at several airports throughout the day. After performing a preflight 
inspection, the pilots filled the airplane's fuel tanks and departed from Lake Norman Airpark 
(14A), Mooresville, North Carolina. They then proceeded uneventfully to NC26, where after a 
brief stop, they departed on the accident flight.
About 5 minutes after departing, and while flying at an altitude of about 3,000 feet msl, the 
airplane's engine began losing power over a period of about 15 seconds, and continued to run 
roughly at a very low power output. The front seat pilot activated the carburetor heat, richened 
the mixture, activated the fuel boost pump, ensured that the primer was locked in place, and 
switched the fuel selector from the right to left fuel tank. The rear seat pilot then took control of 
the airplane and turned towards 5NC3, which was nearby.
Upon arriving over the airport, the rear seat pilot circled overhead in order to lose altitude 
before turning onto the final approach to the runway and asking the front seat pilot to set the 
flaps to 30 degrees. Shortly before reaching the runway threshold, the rear seat pilot heard a 
loud "bang," and realized that the flaps had retracted from the 30- to the 10-degree position. 
The rear seat pilot then asked the front seat pilot to reposition the flaps back to the 30-degree 
position; but could not recall if the front seat pilot had done so. Seeing persons and vehicles 
near the departure end of the runway, the rear seat pilot elected to abort the landing, increased 
the throttle to the full forward position, and maneuvered the airplane toward a farm field to the 
south of the runway. While attempting to land, the airplane touched down hard, collapsing the 
landing gear, before coming to rest in a stand of trees, resulting in substantial damage to the 
fuselage and both wings.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector performed a cursory examination of the 
airplane at the accident site, and noted that the wing flaps appeared to be fully extended. The 
airplane was subsequently recovered from the accident site and examined. Both fuel tanks were 
breached at the inboard forward attach points where the fuel lines were installed. Both fuel 
tank caps were in place and their seals were in good condition. Interior inspection of the tanks 
revealed that they were absent of fuel, water, or contamination. A flop tube was installed in 
each tank and considerable amount of fuel tank sealant was present on the braided steel cover 
of each flop tube. 
The gascolator was removed opened for inspection, and was completely full of light-blue 
colored fuel that had a smell consistent with 100LL aviation fuel. About 1/2 teaspoon of solid 
contaminants was present at the bottom of the gascolator. The contaminants appeared 
consistent with flaked fuel tank sealant and dirt.
Fuel samples from the fuel pump and gascolator were tested for the presence of water, and 
none was found.
The cockpit fuel selector valve and fuel lines from the gascolator to the valve and from the valve 
to the wing roots were tested with compressed air. The valve operated normally and the lines 
were clear of obstructions. The fuel lines forward of the engine firewall were removed and 
examined for blockage, with no obstructions noted.
The engine-driven fuel pump was removed from the engine and its input was actuated 
manually. The pump operated normally and pumped fuel. The pump was subsequently 
disassembled and examined, and the fuel screen was absent of debris or contamination and the 
fuel inlet and outlet ports were normal in appearance.
The carburetor fuel inlet screen was examined and was absent of debris. The carburetor could 
not be tested due to impact damage; however, a visual examination of its components was 
unremarkable. The carburetor bowl was clean and dry; however, it was broken free from the 
upper half of the carburetor.
Continuity of the engine's powertrain and valvetrain were confirmed by rotation of the 
crankshaft at the propeller flange. The crankshaft turned with no binding noted, and suction 
and compression were observed on all cylinders. Rotation of the crankshaft produced spark at 
each of the impulse coupler-equipped right magneto's terminal leads, and the left magneto was 
not tested. The four top spark plugs were removed and all exhibited normal wear and were 
light gray in color.
According to FAA airworthiness records, the experimental amateur-built airplane was 
completed and certificated in 1991. The airplane was equipped with a Lycoming O-320-E2A 
engine. Review of maintenance records revealed that the airplane's most recent condition 
inspection was completed by the airplane's builder in March 2012.
The weather conditions reported at Moore County Airport (SOP), Pinehurst, North Carolina, 
located about 8 nautical miles south of the accident site, at 1035, included winds from 220 
degrees at 5 knots, 10 statute miles visibility, clear skies below 12,000 feet, a temperature of 15 
degrees C, a dew point of 7 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.41 inches of mercury. 
Consultation of a carburetor icing probability chart published by the FAA showed that the 
temperature/dewpoint conditions were favorable to the accumulation of "serious icing at glide 
power."
