Page 1 of 2ANC18FA041
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Salem, OR
Accident Number:
ANC18FA041
Date & Time:
06/03/2018, 1815 PDT 
Registration:
N375KF
Aircraft:
MASON HAL J KITFOX MODEL 1
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
On June 3, 2018, about 1815 Pacific daylight time, a Mason Hal J KitFox Model 1, experimental 
light sport airplane, N375KF, sustained substantial damage during an impact with trees and 
terrain near Blue Skies Airport (OR87), Salem, Oregon. The airplane was registered to a private 
individual and operated by the pilot as a 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 (CFR) Part 91 visual 
flight rules flight when the accident occurred. The student pilot, the only occupant, was fatally 
injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed. The last 
time the airplane had been seen was about 1800 when taxi operations were being conducted.
According to a witness, the pilot had just completed maintenance on the landing gear 
suspension and stated that he was going to taxi the airplane along the runway to test the 
pressure in the main landing gear struts. He witnessed the airplane make several trips along 
the runway. A few hours later, he saw the pilot's vehicle and trailer still parked at the airport, 
but the airplane was not there. The previous instances where the witness interacted with the 
accident pilot, he said the accident airplane had always been trailered to and from the airport 
and he did not see the accident pilot operate the airplane for anything other than taxi 
operations.
When a friend of the pilot had not heard from him the next day and found out the pilot's 
vehicle was still at the airport, he became concerned since he knew the pilot was not 
certificated or authorized to fly the accident airplane solo. He then conducted an aerial search 
in his own airplane and located the wreckage of the missing airplane on the edge of a wooded 
area about 100 yards from the OR87 runway, with a portion of the airplane submerged in a 
small creek. The airplane impacted about 30 feet below the top of an estimated 100ft-tall Fir 
tree before descending steeply into terrain and coming to rest inverted with the right wing and 
propeller submerged, resulting in substantial damage.
The accident pilot's flight instructor estimated the accident pilot had accumulated about 35 
total flight hours, almost all in a Piper Cherokee 140. To his knowledge, the accident pilot had 
not flown the Kit Fox before and did not have a tailwheel endorsement or solo endorsement for 
that aircraft. He said it was possible the accident pilot received endorsements while he was out 
of town the week prior to the accident but he had not spoken to the pilot since returning to the 
area.
Page 2 of 2ANC18FA041
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
The airplane was equipped with a legacy, 121.5 MHz ELT, and not a digital 406 MHz ELT that 
instantly transmits a distress signal to search and rescue satellites, thereby alerting rescue 
personnel within minutes of the location of the crash site. As of February 1, 2009, analog, 121.5 
MHz ELT's stopped being monitored by search and rescue satellites, and the installation of the 
406 MHz has been voluntary.
The aircraft was equipped with an HKS-700 series engine.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MASON HAL J
Registration:
N375KF
Model/Series:
KITFOX MODEL 1 I
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
Yes
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSLE, 201 ft msl
Observation Time:
0056 UTC
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 8°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 5000 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
9 knots / , 280°
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 10000 ft agl
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30.02 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Salem, OR (OR87)
Destination: 
 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
44.966667, -122.923333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
David S Williams
Additional Participating Persons:
Eugene Hahn; FAA; Hillsboro, OR
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
