Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Strafford, MO
Accident Number:
CHI04LA144
Date & Time:
06/03/2004, 1215 CDT 
Registration:
N693V
Aircraft:
Beech M35
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane collided with a fence and a guy wire during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power.  The pilot reported he was flying at 8,500 feet mean sea level when the number 2 
cylinder departed the engine resulting in a total loss of engine power.  He reported that with no 
airports within gliding distance, he elected to land in a farmer's field where the airplane 
contacted a fence and a guy wire.  The number 2 cylinder and the left magneto were not located 
after the accident.  Half of the crankcase, two fractured cylinder through-bolts, two cylinder 
through-bolt nuts with pieces of bolts inside, four cylinder hold down nuts with pieces of studs 
inside, a connecting rod cap with the connecting rod cap bolt, and a connecting rod nut were 
submitted for a metallurgical examination.  The studs and through-bolts were arbitrarily 
numbered clockwise starting at the upper forward stud.  All of the studs and through-bolts that 
were examined exhibited fatigue cracking with stud 3 exhibiting the largest fatigue region.  A 
lip was observed on the surface of the crankcase which corresponded to the forward edge of the 
cylinder barrel flange, adjacent to the through-bolts.  Linear marks aligned with the axis of the 
cylinder were observed at the aft side of the cylinder hole corresponding to sliding contact with 
the cylinder barrel skirt.  Sectioning of studs 3 and 4 revealed cracks and/or rolling laps at the 
thread roots.  On stud 4, many of the cracks extended radially then turned.  Two studs were 
removed from cylinder #4 and one of them also displayed sharp thread radii and cracking.  
This cylinder did not fail.  The engine was overhauled on July 6, 2000, at a tach time of 
2440.33 hours.  The engine had accumulated 194.03 hours since the overhaul.  
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The improper installation of the cylinder during the engine overhaul which resulted in the 
fatigue failure of the cylinder studs and through-bolts and the subsequent separation of the 
cylinder.   Factors associated with the accident were the fence and the guy wire which the 
Page 2 of 6CHI04LA144
airplane contacted during the forced landing.
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) MAINTENANCE,OVERHAUL - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
2. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - FATIGUE
3. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CYLINDER - SEPARATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
4. (F) OBJECT - FENCE
5. (F) OBJECT - GUY WIRE
Page 3 of 6CHI04LA144
Factual Information
On June 3, 2004, at 1215 central daylight time, a Beech M35, N693V, collided with a fence and 
a guy wire during a forced landing after the number 2 cylinder departed the engine in 
Strafford, Missouri.  The pilot and passenger were not injured.  The airplane was substantially 
damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions and a 
visual flight rules flight plan was filed.  The flight  originated in Tell City, Indiana, at 1005, with 
a planned destination of Tulsa, Oklahoma. 
The pilot reported he was flying at 8,500 feet mean sea level when the number 2 cylinder 
departed the engine resulting a total loss of engine power.  He reported that with no airports 
within gliding distance, he elected to land in a farmer's field.  The airplane was damaged when 
it contacted a fence and a guy wire during the landing.    
The number 2 cylinder and the left magneto were not located after the accident.  
The Continental IO-470-C, s/n 242060-R, engine was torn down under the supervision of an 
inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration Kansas City, Missouri, Flight Standards 
District Office.  Half of the crankcase, two fractured cylinder through-bolts, two cylinder 
through-bolt nuts with pieces of bolts inside, four cylinder hold down nuts with pieces of studs 
inside, a connecting rod cap with the connecting rod cap bolt, and a connecting rod nut were 
submitted to the NTSB for a metallurgical examination.  
The following are excerpts from the metallurgical examination report.
"For reference in this report, the studs and through-bolts were numbered clockwise starting 
with the upper forward stud... .  Stud number 1 was contained in the fractured piece of the 
crankcase.... .  The crankcase fracture intersected the hole for stud 2, and the inboard piece of 
stud 2 was missing.  The outboard piece of stud 3 and the nut for stud 3 also were missing.  
Three of the four stud pieces and nuts ... mated to studs 1, 4, and 6.  One stud and nut did not 
mate to any of the stud fractures and was therefore identified as the mating side of stud 2.  The 
two through-bolt pieces with nuts mated to the other two submitted through-bolt pieces at 
positions 7 and 8."
"Each stud and through-bolt fracture surface had a relatively smooth flat region oriented 
approximately perpendicular to the longitudinal axis, features consistent with fatigue.  ...  
Crack arrest lines were observed emanating from multiple origins at one side of the fracture 
surfaces for studs 2 to 5.  The fracture surfaces for studs 1 and 6 were slightly rougher and did 
not have distinct crack arrest lines, but ratchet marks were visible indicating fatigue from 
multiple origins.  Although the fracture surface for stud 1 ... was nearly obliterated by post-
fracture damage, the mating fracture surface showed the described fatigue features.  In each 
case where orientation could be determined, the fatigue emanated from origins at the cylinder 
side of the stud or through-bolt."
"Of all the stud and through-bolt fractures, stud 3 had the smallest overstress region.  The 
fatigue region covered more than 90 percent of the fracture surface."
"A lip was observed on the crankcase surface at a location corresponding to the forward edge of 
the cylinder 2 barrel flange, adjacent to the through-bolt positions.  At the aft side of the 
cylinder 2 area of the crankcase, linear marks aligned with the axis of the cylinder were 
observed at the aft side of the hole for cylinder 2 corresponding to sliding contact with the 
Page 4 of 6CHI04LA144
cylinder barrel skirt.  Also, fretting was observed in the barrel flange contact area around 
through-bolt number 7."
Studs 3 and 4 were sectioned longitudinally.  "Cracks and/or rolling laps were observed at the 
thread roots of both sections.  On stud 3, the cracks generally followed the material flow lines 
and were limited to within 0.001 inch of the surface."
"On stud 4, cracks, many of them branching cracks, ... extended radially for some distance then 
turned, following the flow lines in the material.  Many of the thread roots had sharp radii... ."
The hardness of studs 3 and 4 was measured.  The hardness of stud 3 was 33 HRC, and the 
hardness of stud 4 was 31 HRC.  The manufacturer specified harness range for the studs was 32 
- 38 HRC.
Two studs from cylinder 4 were also removed and sectioned.  One of these studs had thread 
roots with sharp radii and many cracks at the thread roots similar to those on one of the studs 
from cylinder 2.  The other stud from cylinder 4 had a small rolling lap in one thread.  No sharp 
thread root radii were noted on this stud.
"The connecting rod cap bolt from cylinder 2 ... was slightly bent. ... The thread peaks on the 
connecting rod bolt ... were deformed and worn, visually appearing flattened and shiny.  The 
threads closest to the end of the bolt, the thread peaks were mostly deformed toward the end of 
the bolt.  At the other end of the threaded region closest to the head, the thread peaks were 
deformed both toward the end and toward the head." 
The engine was overhauled on July 6, 2000, at a tachometer time of 2440.33 hours.  The 
engine accumulated 194.03 hours since the overhaul.  
Parties to the investigaiton were the Federal Aviation Administration and Teledyne Continental 
Motors.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
78, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/07/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/20/2002
Flight Time:
26000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5000 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 5 of 6CHI04LA144
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N693V
Model/Series:
M35 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
D-6444
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/09/2003, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
88 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5778 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-470-C
Registered Owner:
Bernard A. Armstrong
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
Bernard A. Armstrong
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SGF
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1152 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 39800 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.22 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Tell City, IN (TEL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Tulsa, OK (TUL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1005 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.244444, -93.386944
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Pamela  S Sullivan
Adopted Date:
06/08/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Alan Martens; FAA; Kansas City, MO
Matthew Fox; NTSB; Washington, DC
Scott Boyle; Teledyne Continental; Mobile, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
