Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sebastian, FL
Accident Number:
MIA03LA139
Date & Time:
07/01/2003, 1240 EDT 
Registration:
N51576
Aircraft:
Samual G. DaSilva Velocity
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that about 10 minutes after takeoff during cruise flight at 1,500 feet with the 
passenger flying the airplane, the engine briefly "shuddered", and the rpm dropped to 2,000, 
then to zero.  He took the controls and attempted to restore engine power but was 
unsuccessful.  He maneuvered the airplane for a forced landing in a field, and when the flight 
was approximately 20 feet above ground level he recognized there were drainage ditches in the 
field.  The airplane was landed in the field, and during the landing roll the nose landing gear 
collapsed after traveling into a ditch.  The airplane then slid into a second ditch, and came to 
rest approximately 158 feet from the first ditch impact location.  Examination of the engine 
revealed the crankshaft was fractured at the No. 3 cylinder connecting rod journal; there was 
no evidence of lack of lubrication or fretting on the faying surfaces of the crankcase halves.  
Metallurgical examination of the crankshaft revealed the fracture surface was located in the aft 
radius of the No. 3 connecting rod journal; fatigue progression was noted to initiate from the 
intersection of the radius and the journal.  The fracture propagated in a plane perpendicular to 
the journal surface from a single origin.  The fatigue initiation site did not contain scoring 
marks or scratches.  All connecting rod journals measured 2.114 inches.  The No. 3 connecting 
rod journal superficial macro hardness was slightly below the minimum specified limit, while 
the core hardness was within limits.  The overall aft radius was determined to be 0.152 inch, 
while a localized transition radius of .015 inch at the fatigue origin location was noted.  The 
crankshaft had been to two FAA certified repair stations (FAA CRS), the first time on 
December 14, 1991, and the second time on August 2, 2001.  Both repair stations rejected the 
crankshaft due to a crack in the No. 1 main bearing area.  The records from the facility that 
inspected the crankshaft in 2001 indicate the No. 3 connecting rod journal measured 2.1193 
inches at the time it was rejected; no work was performed to it.  The owner reported that 
following the rejection in 2001, he took the crankshaft to another FAA CRS who reportedly 
ground two connecting rod journals and polished the crankshaft.  The owner did not have a 
receipt or yellow tag for the work performed to the crankshaft.  The engine was assembled, and 
had been operated 87.8 hours since being reassembled at the time of the crankshaft failure.  
The president of the FAA CRS that the owner of the airplane reported last worked on the 
crankshaft reported he did not have any records pertaining to the accident crankshaft.  He also 
reported that he voluntarily closed his business in August 2002, to retire.   
Page 2 of 6MIA03LA139
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The improper repair of the crankshaft by a FAA Certified Repair Station resulting in fatigue 
failure and subsequent total loss of engine power.  A factor in the accident was the 
rough/uneven terrain encountered by the pilot during the landing roll in a field.
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CRANKSHAFT - FATIGUE
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,MAJOR REPAIR - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
3. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
Page 3 of 6MIA03LA139
Factual Information
On July 1, 2003, about 1240 eastern daylight time, a homebuilt Velocity, N51576, registered to 
a private individual, experienced a total loss of engine power during cruise flight near 
Sebastian, Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan 
was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The airplane was substantially damaged and 
the commercial-rated pilot sustained minor injuries while a passenger sustained serious 
injuries.  The flight originated about 10 minutes earlier from the Sebastian Municipal Airport, 
Sebastian, Florida.
The pilot stated that about 10 minutes after takeoff during cruise flight at 1,500 feet with the 
passenger flying the airplane, the engine briefly "shuddered", and the rpm dropped to 2,000, 
then to zero.  He took the controls and attempted to restore engine power but was 
unsuccessful.  He maneuvered the airplane for a forced landing in a field, and when the flight 
was approximately 20 feet above ground level he recognized there were drainage ditches in the 
field.  The airplane was landed in the field, and during the landing roll the nose landing gear 
collapsed after traveling into a ditch.  The airplane then slid into a second ditch, and came to 
rest approximately 158 feet from the first ditch impact location.
Examination of the engine revealed the crankshaft was fractured at the No. 3 cylinder 
connecting rod journal; there was no evidence of lack of lubrication, or fretting on the faying 
surfaces of the crankcase halves.  The crankshaft was removed and sent to the NTSB 
Metallurgy Laboratory located in Washington, D.C., for further examination.
NTSB metallurgical examination of the crankshaft revealed the fracture surface was located in 
the aft radius of the No. 3 connecting rod journal; fatigue progression was noted to initiate 
from the intersection of the radius and the journal.  The fracture propagated in a plane 
perpendicular to the journal surface from a single origin.  The fatigue initiation site did not 
contain scoring marks or scratches.  All connecting rod journals measured 2.114 inches.  The 
No. 3 connecting rod journal superficial macro hardness was slightly below the minimum 
specified limit, while the core hardness was within limits.  The overall aft radius was 
determined to be 0.152 inch, while a localized transition radius of .015 inch at the fatigue origin 
location was noted.
The crankshaft had been to two FAA certified repair stations (FAA CRS), the first time on 
December 14, 1991, and the second time on August 2, 2001.  Both repair stations rejected the 
crankshaft due to a crack in the No. 1 main bearing area.  The records from the facility that 
inspected the crankshaft in 2001 indicate the No. 3 connecting rod journal measured 2.1193 
inches at the time it was rejected; no work was performed to it.
The owner reported that following the rejection in 2001, he took the crankshaft to another FAA 
CRS who reportedly ground two connecting rod journals and polished the crankshaft.  The 
owner did not have a receipt or yellow tag for the work performed to the crankshaft.  The 
engine was assembled, and had been operated 87.8 hours since being reassembled at the time 
of the crankshaft failure.
The president of the FAA CRS that the owner of the airplane reported last worked on the 
crankshaft reported he did not have any records pertaining to the accident crankshaft.  He also 
reported that he voluntarily closed his business in August 2002, to retire.
The airplane minus the retained crankshaft was released to the airplane owner on October 29, 
Page 4 of 6MIA03LA139
2003. The retained crankshaft was also released to the airplane owner on August 20, 2004.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
67, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/10/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/10/2002
Flight Time:
4200 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1247 hours (Total, this make and model), 4200 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Samual G. DaSilva
Registration:
N51576
Model/Series:
Velocity 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
DMO-0112
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/11/2003, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
24.1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
760 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A1A
Registered Owner:
Samuel G. DaSilva
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Samuel G. DaSilva
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA03LA139
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KVRB, 24 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1253 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.11 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C / 24°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Sebastion, FL (X26)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
St. Petersburg, FL (KPIE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1230 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
27.816667, -80.683333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
10/28/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Jon S Strickland; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Orlando, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA03LA139
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
