National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Immokalee, FL
Accident Number: ATL03LA029
Date & Time: 01/03/2003, 1210 EST
Registration: N45051
Aircraft: Mielec PZL-M-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis According to the pilot, 20 minutes into the flight the engine flammed out while the airplane was in a left bank.
As the pilot maneuvered for an emergency landing, the airplane's left wingtip struck trees, and the airplane collided with the ground.
According to the pilot, in his preflight planning he did not compute the fuel consumption or reference the pilot operating handbook for the intended trip.
The pilot stated he did not refuel the airplane after the initial load bearing trip.
The pilot stated that this accident could have been prevented if he refueled the airplane before the initial load.
According to the pilot this  airplane is "notorious for poor fuel feeding when low on fuel".
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate in-flight planning/decision by his improper fuel management which resulted in fuel starvation.
Also causal was the pilot's inadequate preflight planning which resulted in his failure to perform fuel consumption calculations and refueling of the aircraft.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION 3.
(C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On January 3, 2003, at 1210 eastern standard time a Mielec PZL-M-18, N45051, registered to and operated by Airwork Enterprises of Florida, Inc., collided with trees following a loss of engine power at the Zipper Farms Airstrip in the vicinity of Immokalee, Florida.
The agricultural flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot was not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The flight originated from the Immokalee Airport in Immokalee, Florida, at 1145.
The agricultural flight was circular in nature and lasted approximately 20 minutes.The pilot attempted to return to Immokalee Airport when a loss of engine power occurred.
According to the pilot, the engine flammed out while the airplane was in a left bank.
As the pilot maneuvered for an emergency landing, the left wingtip struck trees, and the airplane collided with the ground.
The airplane slid backward and, rotated 180 degrees.
According to the pilot, in his preflight planning he did not compute the fuel consumption or reference the pilot operating handbook for the intended flight.
The pilot stated he did not refuel the airplane after the initial load bearing trip.
Initial examination of the accident site revealed the airplane came to rest upright on its gear and slightly tilted to the left.
No fuel was recovered from the right wing tank, 41 gallons of fuel was recovered from the left fuel tank.
The wings and fuselage displayed impact damage.
Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assemblies and accessories rervealed no anomalies prior to impact.
The pilot stated that this accident could have been prevented if he refueled the airplane before the initial load.
According to the pilot this  airplane is "notorious for poor fuel feeding when low on fuel".
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
