National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Milford, UT
Accident Number: DEN03LA027
Date & Time: 01/01/2003, 2200 MST
Registration: N8500R
Aircraft: Aircraft Mfg & Dev. Co. (AMD)
CH2000
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The two pilots received an in-person weather briefing from the Flight Service Station at 2000.
They said that they would later air-file an IFR flight plan so that they could practice instrument approaches.
They departed about 2100.
Approximately 2200, the Sheriff's Office received a 9- 1-1 cellular telephone call from one of the airplane's occupants, advising that they had crashed, one of the occupants was trapped in the wreckage, and that he was unable to activate the ELT (emergency locator transmitter).
Using NTAP (National Track Analysis Program) data from the Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and homing in on the cellular telephone signals, the wreckage was located about midnight.
The two pilots were airlifted to a hospital in serious condition.
One of the pilots told a sheriff's detective that they did not see the mountain.
The accident site was at an elevation of about 8,500 feet msl.
The Sectional Chart depicted terrain in that area at 8,840 feet msl.
The instructor was reportedly "familiar with the area" and did not consult his VFR sectional charts.
U.S.
Naval Observatory data indicated the Moon's phase was a waning crescent, with 1 percent of the visible disk illuminated.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the inadequate altitude chosen by the flight instructor, resulting in inadequate clearance and subsequent collision with mountainous terrain.
Contributing factors were the instructor's failure to consult pertinent VFR sectional charts for the area, and the dark night conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) ALTITUDE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 2.
ALTITUDE - LOW 3.
(F) VFR PROCEDURES - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 4.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY Factual Information On January 1, 2003, approximately 2200 mountain standard time, an Aircraft Manufacturing & Development Company CH2000, N8500R, registered to and operated by the Salt Lake Community College, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain 7.1 miles southeast of Milford, Utah.
The commercial certificated flight instructor and private pilot receiving instruction were seriously injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the instructional flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated at Cedar City, Utah, approximately 2100, and was en route to Salt Lake City, Utah.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration, the two pilots received an in-person weather briefing from the Cedar City Flight Service Station at 2000.
They said that when they arrived in the vicinity of Delta, Utah, they would air-file an IFR flight plan to Salt Lake City International Airport so that they could practice instrument approaches.
They departed about 2100.
Approximately 2200, the Beaver County Sheriff's Office received a 9-1-1 cellular telephone call from one of the airplane's occupants, advising that they had "crashed north of Milford," one of the occupants was trapped in the wreckage, and that he was unable to activate the ELT (emergency locator transmitter).
Using NTAP (National Track Analysis Program) data from the Salt Lake City Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and homing in on the cellular telephone signals, the wreckage was located about midnight, 7.1 miles east-southeast of the Milford VORTAC on the 116 degree radial.
The two pilots were airlifted to a Salt Lake City hospital in serious condition.
One of the pilots told a sheriff's detective that they did not see the mountain.
The accident site was at an elevation of about 8,500 feet msl.
The Salt Lake City Sectional Chart depicts terrain in that area at 8,840 feet msl.
The instructor was reportedly "familiar with the area" and did not consult his VFR sectional charts.
U.S.
Naval Observatory data indicated the Moon's phase was a waning crescent, with 1 percent of the visible disk illuminated.
Co. (AMD) Registration: N8500R Model/Series: CH2000 Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: No Airworthiness Certificate: Utility Serial Number: 20-0061 Landing Gear Type: Tricycle Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 11/25/2002, 100 Hour Certified Max Gross Wt.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
