National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Jasper, AL
Accident Number: ERA13FA101
Date & Time: 01/01/2013, 2240 CST
Registration: N7700Y
Aircraft: PIPER PA-30
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event: Miscellaneous/other
Injuries: 3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the airport manager, who was also a flight instructor, the student pilot had completed 10 hours of dual instruction in a single-engine airplane and completed three supervised solos.
After the student pilot's third supervised solo, he discontinued his training with the airport manager and enrolled in a flight program at a community college.
The airport manager did not know if the student pilot continued with his training.
A review of the student pilot's records revealed that he had no entries or endorsements related to multiengine, night, or instrument flights.
Instrument meteorological conditions existed on the night of the accident.
An airport security video showed the accident airplane taxiing to the active runway.
Shortly thereafter, the airplane™s strobe lights can be seen reflecting off of the runway and then illuminating in the low clouds; the strobe lights then disappear from the camera™s view.
A witness in the area reported hearing an airplane flying low and then the sound of a loud crash.
The witness subsequently contacted the local authorities, and the airplane was located 1 mile from the airport in a heavily wooded area.
The airplane™s owner reported that he had not given the student pilot permission to use the airplane.
An examination of the airplane did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
The student pilot and two passengers were fatally injured, and the airplane was destroyed.
The airplane was unregistered and was owned by a private individual.
The unauthorized flight was conducted in night, instrument meteorological conditions and no flight plan was filed.
The flight departed from Walker County Airport-Bevill Field, Jasper, Alabama, at 2235.
Witnesses stated that, on the night of the accident, it was dark and raining.
They heard an airplane flying very low and, shortly thereafter, they heard a loud crash.
The witnesses called the local authorities and reported that the airplane had crashed.
According to the airport manager/instructor, the student pilot worked as a cleanup person at the airport in trade for flight lessons.
The airport manager said that the student pilot completed 10 hours of dual instruction and a solo flight on April 27, 2012.
He also said that the student pilot received his flight lessons in a Cessna C-172 airplane.
The student pilot completed two other supervised solos before enrolling at the Wallace State Community College aviation program.
He continued coming to the airport and doing odd jobs for various airplane owners in exchange for rides.
The airport manager and had no knowledge of the student ever taking any other lessons.
The owner of the airplane stated that he knew the student pilot from seeing him around the airport.
He went on to say that he never gave permission to the student pilot to fly his airplane.
He said that the student pilot did not have a key for his airplane, and it was not kept locked.
On the night of the accident, the owner was informed that his airplane was missing from the airport.
When he arrived at the airport, he verified that his airplane was missing and reported that it was last seen on December 23, 2012.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the student pilot made no contact with air traffic control facilities prior to the accident, and there were no known radio transmissions.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION The pilot, age 17, held a student pilot certificate and reported a total of 6 hours of flight time in the last 6 months as of the exam dated February 28, 2012.
The student pilot was issued a class 3 medical certificate with limitations for corrective lenses.
Review of FAA records did not reveal any other certifications other than the student pilot certificate.
A review of copies of the student pilot's logbook revealed that he had accumulated total of 15.5 flight hours as of September 16, 2012.
The logbook showed that, on April 27, 2012, he was signed off on his first solo flight.
On August 26, 2012, he was signed off for the private pilot knowledge test, but there are no records of him taking the test.
The student pilot's logbook did not show any entries or endorsements related to multi-engine, night, or instrument flights.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION The four-seat, low-wing airplane, serial number 30-785, was manufactured in 1965.
It was powered by two Lycoming model IO-320-B1A 160-hp engines equipped with Hartzell HC- E2YL-2BS hubs and F7663-4 blades.
Review of copies of maintenance logbook records showed an annual inspection was completed August 13, 2012, at a recorded airframe total time of 1369.5 hours and a total time of 5160.6 hours.
A witness reported that there was fog and mist in the area at the time of the accident.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION The airplane was found in heavily wooded area about 1 mile southwest from JFX.
The fuselage of the airplane came to rest on a course of 050 degrees magnetic.
The cockpit and cabin were crushed and fragmented.
The nose gear assembly was broken away from the fuselage and located along the debris path.
The instrument panel and instruments were impact damaged.
The empennage remained attached to the fuselage and was buckled.
The vertical and horizontal stabilizers were still attached and buckled.
The rudder and elevators remained attached to the flight surfaces at the attachment points, and the respective flight control cables were connected.
The left and right aileron cables were broken in overstress, and the ends of the cables remained attached to their respective bellcranks.
Flight control continuity was established from the flight controls to the flight control surfaces.
The left and right fuel selectors were found in the on position.
The right wing was attached to the fuselage at the wing root, and the outboard section was fragmented throughout the debris path.
The right engine was broken away from the wing nacelle and was impact damaged.
The right main fuel tanks were breached, and the fuel caps were secured to the wing.
The main landing gear assembly was broken away from the wing and was located on the debris path in the extended position.
The left wing was attached to the fuselage at the wing root, and the outboard section extending past the engine nacelle was fragmented throughout the debris path.
The engine remained attached to the wing nacelle and was impact damaged.
The left main fuel tanks were breached, and the fuel caps were secure.
The left main landing gear was found in the extended position.
Examination of both engines revealed that the propellers remained attached to the hubs.
Both propeller blade assemblies displayed "S" bending and scoring throughout the blade spans.
There was evidence of propeller blade cuts on tree branches throughout the accident site.
The branches measured approximately 4-inches in diameter and were found within the debris path severed cleanly in diagonal linear patterns.
There were no discrepancies noted that would have precluded normal operation of both propeller blade assemblies.
Both engines remained attached to their respective wings, and each showed crush damage.
Examination of both engines did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION An autopsy was performed on the student pilot on January 3, 2013, by the Alabama Department of Forensic Sciences, Huntsville, Alabama.
The autopsy findings included blunt force injuries, and the report listed the specific injuries.
The cause of death was reported as three of the listed injuries.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
The toxicology report stated no ethanol was detected in the liver or the muscle, and no drugs were detected in the liver.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION A review of video footage retrieved from the airport security camera showed that, on the night of the accident, an airplane is seen taxiing on the ramp at a high rate of speed to the active runway.
As the airplane departs the strobes lights are seen reflecting off of the runway and continue up into a low cloud ceiling.
The strobes are then seen pulsating in the clouds before being lost from the camera's view.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85922
