During the initial climb after takeoff, while executing a dark-night departure, the pilot failed to 
maintain clearance from rising terrain about one and one-quarter mile off the end of the 
runway. Operator records indicated that the pilot had flown out of this airport in the past, and 
that the aircraft was approximately 600 pounds below maximum certificated gross weight at 
the time of departure. A teardown inspection of both engines revealed no pre-impact 
anomalies, and visual and teardown inspections of the propellers showed damage signatures 
consistent with ground contact in a flat pitch under significant power. 
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from the terrain during the initial climb after a night 
takeoff. Factors include a dark night and rising terrain off the departure end of the runway. 
 On June 1, 1997, approximately 2240 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 402C, N1233P, 
impacted the terrain just after takeoff from Rawlins Municipal Airport, Rawlins, Wyoming. The 
airline transport pilot, who was the sole occupant, received serious injuries, and the aircraft, 
which was owned and operated by Casper Air Service, sustained substantial damage. The 14 
CFR Part 135 cargo flight was departing for Riverton, Wyoming, and was being operated in 
visual meteorological conditions on a dark night. The pilot had filed an IFR flight plan.
According to an FAA inspector who arrived at the scene the day after the accident, the aircraft 
impacted 200 foot high terrain about one and one-quarter mile off the end of runway 04, while 
making a VFR dark-night departure. Both propellers made a number of equally-spaced slash 
marks in the surface of the ground, and an inspection of the flight control system continuity 
showed no pre-impact anomalies. Both the flaps and the landing gear were in the up position. 
During the investigation, both engines and both propellers were subjected to teardown 
inspections. Except for impact damage, both engines and their fuel systems exhibited normal 
operational signatures throughout, with all components appearing well lubricated, and all 
magnetos producing a bright blue spark across a seven millimeter spark gap. The propeller 
blade visual inspections and the propeller hub teardown inspections revealed damage 
signatures consistent with ground impact in a flat pitch under significant power. 
Records provided by the operator indicate that the pilot had flown out of this airport in the 
past, and that at the time of departure, the aircraft was approximately 600 pounds below 
maximum certificated gross weight. As of the date of the last investigative interview, the pilot 
has been unable to remember the sequence of events leading up to the crash.
