The pilot was departing in a tailwheel equipped airplane from a runway that was located along 
and above a small creek. A right crosswind of about 8 knots was prevailing at the airport. 
During the takeoff roll, the right wing began to rise. Full right aileron control did not prevent 
the right wing from continuing to rise. The airplane departed off the left edge of the runway 
and became airborne. It then stalled and descended about 75 ft to the ground in a near nose 
level attitude. The airplane received damage to the left wing, fuselage, and landing gear. 
the pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions, and failure to maintain directional 
control of the airplane and runway alignment.  Factors relating to the accident were: the 
crosswind, and the proximity of a creek (ravine) to the runway. 
 On June 1, 1997, about 1825 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Piper PA-22, N3602A, 
crashed during takeoff at the Healy River Airport, Healy, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight when the accident 
occurred.  The airplane, registered to and operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage.  
The certificated private pilot, the sole occupant, received minor injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, Fairbanks Flight Standards District Office 
(FSDO), reported the airplane was departing runway 15.  Skid marks on the runway indicated 
the airplane departed the left side of the runway, down an embankment.  The airplane came to 
rest about 75 feet below the level of the runway.  
On June 3, 1997, at 1345, in a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety 
Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot reported he started the takeoff with a right 
quartering headwind of about 5 knots.  He noticed a dark cloud about 1 mile to the west of the 
airport.  During the takeoff roll, the right wing began to rise.  Full right aileron control could 
not prevent the right wing from continuing to rise.  The airplane was pushed to the left, off the 
edge of the runway.  The airplane then stalled, and descended to the ground in a near nose 
level attitude.  The airplane received damage to the left wing, fuselage, and landing gear.
The closest official weather observation station is Healy, Alaska.  On June 1, 1997, at 1825, an 
Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) was reporting in part:  Wind, 244 degrees 
(magnetic) at 8 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles in light rain showers; clouds, 4,000 feet 
broken, 10,000 feet overcast; temperature, 44 degrees F; dew point, 37 degrees F; altimeter, 
29.55 inHg.
The NTSB pilot/operator report (NTSB form 6120.1/2) was not returned by the pilot.
