The airplane was substantially damaged during landing when the nose gear failed to properly 
extend.  The pilot reported that during touch-and-goes at MDS the nose gear would not extend 
prior to landing. The pilot diverted to MML and conducted a fly-by where ground personnel 
reported that the nose gear tire appeared to be cocked inside the gear well.  The pilot reported 
that several attempts to lower the nose gear were unsuccessful.  The pilot landed in the grass 
adjacent to the runway with the main gear extended and the nose gear retracted.  Post accident 
investigation could not duplicate the problem.  Operational checks of the landing gear 
retraction and extension after the accident were normal.
The failure of the nose gear to properly extend for undetermined reasons, which resulted in 
damage to the forward fuselage during landing.
On October 2, 2006, about 1605 central daylight time, a Piper PA-23-250, N71TA, piloted by a 
flight instructor and dual student, was substantially damaged during landing on runway 12 
(5,010 feet by 100 feet, asphalt) at the Southwest Minnesota Regional Airport (MML), 
Marshall, Minnesota.  The nose gear failed to extend properly prior to landing and attempts to 
use the emergency gear extension system were not successful.  The instructional flight was 
being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  The flight instructor and dual student were not injured.  The flight departed 
Madison Municipal Airport (MDS), Madison, South Dakota, about 1430.
The flight instructor reported to the Federal Aviation Administration that he was on an 
instructional flight with the owner of the airplane who was not rated to fly the aircraft.  The 
instructor and the student were doing touch-and-goes at MDS.  On the fourth landing, the 
retractable nose gear would not extend.  
The instructor wanted ground personnel to get a visual of the gear so he diverted to MML to 
conduct a fly-by.  Ground personnel reported that the nose gear doors were fully open; 
however, the gear remained in the well and the nose gear tire appeared to be cocked.  
Several attempts to lower the gear using emergency extension procedures failed.  The 
instructor reported using the CO2 bottle as a last resort, which also failed to lower the gear.  He 
subsequently decided to land the airplane in the grass adjacent to runway 12 at MML with the 
main gear extended and the nose gear retracted.  The forward fuselage was subsequently 
damaged during the emergency landing.
Post accident investigation conducted by the FAA revealed that when the nose gear assembly 
was turned slightly left the axle bolt area would contact the door structure. There were visible 
nose wheel marks on the right gear door.  Examination also revealed that the gear system 
worked satisfactorily using normal operations as well as the emergency hand pump.
Maintenance records indicated that, five days prior to the accident, during the 100-hour 
inspection, the nose gear was removed, disassembled and reinstalled.  The records also stated 
that the upper nose gear trunnion was repaired at that time.  The records indicated that the 
gear was cycled five times following the repair.  
Maintenance personnel reported that wheel marks were observed on the right nose gear door 
at the time of the 100-hour inspection.
