The pilot reported that he was conducting an aerial application flight. He stated that about half 
way through the third turn-around maneuver a gradual loss of power occurred. He added full 
throttle but did not notice the difference in the engine sound or the power output. He made a 
forced landing into a small field of trees and the airplane collided with the ground. The pilot 
exited the airplane, and an immediate post-crash fire consumed the airplane. Examination of 
the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that all components for flight were located at the 
crash site. An examination of the engine revealed that all of its components were heavily fire 
damaged, and an engine examination could not be facilitated due to the fire damage. Due to 
the engine fire damage the cause of the loss of power could not be determined.
The total loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
On October 4, 2006, at 1815 central daylight time, a Grumman G-164, N493Y, registered to 
and operated by Fayette Flying Service LLC, as a 14 Code of Federal Regulation Part 137 aerial 
application flight, loss full engine power while maneuvering in the vicinity of Somerville, 
Tennessee. The airplane collided with a tree while making a force landing, and was 
substantially damaged by post-crash fire. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan was filed. The private pilot received minor injuries. The flight originated from the 
Fayette County Airport, Somerville, Tennessee, at 1750.
 
The pilot reported that he was conducting an aerial application flight. He stated that about half 
way through the third turn-around maneuver a gradual loss of power occurred. He added full 
throttle but did not notice the difference in the engine sound or the power output. He made a 
forced landing into a small field of trees and the airplane collided with the ground.
 
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that all components for flight were 
located at the crash site. An examination of the engine revealed that all of its components were 
heavily fire damaged, and an engine examination could not be facilitated due to the fire 
damage. A review of the engine logbook pages revealed that the engine was overhauled on July 
27, 2006 at an engine total time of 524.7 hours. After the engine was reinstalled it was run for 
1-hour. The owner of the airplane did not submit the airplane logbooks or records for review to 
the NTSB. 
