The lateral cyclic friction was on prior to departure, and the helicopter landed hard shortly 
after takeoff.   After the pilot's first flight, the helicopter underwent a hot refueling and the 
passengers were loaded onboard for the pilot's second flight.  The pilot performed her 
pretakeoff checklist items, which included releasing the control frictions and performing a 
freedom of control check.  The pilot then demonstrated to the front seat passengers where to 
position their feet by bringing her right foot aft.  She then obtained tower clearance and began 
the takeoff.  During the takeoff, the cyclic was locked and she could not move it.  She attempted 
to control the helicopter using trim but shortly thereafter, the helicopter impacted the ground.  
Upon impact, the pilot reached down and released the lateral cyclic friction.  The Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the lateral cyclic friction system 
installation and operation and noted no mechanical anomalies.  The FAA inspector did note 
that if he brought one foot farther aft than is done in normal operation, an inadvertent 
application of the lateral cyclic friction might result.
Inadvertent application of the lateral cyclic friction, which resulted in a loss of control and 
subsequent hard landing.
On October 2, 2006, at 0930 Hawaiian standard time, an MD Helicopters, Inc., (MDHI) 369E, 
N142MK, experienced cyclic control difficulty during takeoff and landed hard at Hilo 
International Airport, Hilo, Hawaii.  During the accident sequence, the tailboom was bent and 
the right skid collapsed.  K and S Helicopters, Inc., was operating the helicopter as an on-
demand air taxi tour flight under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.  
The commercial pilot and two passengers were uninjured; two passengers sustained minor 
injuries.  The helicopter sustained substantial damage.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a company flight plan was in effect.  The 45-minute local tour flight was 
originating at the time of the accident with a planned return to Hilo.
The pilot submitted a written statement regarding the accident.  On the second flight of the 
day, she had the helicopter refueled without shutting down.  Once the helicopter was refueled, 
the four passengers were loaded onboard.  After the passenger briefing, she removed the 
friction locks and conducted a gauge check.  Then, the pilot showed the front passengers where 
to comfortably rest their feet during the flight so as not to conflict with her access to the radio 
stack.  To do this, the pilot brought her right foot aft, demonstrating to the passengers how to 
position their feet.  After receiving a tower clearance, she entered her squawk code into the 
transponder and applied flight controls to lift the helicopter off the ground.  The cyclic felt 
heavy to the right, so she applied left cyclic trim to even out the flight control forces.  The pilot 
felt the inputs to the cyclic control were normal and began to transition to forward flight.  As 
the helicopter accelerated, more left trim was necessary to maintain coordinated flight.  At this 
point, the pilot indicated that she ran out of left trim.  The helicopter began rolling to the right 
and the pilot attempted to increase left cyclic input to counter the roll.  The helicopter was 
about 5 to 10 feet above ground level when she aborted the takeoff and applied aft cyclic to slow 
the helicopter, but it continued to roll to the right.  The helicopter impacted the ground, and 
the right skid collapsed as the helicopter slid to a stop.  The pilot stated that she reached down 
and released the cyclic friction after impact.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector from the Honolulu Flight Standards District 
Office examined the helicopter on October 11, 2006.  The inspector indicated that the cyclic 
lateral and longitudinal frictions were off and that the cyclic was in a neutral position.  Control 
continuity was obtained through the flight control systems and the trim system functioned 
optimally.  In addition, the one-way lock valve function operated normally.  The inspector 
attempted to simulate bumping the cyclic lateral lock lever to transition it from an unlocked 
position to a locked position.  The inspector noted that when he brought one of his feet aft 
farther than normal, the lever might be inadvertently applied.  According to the inspector, the 
installation of the lateral cyclic lock was in compliance with the Supplemental Type Certificate 
(STC) requirements, and the rotorcraft flight manual supplement required by the STC was 
onboard the helicopter.
