The pilot reported that during the downwind leg for the runway, he performed his "GUMPS" 
check, which included verifying the fuel selector position and extending the landing gear.  The 
pilot lowered the flaps during the base leg.  During the base leg to final approach turn, the pilot 
advanced the mixture lever to full rich, the propeller lever to full forward, and secured his 
seatbelt.  At the time the pilot advanced the mixture and propeller controls, "there wasn't any 
change in the engine noise and the engine RPMs were noted to have fallen to 1,500 RPMs."  At 
some point during the final approach, the engine lost power.  The pilot twice attempted to 
restart the engine, however, the restart was not successful.  The pilot declared an emergency 
and executed a forced landing to the partially vacant parking lot.  During the forced landing, 
the airplane impacted a light pole and three parked vehicles.  Examination of the airframe and 
systems revealed no anomalies.  The engine was functionally tested and did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have prevented normal operation and production of rated horsepower.  
The reason for the loss of engine power was not determined.
the loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.  Contributing factors were the light pole 
and parked vehicles impacted during the forced landing.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 3, 2006, approximately 1805 Mountain daylight time, a Beech 36 single-engine 
airplane, N7855R, sustained substantial damage when it impacted a light pole and three 
unoccupied parked vehicles in a parking lot following a loss of engine power during final 
approach to runway 17L at Centennial Airport (APA), Centennial, Colorado.  The private pilot, 
who was the sole occupant, sustained minor injuries.  The airplane was registered to Baryn 
Properties, Portland, Oregon, and was operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed for the Title 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The flight departed San Jose, California, at 1230 
Pacific daylight time.
According to APA air traffic control tower controller statements, the pilot was initially cleared 
for the instrument landing system (ILS) runway 35R approach to APA.  During the approach, 
the controllers instructed the pilot to cancel the ILS runway 35R approach, due to a shift in the 
wind conditions, and enter a right downwind for runway 17L.  The controller cleared the pilot 
to land the airplane on runway 17L.  Shortly thereafter, the pilot declared an emergency and 
stated he was not going to make it to the runway.
The pilot reported that during the downwind leg for runway 17L, he performed his "GUMPS" 
check, which included verifying the fuel selector position and extending the landing gear.  The 
pilot lowered the flaps during the base leg.  During the base leg to final approach turn, the pilot 
advanced the mixture lever to full rich, the propeller lever to full forward, and secured his 
seatbelt.  At the time the pilot advanced the mixture and propeller controls, "there wasn't any 
change in the engine noise and the engine RPMs were noted to have fallen to 1,500 RPMs."  At 
some point during the final approach, the engine lost power.  The pilot twice attempted to 
restart the engine, however, the restarts were not successful.  The pilot declared an emergency 
and executed a forced landing to the partially vacant parking lot.
During an interview with a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot reported 
that he believed he had pushed the mixture, propeller, and throttle controls forward during his 
GUMP check and did not move the controls after the accident occurred.  The inspector 
informed the pilot that the investigation team noted the fuel boost pump in the off position, 
and the pilot responded, "Well, then it was off for landing."  The inspector asked him why he 
pushed the mixture full rich for landing and the pilot responded, "This engine was turbo 
normalized and that full rich was the proper position for the mixture for landing even at this 
altitude (5,000 feet)...pushing the mixture full rich on this engine doesn't make any difference 
because the engine thinks its at sea level."  The pilot added that the engine did not surge like it 
normally did when he pushed in the mixture to full rich.  When the airplane was lower on final 
approach than the pilot wanted to be, he applied engine power to adjust his glide path.  During 
the engine power application, the pilot realized the engine had failed.   
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with single-engine land and instrument airplane 
ratings.  He held a third-class medical certificate, issued on April 21, 2006, with a limitation for 
corrective lenses.  The pilot's most recent flight review was completed on May 30, 2006, in the 
accident airplane.  According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 
6120.1/2), the pilot reported he had accumulated a total of 3,699.8 hours of flight time, of 
which 3,398.8 hours were in the accident airplane make and model.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The 1969-model Beech 36 airplane, serial number E-134, was a low-wing, retractable landing 
gear, semi-monocoque design airplane. The airplane was powered by a six-cylinder, direct 
drive, air cooled, horizontally-opposed, fuel injected Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) IO-
550-B engine (serial number 296921-R), rated at 300 horsepower, and equipped with a 
McCauley three-bladed constant speed propeller. The airplane was configured to carry a 
maximum of six occupants, and the maximum gross weight for the airplane was 4,000 pounds.
The airplane was issued a standard airworthiness certificate and was certificated for normal 
category operations. The airplane's current registration was issued to the owner on February 4, 
1997.  Review of the maintenance records revealed the most recent annual inspection was 
completed on September 6, 2006, at a total airframe time of 6,428.1 hours and a total engine 
time of 1,338.8 since factory rebuild.  According to the tachometer at the accident site, the 
airplane had accumulated 14.4 hours since the annual inspection.
On November 19, 1999, a Tornado Alley Turbo "Whirlwind" Turbo normalizing System was 
installed in accordance with supplemental type certificate (STC) SA5223NM.       
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1753, the APA automated surface observation system reported the wind from 160 degrees at 
9 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, decreasing rain, broken clouds at 6,000 feet, overcast ceiling 
at 8,000 feet, temperature 12 degrees Celsius, dew point 8 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter 
setting of 30.27 inches of Mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT
The accident site was located in the parking lot of a business complex approximately 1/4 miles 
northwest of the threshold of runway 17L.  A global positioning system (GPS) receiver recorded 
the location as 39 degrees 34:04 minutes north latitude and 104 degrees 50:52 minutes west 
longitude at an elevation .  The main wreckage came to rest upright adjacent to two of the 
parked vehicles.  The outboard 3 feet of the right wing was separated and came to rest near the 
light pole, which collapsed during the initial impact.  The wreckage distribution path (light pole 
to main wreckage) was approximately 125 feet in length and oriented on a measure magnetic 
heading of approximately 180 degrees.
Examination of the main wreckage revealed the airplane impacted the parking lot in a nose low 
attitude.  Flight control continuity was established to all flight control surfaces.  Approximately 
24 gallons of 100 low lead fuel was drained from the left and right wing fuel tanks (12 gallons 
each tank).  The landing gear was found in the extended position, and the flaps were found in 
the full extended position.  Examination of the cockpit revealed the throttle, mixture and 
propeller controls were full forward, the fuel selector was in the left tank position, and the fuel 
pump was in the off position.  The manifold pressure gauge indicated 25 inches and the RPM 
gauge indicated 0.
TEST AND RESEARCH
On March 7, 2007, at the facilities of TCM, Mobile, Alabama, under the supervision of the 
NTSB investigator-in-charge, the engine was examined and functionally tested.  Prior to the 
engine test run, the following items were completed:  fuel control mixture shaft was 
straightened, scat duct was used to connect the throttle and control assembly to the aft cross-
over, a fitting on the oil cooler was replaced, the number 6 cylinder rocker cover was replaced, 
and the starter adapter was replaced.  The cylinders were borescoped and exhibited normal 
operating signatures.  
The first attempt to start the engine resulted in a loss of power without the application of fuel 
boost pump pressure.  Examination revealed that an abnormal amount of fuel was flowing 
from the fuel control fuel return fitting with the mixture control positioned at full rich.  The 
fuel control hose was detached and the fittings were capped.  The engine started on the second 
attempt without hesitation or stumbling observed in the RPM.  The engine RPM was advanced 
in steps for warm-up in preparation for full power operation.  The engine RPM was advanced 
and held for 5 minutes to each of the following RPM settings:  1,200, 1,600, 2,100, and 2,450 
RPM.  The engine throttle was advanced to full open position and held for 5 minutes where it 
sustained rated 2,600 RPM.  The engine was advanced to full throttle from idle 6 times where 
it performed without any hesitation, stumbling or interruption in power.  According to TCM, 
throughout the test phase, the engine operation was normal and did not reveal any 
abnormalities that would have prevented normal operation and production of rated 
horsepower.   
A Tornado Alley Turbo representative conducted a flight in an aircraft with the same engine 
and turbo normalizer configuration as the accident airplane.  During the flight, the pilot leveled 
the airplane at an altitude of 7,500 feet mean sea level.  The pilot applied full throttle, full rich 
mixture, engine set at 2,700 RPM, and the boost pump in the off position.  The pilot then 
reduced the throttle to idle and maintained the 7,500 feet altitude which allowed the engine 
RPM and airspeed to decrease.  Approximately 90 knots, the pilot applied full throttle and the 
engine recovered immediately to full power.  The pilot repeated the process several times with 
the same result.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to the Tornado Alley Turbo Airplane Flight Manual (AFM) Supplement, Section 3.  
Emergency Procedures, Retarding Throttle To Idle, "Retarding the throttle to idle at or near 
full rich mixture setting may cause engine combustion to cease, depending on auxiliary fuel 
pump operation and altitude.  At altitudes below 18,000 feet, merely advancing the throttle 
should cause resumption of normal engine operation..."  
The AFM Supplement Section 4.  Normal Procedures, Before Landing, indicates the following 
procedures:
1.  Seat Belts & Shoulder Harnesses - FASTENED; Seat Backs - POSITION FOR LANDING
2.  Fuel Selector Valve - SELECT FULLER MAIN TANK (feel for detent and visually check)
3.  Fuel Boost Pump - OFF
4.  Cowl Flaps - AS REQUIRED
5.  Mixture - AS REQUIRED FOR ALTITUDE AND THROTTLE SETTING
6.  Landing Gear - DOWN and CHECKED (Check AFM for correct Landing Gear extension 
speed)
7.  Landing Lights - AS REQUIRED
8.  Flaps - DOWN (observe maximum extension airspeeds)
9.  Airspeed - ESTABLISH NORMAL APPROACH SPEED
10.  Propeller - HIGH RPM 
The airplane was released to the owner's representative.
