The flight was loaded with fertilizer and had taken off, when the engine lost power.  The pilot 
made a forced landing, and the airplane's landing gear went into a ditch and separated.  The 
pilot had made 3 previous takeoffs under similar load conditions without incident.  The pilot 
said, 'initially during the takeoff roll the aircraft accelerated normally.'  However, immediately 
after breaking ground, during the initial climbout, the engine began to loose power, and the 
aircraft began to loose lift.  The airplane continued to sink with partial power until impact.  
Examination of the engine revealed no exterior damage.  The engine teardown revealed that 
improper atomization of the fuel resulted in a non-atomized fuel stream at the first-stage 
turbine rotor.  The subsequent atomization and ignition of this fuel resulted in a localized area 
of increased temperature and non-uniform thermal damage to the second- and third-stage 
turbine stators.  The localized area of increased temperature resulted in thermal damage to the 
second- and third-stage turbine rotors, and increased second- and third-stage turbine rotor 
blade tip clearance, rendering the engine incapable of producing full power.  There was no 
evidence that the engine control system components contributed to the loss of engine power 
reported during the accident flight. 
a power loss due to internal damage to the second- and third- stage turbine rotor blades, due to 
thermal heat, rendering the engine incapable of producing full power, resulting in a forced 
landing, and subsequent impact with the terrain. 
 On December 1, 1998, about 1600 eastern standard time, a Grumman-Shweizer G-164B, 
N6630Q, registered to Ag Pilots Inc., impacted with a ditch during a forced landing near Fort 
Gains, Georgia.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time, and no flight plan was 
filed for the 14 CFR Part 137 aerial application flight.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  
The commercial-rated pilot reported no injuries.  The flight was originating at the time.
The flight was loaded with fertilizer and had taken off, when the engine lost power.  The 
pilot made a forced landing, and the airplane's landing gear went into a ditch and separated.  
According to the pilot, "...I had made 3 previous takeoffs under similar load conditions.  I had 
taken on fuel, about 3/4 of a tank, the previous load, and took off without incident....initially 
during the takeoff roll the aircraft accelerated normally.  However, immediately after breaking 
ground, during the initial climbout, the engine began to loose power, and the aircraft began to 
loose lift.  Because of the terrain, at the departure end of the runway, I was forced to make [a] 
right turn of approximately 20 degrees, to avoid [a] collision with tall trees.  The aircraft 
continued to sink with partial power until impact...."
According to the FAA inspector's statement, "...about 100 feet the pilot experienced a 
power loss...[he] veered 20 degrees to the right and landed in a field over-grown with weeds.  
The aircraft struck a small ditch and sheared off the left main landing gear.  The right gear 
folded and the aircraft skidded on its belly to a stop about 100 feet from the impact point.  The 
upper left wing was ruptured and leaking fuel."
The FAA inspectors examined the engine and according to their statement they found 
the following,"...oil quaintly checked normal.  The engine had no exterior damage...found what 
appeared to be a fertilizer residue build up obstructing the first stage compressor intake air 
flow.  The buildup was hard and had not dislodged during the crash impact forces; nor, during 
the aircraft transportation to the storage sight.  The shut down solenoid is electrically and 
mechanically controlled.  It normally should open and close electrically; however, it [would] 
only close mechanically by a lever available to the pilot.  Inspection found the 'electric closed' 
wire to have been cut.  The aircraft powerplant shut-down was reportedly done with the use of 
the mechanical handle.  Additionally, the fuel heat system had been deactivated.  Lines were 
capped off.  The start enrichment system had been deactivated.  One end had been capped and 
the other end crimped.
According to the FAA, examination of the airplane's fuel system revealed, "...the main 
fuel filter was removed for inspection, and found to be contaminated with a substantial amount 
of what appeared to be dirt, scalant (sic); or rust."
On April 1, 1999, the engine from N6630Q was examined under the supervision of the 
FAA at Allied Signal's facilities Phoenix, Arizona.  Examination of the engine revealed that 
improper atomization of the fuel resulted in a non-atomized fuel stream at the first-stage 
turbine rotor.  The subsequent atomization and ignition of this fuel resulted in a localized area 
of increased temperature and non-uniform thermal damage to the second- and third-stage 
turbine stators.  The localized area of increased temperature resulted in thermal damage to the 
second- and third-stage turbine rotors, and increased second- and third-stage turbine rotor 
blade tip clearance, rendering the engine incapable of producing full power.  It was determined 
that the thermal damage to the turbine components occurred prior to the accident flight based 
on oxidation found on the second-stage turbine rotor, and the oxidation found on all damaged 
surfaces of the turbine components.  The ITT (inlet turbine temperature) thermocouple 
assembly was cable of providing an accurate indication of inter-stage turbine temperature to 
the aircraft indication system.  There was no evidence that the engine control system 
components contributed to the loss of engine power reported during the accident flight 
(Excerpts of Allied Signal's teardown report are attachments to this report).
The FAA concurred with the Allied Signal teardown report, and were in agreement that 
the second- and third-stage turbine rotor and stators displayed thermal damage.
