Approximately one hour into the flight, the flight instructor reported that the engine developed 
a rough condition and a reduction in power. Since normal flight could not be maintained, the  
flight instructor selected a field that he believed would be suitable for a forced landing. During 
the landing roll, the flight instructor attempted to avoid a collision with a drainage ditch and 
trees. After the airplane went through several gyrations, it rested180 degrees from the initial 
landing direction. Examination of the engine disclosed that the #2 exhaust valve had failed, 
and pieces if the valve head  were lodged in the cylinder and the exhaust system. The 
examination of the valve revealed that the valve head separated at the valve stem attach point. 
The valve stem remained in a normally installed position, and functioned normally when the 
engine drive train was rotated.  A review of the engine maintenance logs disclosed that this 
engine had a previous exhaust valve failure 931 hours ago.  The exhaust valve Part Number was 
SA-646612. 
The failure of the #2 exhaust valve that resulted in the total loss of engine power. A factor is the 
lack of suitable emergency landing terrain. 
 On December 3, 1998, at 1430 eastern standard time, a Cessna 150, N18022, collided with the 
ground during an emergency landing, near Columbia, North Carolina. The instructional flight 
was operated by the flight instructor under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight 
plan filed. A review of weather data from the nearest reporting facility disclosed that visual 
weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. According to the operator, the 
airframe sustained substantial structural damage. The certified flight instructor and the 
student pilot, were not injured. The local flight departed Manteo, North Carolina, at 1330. 
According to the flight instructor, before the initial takeoff, he and the student pilot completed 
a preflight inspection and a normal engine run-up. The flight instructor reported that after the 
initial takeoff they flew to Elizabeth City, North Carolina, where they made a touch and go 
landing. The flight instructor and student pilot made another touch and go landing at Edenton, 
North Carolina. Approximately one hour into the flight, the flight instructor reported that the 
engine developed a rough condition and a reduction in power. Since normal flight could not be 
maintained, the  flight instructor selected a field that he believed would be suitable for a forced 
landing. During the landing roll the flight instructor attempted to avoid a collision with a 
drainage ditch and trees. After the airplane went through several gyrations, it rested 180 
degrees from the initial landing direction.  
Examination of the engine disclosed that the #2 exhaust valve had failed, and pieces of the 
valve head  were lodged in the cylinder and the exhaust system. The examination of the valve 
revealed that the valve head separated at the valve stem attach point. The valve stem remained 
in a normally installed position, and functioned when the engine drive train was rotated.  A 
review of the engine maintenance logs disclosed that this engine had a previous exhaust valve 
failure 931 hours ago.  The exhaust valve Part Number was SA-646612 (see attached FAA 
inspector's report).
