The pilot reported that he performed a short field approach, had completed his flare with his 
main wheels on the runway when, upon lowering the nose wheel to the runway the airplane 
veered off the left side. The excursion continued into the grass for about 100 feet until collision 
with trees.  Examination of the runway by an FAA Inspector revealed that tire skid marks 
showed at least three separate touchdowns, and that the first touchdown was with the nose 
wheel only. Postcrash examination of the airplane revealed no mechanical malfunctions that 
would cause directional control difficulties. 
The failure of the pilot to use proper short-field landing procedure, resulting in an extended 
flare and touchdown by the nose wheel and right main wheel simultaneously, and the 
subsequent loss of directional control  and collision with trees. 
 On December 2, 1998, about 1400 eastern standard time, a Bellanca 17-30 Super Viking, 
N4789V, registered to Carolina Investigative Services, Inc., operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight, crashed on landing at Montgomery County Airport, Star, North Carolina. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  The airplane was 
substantially damaged, and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  The 
flight originated from Johnston County Airport, Smithfield, North Carolina, about 1340.
The pilot stated that he made a steep, short field approach at about 105 mph onto the 
runway, described as having trees on each end. He stated his landing touchdown felt normal 
with the nosewheel lined up on the centerline of runway 20, until he eased the nosewheel to the 
runway, at which time the airplane took a sudden and violent veer to the left, and off the 
runway, into a tree line. He also stated that when he hit the trees, he was doing about 90 mph. 
The collision sheared both wings and collapsed the nose landing gear strut.  The pilot stated 
"no" to the question of any mechanical malfunction, and he stated that winds were not a factor 
in the accident.
Examination of the airplane by the pilot's personal A&P mechanic and the airport 
manager revealed no mechanical malfunctions of the rudder pedals, the braking system, the 
nose gear steering system, or any components of the nose landing gear.  The rudder control 
path was checked for obstructions to full travel that may have interfered with the nose gear 
steering movement, but nothing was found.
Examination of the accident site and the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that a 
single skid mark made by the nosewheel began about 1,000 feet down the 3,500-foot runway, 
about 2 feet left of centerline. About 71 feet further down the runway, both main wheels left a 
skid mark. About 58 feet further, the left main and the nosewheel left a simultaneous skid 
mark.  About 64 feet further, another nosewheel and right main wheel simultaneous skid mark 
began and continued in a left turn for about 60 to 80 feet until departing the left runway edge 
at about a 40-degree angle to the runway.  The excursion continued for about 100 feet until the 
airplane collided with trees. The collision sheared both wings from the airframe and forced the 
nose landing gear back up into its wheel well. The airplane's path up to the trees indicated all 
landing gear were down, all three tires were tracking straight with no wobble or shimmy, and 
all three tires were inflated.  The path showed no plowing or uprooting of the grass or terrain.
