The pilot reported the engine lost power while in the traffic pattern after having flown two 
hours.  The airplane was landed in a field during which time the right main landing gear 
collapsed.  Post accident inspection revealed the left fuel tank was full of fuel and the right fuel 
tank was empty.  A post accident test run of the engine failed to reveal any anomalies.  The 
pilot reported that he did not switch fuel tanks in a timely manner during the flight. 
the pilot's inattention to fuel management in that he failed to switch fuel tanks in a timely 
manner which resulted in fuel starvation.  A factor related to the accident was the low altitude 
at which the loss of engine power occurred. 
 On December 1, 1998, at 1650 eastern standard time, a Piper PA- 28-181, N36700, operated by 
a private pilot collided with the terrain during an off airport forced landing 2 miles east of the 
Jewett Airport, Mason, Michigan.  The pilot reported the forced landing was a result of a loss of 
engine power.  The pilot was not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR 
Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.  The flight originated 
from Muskegon, Michigan.
The pilot departed Mason, Michigan, at 1445 est and flew to Muskegon, Michigan, where he 
made a touch and go landing prior to heading back to Mason.  The pilot reported that while at 
1,800 feet, on base leg for landing on runway 27 at the Jewett Airport, the engine lost power.  
The pilot landed the airplane in an open field during which time the right main landing gear 
collapsed.  
Post accident inspection of the airplane revealed the right fuel tank was empty and the left fuel 
tank was full.  The airplane had been refueled prior to departing Mason, Michigan.  The hobbs 
time at departure was 3260.5 and the hobbs time noted at the accident site was 3262.5.  Each 
fuel tank holds 24 gallons of usable fuel.  According to an Inspector from the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) Belleville, Michigan, Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), this 
airplane uses approximately 10.5 gallons per hour.  The airplane was removed from the 
accident site and the engine was started using the left fuel tank.  He reported, "Although high 
power was not attempted, the engine ran satisfactorily." 
In a written statement to the FAA, the pilot stated, "I believe that the right fuel tank was not 
switched in a timely manner which led to the fuel starvation to the engine and the eventual 
forced landing."
