The flight was at 4,000 feet when Air Traffic Control gave the crew a traffic report.  The crew 
could not locate the traffic, because at the time they were flying in instrument meteorological 
conditions.  About 3 minutes later the crew received a TCAS (traffic collision avoidance system) 
alert to climb.  The flight climbed from 4,000 feet and leveled off at 5,300 feet.  During the 
climb both flight attendants fell.  One flight attendant broke her leg, the other was not injured.  
The flight attendants were standing completing their pre-landing duties when the event 
occurred.  The pilot radioed ATC that he needed to have an ambulance meet the flight when it 
landed.  The flight landed without further incident, and the flight attendant was taken to a local 
hospital. 
an abrupt maneuver in response to a traffic avoidance system alert, resulting in a flight 
attendant falling and breaking a leg. 
 On December 1, 1998, about 1030 eastern standard time, an Aerospatiale ATR-72-212, 
N414WF, registered to AMR Leasing Corporation Inc., and operated by American Eagle Inc., 
had a flight attendant injured while maneuvering, about 30 miles southeast of Fort Lauderdale, 
Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time, and an IFR flight plan was 
filed for the 14 CFR Part 121 scheduled passenger flight.  The airplane was not damaged.  The 
flightcrew of 2, 1 flight attendant, and 48 passengers reported no injuries.  One flight attendant 
was seriously injured.  The flight had departed from Nassau, Bahamas, at 0945.
The flight was at 4,000 feet when Air Traffic Control gave the crew a traffic report.  The 
crew could not locate the traffic, because at the time they were flying in instrument 
meteorological conditions.  About 3 minutes later the crew received a TCAS (traffic collision 
avoidance system) alert to climb.  The flight climbed from 4,000 feet and leveled off at 5,300 
feet.  During the climb both flight attendants fell.  One flight attendant broke her leg, the other 
was not injured.  The flight attendants were standing completing their pre-landing duties when 
the event occurred.  The pilot radioed ATC that he needed to have an ambulance meet the flight 
when it landed.  The flight landed without further incident, and the flight attendant was taken 
to a local hospital.
