The pilot of the high wing tailwheel equipped airplane lost control of the airplane after 
impacting a powerline that was suspended 30 feet above the ground. Witnesses near the 
accident site observed the airplane maneuvering at low altitude prior to the accident. A nearby 
resident reported to law enforcement officers that he heard the sound of the airplane engine 
flying near his residence. The resident reported that the sound of the engine stopped about the 
same time that his home lost electrical power. The resident went outside and found that the 
single powerline servicing his home was down on the ground. The remains of the wood and 
fabric airplane came to rest on a southerly heading, about 200 feet beyond the point where the 
wire was severed. The commercial pilot was occupying the front seat of the 2-seat tandem 
airplane. Flight control continuity was established to all flight surfaces. Likewise, continuity 
was established to all engine controls. Fuel was found at the site and there was no fire. 
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the powerline while maneuvering. 
 On December 2, 1998, approximately 1425 central standard time, a Holiman Pietenpol 
Aircamper homebuilt airplane, N396S, was substantially damage upon collision with a power 
line while maneuvering near England, Arkansas.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the 
airplane, was seriously injured.  The experimental airplane was owned and operated by the 
pilot/builder under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
throughout the area for the local personal flight.  The flight originated from the Saline County 
Airport, in Benton, Arkansas, approximately 30 minutes prior to the accident. 
According to witnesses near the accident site, the high wing tailwheel equipped airplane was 
observed maneuvering at low altitude in the vicinity of the accident.  A nearby resident 
reported to law enforcement officers that he heard the sound of the airplane engine flying near 
his residence.  The resident reported that the sound of the engine stopped about the same time 
that his home lost electrical power.  The resident went outside and observed that the single 
powerline servicing his home was down on the ground and the remains of the wood and fabric 
airplane came to rest on a southerly heading, approximately 200 feet beyond the point where 
the wire was severed.  The property owner estimated that the severed power line was 
suspended about 30 feet above the ground.   
The 74 year old commercial pilot was occupying the front seat of the 2-seat tandem airplane.  
He was reported to have been hospitalized for over 2 months as result of injuries sustained.  In 
a statement to his daughter, who completed the attached NTSB Form 6120.1/2, the pilot stated 
that he did not have any recollection about the flight or the accident.  
Examination of the wreckage by the FAA inspector who traveled to the accident site revealed 
that the fuselage and both wings sustained structural damage.  The inspector further noted 
continuity to all flight controls.  Likewise, continuity was established to all engine controls.  
Fuel was found at the site and there was no fire.
