National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LAWRENCE, MA
Accident Number: NYC99LA086
Date & Time: 04/02/1999, 0856 EST
Registration: N66162
Aircraft: Cessna 172P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis After a dual instructional flight, the student pilot (SP) departed for his first solo flight.
The SP was attempting a touch and go landing, when the airplane's nose wheel contacted the runway, and the airplane bounced back up into the air.
The airplane bounced two to three times, and it's propeller struck the runway.
The airplane came to rest on the runway.
Examination of the airplane did not reveal evidence of any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions of the airframe or engine.
The airplane's nose gear had been driven up into the fuselage, damaging the firewall.
The SP reported 35 hours of total flight experience, of which, 24 hours were in the past 90 days.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's improper flare, and his improper recover from a bounced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On April 2, 1999, about 0856 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172P, N66162, was substantially damaged while landing at the Lawrence Municipal Airport, Lawrence, Massachusetts.
The certificated student pilot (SP) was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the local instructional flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the CFI, after a dual flight lesson, which included touch and go landings, balked landings, and go-arounds, he felt the SP was ready for his first solo flight.
The SP stated his intent was to perform a touch and go landing, and then a landing to a full stop.
The CFI observed the flight from the ground.
He stated the airplane entered the traffic pattern for runway 5, and the SP's approach seemed very standard and normal.
He further stated: "...the flare and round out seemed a little flat.
The nose wheel of the aircraft made contact with the runway, this caused the aircraft to porpoise back up into the air.
The oscillations got worse and worse until finally the propeller made contact with the runway.
I estimate about three bounces before the [propeller] struck the runway."
The airplane came to rest on the runway.
The SP stated he believed he landed a "little too fast," which caused the airplane to balloon, and bounce.
Examination of the airplane by an FAA Inspector did not reveal evidence of any pre- impact mechanical malfunctions of the airframe or engine.
The airplane's nose gear had been driven up into the fuselage, damaging the firewall.
The SP reported 35 hours of total flight experience, of which, 24 hours were in the past 90 days.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 43, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
