National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Stockton, CA
Accident Number: WPR11LA423
Date & Time: 09/01/2011, 1840 PDT
Registration: N205PJ
Aircraft: ARROW FALCON EXPORTERS INC
UH-1H
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis During cruise flight, the pilot noted a fluctuation in the engine oil pressure followed by the illumination of the red warning light indicating low oil pressure.
He performed a precautionary landing, and at 10 feet above ground level, the engine lost total power.
The helicopter subsequently landed hard on uneven terrain and rolled onto its left side.
Postaccident examination of the engine revealed that a gear tooth on the starter-generator drive gear had separated.
The separated tooth jammed the accessory gear drive train, which resulted in the failure of the engine oil pump and subsequent catastrophic engine failure due to oil starvation.
The reason for the failure of the gear tooth could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A total loss of engine power due to the separation of a tooth from the starter-generator drive gear, which resulted in failure of the engine oil pump and subsequent oil starvation.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant, received minor injuries.
P.J.
Helicopters, Red Bluff, California, was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country repositioning flight, which had originated from Tracy, California, about 10 minutes before the accident.
A company visual flight rules flight plan was on file and had been activated.
The pilot stated that, while in cruise flight, he noted a fluctuation in the engine oil pressure followed by the illumination of the red warning light indicating low oil pressure.
As he was performing a precautionary landing, about 10 feet above ground level, the engine had a total loss of power.
The helicopter subsequently landed hard on uneven terrain, and rolled onto its left side.
Postaccident teardown examination of the engine, which was conducted under the supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, revealed that a gear tooth on the starter- generator drive gear had separated.
The separated tooth jammed the accessory gear drivetrain, which resulted in the failure of the engine oil pump and led to catastrophic engine failure due to oil starvation.
The reason for the failure of the gear tooth was not determined.
