National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Loveland, CO
Accident Number: GAA17CA131
Date & Time: 02/05/2017, 1555 MST
Registration: N4853U
Aircraft: CESSNA T210
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that the airplane was low and that he felt "rushed" during final approach.
He added that, during the landing roll, the airplane "started to veer off the runway," so he applied power to abort the landing and that, during the aborted landing, he "pulled back" on the yoke.
The airplane then aerodynamically stalled and impacted grass left of the runway and then nosed over.
The fuselage, left wing, and vertical stabilizer sustained substantial damage.
The pilot reported that there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's exceedance of the airplane's critical angle of attack during an attempted go-around, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall.
Many stall accidents result when a pilot is momentarily distracted from the primary task of flying, such as while maneuvering in the airport traffic pattern, during an emergency, or when fixating on ground objects.
An aerodynamic stall can happen at any airspeed, at any altitude, and with any engine power setting.
Pilots need to be honest with themselves about their knowledge of stalls and preparedness to recognize and handle a stall situation.
Training can help pilots fully understand the stall phenomenon, including angle-of-attack (AOA) concepts and how weight, center of gravity, turbulence, maneuvering loads, and other factors can affect an airplane's stall characteristics.
The stall characteristics may be different in each type of airplane, so learn them before you fly.
The stall airspeeds marked on the airspeed indicator (for example, the bottom of the green arc and the bottom of the white arc) typically represent steady flight speeds at 1G at the airplane's maximum gross weight in the specified configuration.
Maneuvering loads and other factors can increase the airspeed at which the airplane will stall.
For example, increasing bank angle can increase stall speed exponentially.
Reducing AOA by lowering the airplane's nose at the first indication of a stall is the most important immediate response for stall avoidance and stall recovery.
This may seem counterintuitive at low altitudes, but is a necessary first step.
See http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_019.pdf for additional resources.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents.
Note that this should not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations (FARs).
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Adam M Gerhardt Adopted Date: 04/04/2017 Additional Participating Persons: Mike Burton; FAA; Denver, CO Publish Date: 04/04/2017 Note: This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94694
