The pilot attempted a takeoff in the homebuilt airplane.  During the takeoff roll, the airplane 
veered off the left side of the runway, struck runway lights, and went into a creek.  A post-
accident examination of the airplane revealed that it was equipped with a free-castoring nose 
wheel and motorcycle brakes.  It was found that the left brake dragged due to a lack of 
clearance between the brake pad and brake rotor.  The lack of clearance was attributable to the 
design of the brakes and their adaptation from a motorcycle to an airplane.
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control.  A factor was the inadequate brake system 
installed on the airplane.
On May 1, 2004, about 1130 eastern daylight time, a homebuilt VM-1 Esqual, N626EA, was 
substantially damaged during an attempted takeoff from Cambridge Municipal Airport (CDI), 
Cambridge, Ohio.  The certificated private pilot received minor injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the local personal flight, conducted 
under 14 CFR Part 91.   
According to the pilot, he attempted to take off from runway 22.  After he set the throttle to 
takeoff power, the airplane "started pulling abruptly to the left."  The pilot applied "strong right 
rudder," in an effort to counteract the turning, but to no avail.  The airplane then veered off the 
left side of the runway, struck runway lights, and went into a creek.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane after the accident 
and submitted a Service Difficulty Report (SDR).  According to the report, the airplane was 
equipped with a free-castoring nose landing gear and was configured to use motorcycle brakes 
on the main landing gear.  A post-accident examination of the brakes revealed that the right 
brake operated normally; however, the left brake dragged due to a lack of clearance between 
the brake pad and the brake rotor.  The lack of clearance was attributable to the design of the 
brakes and their adaptation from a motorcycle to an airplane.
