The commercial certificated pilot was departing a remote gravel runway, located adjacent to a 
rocky beach, on an on-demand air taxi flight.  The airplane was equipped with a short takeoff 
and landing (STOL) modification.  The STOL installation droops the ailerons about 16 degrees 
as the flaps are extended. The pilot said he lowered the airplane flaps to 20 degrees and applied 
full power for a short field takeoff with the control yoke aft.  As the airplane gained speed, the 
pilot said the nose of the airplane rotated to about 10 degrees above the horizon, and the main 
landing gear tires lifted off the runway surface.  About 3 feet above the runway, the airplane 
suddenly rolled to the left.  The pilot applied right aileron and right rudder to stop the roll, 
without affect.  The left wingtip collided with small rocks along the beach about 800 feet from 
the beginning of the runway, and the airplane swerved about 30 degrees to the left.  The 
airplane came to rest on a rocky beach, about 150 degrees to the left of the runway centerline.  
The pilot said the engine was producing power throughout the event.  He did not report any 
aileron control problem.  Postaccident photographs of the accident scene and the airplane 
revealed that the left wing was bent upward at the tip.  The right wing was bent upward about 
midspan.  A view of the aft side of the airplane revealed that the left wing flap was extended 
slightly.  The right wing flap was extended about one-half of its range.  The airplane was 
recovered by insurance and company personnel, and transported to the operator's facility.  The 
wings, rudder, horizontal stabilizer, and the elevator were removed for transport.  Postaccident 
examination of the wings by the NTSB investigator-in-charge revealed no observed mechanical 
malfunction of the internal flap and aileron control mechanism within each wing.  Since the 
wings were removed for recovery, the rigging of the aileron and flap cables could not be 
established.  The right front seat passenger was recording the flight on a hand-held video 
recorder.  Review of a copy of the video tape revealed that the airplane was taxied at a fast pace 
toward the departure end of the runway.  The airpane made a rolling "U" turn, did not slow or 
stop, and the pilot applied full power.  As the airplane lifed off, it almost immeditely rolled to 
the left and collided with the ground.  The video does not record any sound of a stall warning 
horn, or a view of the flap handle position.  The elapsed time from application of full power for 
takeoff, until the left wing collided with the ground, was about 17 seconds.  Following the 
accident, additional video from the passenger's camera recorded the position of the airplane at 
the point of rest.  The video showed that the left flap appeared to be slightly extended.  The 
Page 2 of 8ANC04LA050
right flap appeared extended about one-half of its normal travel.
A loss of directional control for an undetermined reason during takeoff-initial climb, which 
resulted in the left wing colliding with the ground.
History of the Flight
On May 2, 2004, about 1340 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire-equipped Cessna U206F 
airplane, N35860, sustained substantial damage when it collided with rocky terrain during 
takeoff initial climb from the English Bay Airport, Nanwalek, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 
135, when the accident occurred.  The airplane was operated by Smokey Bay Air Inc., Homer, 
Alaska.  The commercial certificated pilot, and the four passengers, were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and VFR company flight following procedures were in 
effect for the flight to Homer.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on May 2, the director of operations for the operator reported that 
the airplane was departing runway 01 at Nanwalek.  During the takeoff, the airplane collided 
with rocky terrain adjacent to the left side of the runway.  The nose gear collapsed, and the 
airplane received damage to the wings, engine, and landing gear.   Prior to the accident, the 
pilot had conducted two previous flights to Nanwalek.
On May 3, during a telephone conversation with the NTSB IIC, the pilot reported that the 
airplane was equipped with a Robertson Short Takeoff and Landing (STOL) modification.  He 
said he lowered the airplane flaps to 20 degrees, and applied full power for a short field takeoff 
with the control yoke aft.  As the airplane gained speed, the nose rotated to about 10 degrees 
above the horizon, and the main landing gear tires lifted off the runway surface.  The pilot said 
about 3 feet above the runway, the airplane suddenly rolled to the left.  He applied right aileron 
and right rudder to stop the roll, without affect.  The left wingtip collided with small rocks and 
beach, about 800 feet from the beginning of the runway, and the airplane swerved about 30 
degrees to the left.  The nose gear then collided with a large boulder, separating the nose wheel.  
The airplane came to rest on a rocky beach, about 150 degrees to the left of the runway 01 
centerline.  The pilot said the engine was producing power throughout the event.  He did not 
indicate any problem with the aileron controls.
Postaccident photographs of the accident scene and the airplane were taken by law 
enforcement personnel from the Alaska State Troopers about 1800.  These photos were 
reviewed by the NTSB IIC.  The photographs depicted the airplane on the beach area, adjacent 
to the runway, after the airplane was pulled upslope, out of the tidal waters of the bay by 
residents of Nanwalek.  The photographs revealed that the left wing was bent upward at the tip.  
The right wing was bent upward about midspan.  The right horizontal stabilizer and elevator 
was bent downward about midspan.  The right main landing gear strut was bent downward, 
and the right main wheel assembly was bent outward about 45 degrees at the top of the wheel.  
A view of the aft side of the airplane revealed that the left wing flap was extended slightly. The 
right wing flap was extended about one-half of its range.  A view of the instrument panel 
revealed the flap lever was up, and the flap position indicator was 10 degrees.
Weather Information
The pilot indicated that the weather conditions consisted of patchy low fog next to the 
mountains, a sky condition of 1,500 feet overcast, temperature 42 degrees F, and the wind was 
270 degrees at 3 knots.
The closest official weather observation station is Seldovia, Alaska, which is located 8 nautical 
miles northeast of the accident site.  At 1353, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) 
was reporting in part: Wind, variable at 4 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky 
condition, 500 feet overcast; temperature, 45 degrees F; dew point, 43 degrees F; altimeter, 
29.90 inHg.
Airplane information
The airplane is equipped for the installation of floats, and was equipped with a belly-mounted 
cargo pod.  The flap actuator and flap position indicator have indices for flaps up, 10 degrees, 
20 degrees, and full flaps.  In addition, the airplane is required to have a placard that states, 
"Floatplane Max Flaps 30 degrees."
The airplane's flap mechanism consists of a flap motor that utilizes a jackscrew to extend the 
right flap.  The left flap is connected to the right via cable to a bellcrank, then to a push-pull 
rod.  As the right flap is extended or raised, the left flap extends or raises the same amount.
Robertson Aircraft STOL Information
The Robertson STOL modification to the airplane was installed on April 18, 1977.  The 
modification consists of a leading edge cuff on each wing, and additional bellcranks and push-
pull tubes that droop the ailerons as the wing flaps are extended.  The following is the 
Robertson flap and aileron position data:
When the flaps are up, the normal aileron travel is 14 degrees down, and 20 degrees up (all 
values are plus or minus 2 degrees).  When the flaps are extended to 25 degrees, the aileron 
droops to 16 degrees, and the aileron travel is 28 degrees down, and 3 degrees up.  When the 
flaps are extended to 30 degrees, the aileron droops to 15 degrees, and the aileron travel is 26 
degrees down, and 4 degrees up.  When the flaps are extended to 40 degrees, the aileron 
droops to 13 degrees, and the aileron travel is 25 degrees down, and 5 degrees up.  
The Robertson owner's manual supplement contains information for "normal" operation, and 
"STOL" operation.  The owner's manual describes "normal" operation as specifically tailored 
for the average pilot who desires increased safety margins, utility, and peace of mind.  "STOL" 
operation is described for use by the experienced pilot when emergency conditions or 
operation into austere fields require the utmost from the aircraft, consistent with safety.  The 
manual states, in part, that a "normal" takeoff consists of:  "Flaps, 20 degrees; power, full 
throttle and 2,850 rpm; elevator control, lift nose wheel at 55 mph; accelerate to 70 mph over a 
50 foot obstacle."
A "STOL" takeoff consists of, in part:  "Flaps, 25 degrees (Note: to set flaps to 25 degrees, 
ignore detents on flap position indicator selector switch and observe aileron as flaps are being 
lowered.  With control wheel centered, continue lowering flap until aileron has reached 
maximum droop and just started back up.) Brakes, set; power, full throttle and 2,850 rpm; 
Brakes, release; elevator control, lift nose at 50 mph; accelerate to 55 mph over a 50 foot 
obstacle."
According to the Robertson owner's manual supplement, at gross weight, the power off stall 
speed with flaps up is 67 mph; at 20 degrees of flaps, the stall speed is 58 mph; at 40 degrees of 
flaps, the stall speed is 55 mph.
Airplane Examination
The airplane was recovered by company and insurance company personnel and transported to 
Homer, Alaska.  The wings were removed during the recovery process, which included 
disassembly of the aileron and flap control cables.  During the recovery process, recovery 
personnel photographed the airplane before disassembly.  Utilizing the photographs taken by 
recovery personnel before removal of the wings, and referencing the position of the flaps to the 
fuselage, the NTSB IIC estimated that when the photographs were taken by recovery personnel, 
the left flap was extended about 7 degrees, and the right flap was extended about 24 degrees.
On May 18, the wings and fuselage were examined in Homer by the NTSB IIC.  Prior to the 
examination, all of the wing inspection panels and access plates were removed by company 
maintenance personnel.  The examination revealed the right wing was bent upward about 80 
degrees at the outboard end of the flap.  The right aileron was wrinkled and bent upward at the 
outboard attach point.  The outboard end of the right flap was bent downward about 45 
degrees, and the outboard flap track assembly was fractured.  Examination of the right flap 
actuator revealed that it was extended about 5 inches, or 32 threads.  According to the 
manufacturer, extension of the flap actuator corresponds to about 26 degrees of flap extension.  
The director of maintenance for the operator reported that during recovery and removal of the 
wing for transport, he activated the flap motor in a downward direction for a few seconds to 
facilitate the removal process.  Examination of the internal flap and aileron control mechanism 
within the right wing revealed no observed mechanical malfunction. 
The left wing was bent upward about 3 feet inboard from the wingtip, accompanied by diagonal 
scratches.  The left aileron had upward curling about 12 inches inboard from the wingtip with 
diagonal scratches along the underside.  The underside of the left aileron had midspan tearing 
of the skin surface adjacent to the aileron droop push-pull tube.  This was accompanied by 
over-travel bending consistent with deflection of the aileron in a downward direction.  The rod 
end bearing for the aileron droop mechanism, at the inboard extension bellcrank attach point, 
was broken consistent with overload signatures.  Examination of the internal flap and aileron 
control mechanism within the left wing revealed no observed mechanical malfunction.
Continued examination of the left wing revealed a metal rivet bucking bar within a space 
formed by the leading edge skin and the forward spar, between wing station 118.0 and 136.0.  
The spanwise space for the location of the slightly rusted bar was formed by chordwise nose 
ribs that each have lightening holes in the vertical web of the each rib.  Just inboard from the 
nose rib at wing station 118.0 is a pulley for the left aileron.  Visual examination of the internal 
space containing the bucking bar was conducted by using a flashlight and mirror.  The 
examination revealed scuffing of the primer paint.  No denting, bending, or signs of 
impingement were observed along the edges of the lightening hole, nor were there any signs of 
damage to the aileron roller.  
Since the wings were removed for recovery, rigging of the aileron and flap cables could not be 
verified, other than to note that they were not separated or broken.
An examination of the instrument panel revealed that the flap handle was in the down position.  
The flap indicator was in the up position.  A placard was affixed to the instrument panel 
adjacent to the flap indicator which stated:  "Floatplane Max Flaps 30 degrees."
Video Information
The right front seat passenger was recording the flight on a hand-held video recorder.  The 
video tape, which included the accident event, was provided to the NTSB IIC, and was 
submitted the NTSB Recorder Laboratory.  The Recorder Laboratory copied the video and 
returned it to the NTSB IIC.  Review of a copy of the video tape revealed that the passenger 
predominately captured views toward the right front portion of the airplane.  The video 
revealed that prior to takeoff, the airplane was taxied at a fast pace toward the departure end of 
the runway.  The airplane made a rolling "U" turn, did not slow or stop, and the pilot applied 
full power. A view of the right aileron during the takeoff roll does not reveal any obvious droop 
to the aileron.  The right flap position is not captured on the video.  As the airplane lifted off the 
ground, it almost immediately rolled to the left with subsequent collision with the ground.  The 
video does not record any sound of a stall warning horn, or a view of the flap handle position.  
The elapsed time from application of full power for takeoff, until the left wing collided with the 
ground, was about 17 seconds.
Following the accident, additional video from the passenger's camera recorded the position of 
the airplane at the point of rest.  The video showed that the left flap appeared to be slightly 
extended.  The right flap appeared extended about one-half of its normal travel.
The original video and a copy provided to the NTSB IIC, was returned to the owner.
