National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PROSPERITY, PA
Accident Number: NYC01LA029
Date & Time: 11/02/2000, 1200 EST
Registration: N35241
Aircraft: Cessna 177B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While performing maneuvers, at an altitude of about 2,500 feet above the ground, the pilot heard a loud "pop," and the engine lost all power.
The pilot made a forced landing to a field, where the airplane struck a fence, before coming to rest in briar bushes.
When the airplane's dual magneto system was examined, both sets of points remained closed, regardless of the camshaft position.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the dual magneto ignition system points to open.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) IGNITION SYSTEM,IGNITION POINTS - OTHER ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On November 2, 2000, about 1200 Eastern Standard Time, a Cessna 177B, N35241, was substantially damaged after a forced landing near Prosperity, Pennsylvania.
The certificated private pilot and pilot-rated passenger received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, he and the passenger were practicing maneuvers, for the commercial pilot practical test.
While at an altitude of about 2,500 feet above the ground, the pilot heard a loud "pop," and the engine lost all power.
The pilot made a force landing to a field.
After touching down in the field, the airplane struck a fence and came to rest in briar bushes.
The pilot did not report any prior mechanical difficulties with the airplane's engine.
The airplane's magneto system, a Teledyne Continental Motors D-3000 Magneto Ignition system, was forwarded to Teledyne Mattituck Services Inc., Mattituck, New York, on January 10, 2001, and examined in the presence of a Federal Aviation Administration inspector.
The inspector observed that both sets of points remained closed, regardless of the cam position, when the magneto system was tested.
The inspector also stated that all securing hardware torque seals were intact and there was no evidence of point adjustment shifting.
A Safety Board investigator examined the magneto system on February 7, 2001.
As the impulse coupling was turned, the lobes of the cam would not push the cam follower far enough to open the points.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
