National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BETHEL, AK
Accident Number: ANC01LA017
Date & Time: 11/03/2000, 1345 AST
Registration: N7336U
Aircraft: Cessna 207A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The certificated commercial pilot was departing runway 29, from intersection Echo.
He noted that the gravel runway had a light accumulation of heavy, wet snow/slush, and estimated about 1,500 feet of runway remained from intersection Echo.
During the departure roll, the airplane veered to the left, and he applied full right rudder to correct the veer.
He was unable to correct the veer, so he closed the throttle, aborted the takeoff, and applied maximum braking.
The airplane ran off the end of the runway, down an embankment, and struck a chain link fence.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings.
Airport personnel reported that when departing runway 29 from intersection Echo, the published usable runway remaining is 1,350 feet.
The published usable full-length of runway 29, is 1,850 feet.
At the time of the accident winds were reported to be from 093 degrees (magnetic) at 9 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to use all available runway.
Factors associated with the accident were the pilot's inadequate preflight planning/preparation, a short runway, a tailwind, and a slush- covered runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) ALL AVAILABLE RUNWAY - NOT USED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SHORT RUNWAY/LANDING AREA 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SLUSH COVERED ---------- Occurrence #2: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 6.
OBJECT - FENCE Factual Information On November 3, 2000, about 1345 Alaska standard time, a wheel equipped Cessna 207A airplane, N7336U, sustained substantial damage during an aborted takeoff from the Bethel Airport, Bethel, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on- demand cargo flight transporting mail under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was owned by Flight Alaska, Inc., doing business as Yute Air Alaska.
The solo commercial pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company visual flight rules (VFR) flight following procedures were in effect for the flight to Kongiganak, Alaska.
The pilot said that after accepting the alternate runway, he taxied onto runway 29 at intersection Echo.
He said runway 29 was a gravel runway that had a light accumulation of heavy, wet snow/slush, and estimated that he would have about 1,500 feet of runway remaining from intersection Echo.
The pilot said while departing runway 29, the airplane veered to the left, and he applied full right rudder to correct the veer.
He said that he was unable to correct the veer, so he closed the throttle, aborted the takeoff, and applied maximum braking.
The airplane ran off the end of the runway, down an embankment, and struck a chain link fence.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings.
Bethel tower personnel reported that when departing runway 29 from intersection Echo, the published usable remaining runway is 1,350 feet.
In addition, published usable full-length of runway 29, is 1,850 feet.
The closest weather observation station is Bethel.
The pilot submitted a written report to the NTSB dated November 4.
In his written report, the pilot wrote, in part: "After a few hundred feet I could feel the right main gear grabbing.
I let off of the right rudder and it still continued.
I began to drift from centerline, and found myself using more left rudder than right.
Realizing that the right main gear was stuck or frozen, I thrusted my right foot on the right break in hopes of breaking it free.
This maneuver failed so I immediately applied breaks and pulled the throttle to idle."
On November 15, the operator reported that there were no postaccident mechanical anomalies noted with the accident airplane's engine, flight controls, or brakes.
: 3800 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 3 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 16703 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: IO-520-F Registered Owner: FLIGHT ALASKA, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
