National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WALDRON ISLAND, WA
Accident Number: SEA01LA012
Date & Time: 11/02/2000, 1155 PST
Registration: N65923
Aircraft: Cessna 172P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot reported that upon arrival in the area of the private 2,700 foot long, gravel airstrip, he executed a descending 360-degree turn to lose altitude, and then lined up to land to the southeast under light and variable wind conditions.
He reported sequentially lowering the flaps to 30 degrees on the approach and then experienced a rapid descent rate.
The touchdown was reported as within the first third of the runway at 60 knots.
He then applied braking but felt the aircraft was not decelerating adequately.
He then applied heavier braking during which the brakes locked and the aircraft continued off the upwind end of the runway impacting trees.
A commuter pilot who landed at the airstrip about one hour later reported, 'Skid marks were present in the gravel approximately the last 500 feet of the runway to where the aircraft was resting in the trees' and the airstrip was 'not for the inexperienced' pilot.
The landing criteria were based upon no wind, flaps 30 degrees, power off, and maximum braking on a level, dry, paved runway.
No mechanical malfunction of the aircraft's brakes or wheels was noted following the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper distance/speed during the approach, which lead to an overrun during the landing roll and subsequent collision with trees.
A factor was the trees beyond the upwind end of the runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DISTANCE/SPEED - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
The accident occurred at Waldronaire airport, on Waldron, Island, Washington, and both occupants were uninjured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was in effect.
The flight, which was personal, was operated under 14CFR91, and originated from Olympia, Washington, at 1040.
The private pilot reported that upon arrival in the Waldron Island area, he executed a descending 360-degree turn to lose altitude, and then lined up to land to the southeast.
The private airstrip was equipped with a single runway (32/14) which was reported as 2,700 feet in length.
The pilot reported that the landing surface was gravel with turf surrounding the runway and that the winds on landing were light and variable.
He reported sequentially lowering the flaps to 30 degrees on the approach and then experienced a rapid descent rate.
The touchdown was reported as within the first third of the runway at 60 knots.
He then applied braking but felt the aircraft was not decelerating adequately.
He then applied heavier braking during which the brakes locked and the aircraft continued off the upwind end of the runway impacting trees.
The pilot reported that the aircraft's main wheels rolled freely during the recovery from the accident site and that he experienced no brake malfunction.
The pilot was sent NTSB Form 6120.1/2 on November 3, 2000, with a second mailing via certified mail on February 2, 2001 (refer to Attachment USPS I).
No response was received in either case.
The pilot was issued his private pilot certificate on April 23, 1999, and reported a total of 100 hours of flight experience at his last medical examination conducted July 12, 1999.
His total flight time and experience in make and model at the time of the accident was not known.
An inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) telephonically interviewed the pilot on the date of the accident (refer to Attachment RTC I).
Additionally, the FAA inspector telephonically interviewed a commuter pilot who landed at the same airstrip about one hour later.
The commuter pilot reported, "Skid marks were present in the gravel approximately the last 500 feet of the runway to where the aircraft was resting in the trees."
The landing criteria were based upon no wind, flaps 30 degrees, power off, and maximum braking on a level, dry, paved runway.
The operator reported that following the recovery of the aircraft an examination revealed no mechanical malfunction of the aircraft's brakes or wheels.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
