National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Greer, SC
Accident Number: MIA01LA022
Date & Time: 11/01/2000, 1520 EST
Registration: N4041A
Aircraft: Horne Bowers Flybaby
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated his landing touchdown occurred at about the mid-length of the runway at an excessive airspeed, and the aircraft collided with a perimeter fence at the far end of the airstrip.
The accident events were corroborated by the written statement of an eyewitness, and examination of the aircraft by an FAA inspector.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A runway overrun as a result of the pilot's failure to maintain proper approach speed and landing touch down point.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The experimental, amateur-built airplane received substantial damage, and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The flight originated from the same airstrip about 20 minutes before the accident.
According to the pilot, his landing resulted in an extended flare that touched down at about the mid-length point of the 1,800-foot  runway and despite heavy braking on the grassy, down-sloped surface, ran off the runway end and into a fence.
According to an eyewitness to the accident, the flight's first approach resulted in a go- around due to being too high.
The second approach was too fast, resulting in a touchdown beyond the mid-length of the runway.
The aircraft continued beyond the runway end, collided with a perimeter fence, and nosed over into a drainage ditch.
According to an FAA inspector, the accident occurred in the Lake Cunningham area of Greer, South Carolina, at a private airstrip named Flying Few Airfield.
Examination of the aircraft revealed a broken wooden propeller, leading edge damage to the wings, and buckling of the fuselage behind the cockpit.
The pilot stated to him that he may not have closed the throttle all the way on landing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Age: 76, Male Airplane Rating(s): Seat Occupied: Single Other Aircraft Rating(s): Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
