National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WORTH, IL
Accident Number: CHI01LA030
Date & Time: 11/01/2000, 1600 CST
Registration: N169DM
Aircraft: Aviat PITTS S-2B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane impacted the terrain following a loss of engine power.
The pilot reported that he performed a preflight of the airplane with the exception of verifying a chart used to keep track of the fuel on board.
According to the pilot he thought there were 19 gallons of fuel on board, however, 15.2 gallons of the fuel were used on a previous flight.
He reported, "...I misread that part of the calculation."
Fuel exhaustion occurred about 20 minutes after takeoff while at an altitude of 1,050 feet above the ground.
The pilot reported "Approximately 22 seconds later I impacted the ground with a 75' landing distance, measured using step method.
A/C did not roll or tumble, but I was able to keep it upright through the impact.
The speed of impact was approximately 110 mph as I had to avoid a bridge and set it down immediately."
He reported on the form that the accident cold have been prevented "By thorough ground, physical, preflight.
Do not use a chart, without actual in sight ck.
of fuel levels."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate preflight of the airplane and his failure to verify the fuel supply on board, which resulted in fuel exhaustion.
Factors associated with the accident were the low altitude at which the power loss occurred and the lack of suitable terrain given the low altitude.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) FUEL SUPPLY - NOT VERIFIED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 4.
(F) ALTITUDE - LOW 5.
The forced landing was made in a field near 115th and Beloit Avenue in Worth, Illinois.
The pilot was not injured and the airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The flight originated from Kankakee, Illinois, at 1540.
The pilot reported that he performed a preflight of the airplane with the exception of verifying a chart used to keep track of the fuel on board.
According to the pilot he thought there were 19 gallons of fuel on board, however, 15.2 gallons of the fuel were used on a previous flight.
He reported, "...I misread that part of the calculation."
The pilot reported that fuel exhaustion occurred approximately 20 minutes after takeoff.
He was at an altitude of 1,050 feet above the ground.
He reported, "Approximately 22 seconds later I impacted the ground with a 75' landing distance, measured using step method.
A/C did not roll or tumble, but I was able to keep it upright through the impact.
The speed of impact was approximately 110 mph as I had to avoid a bridge and set it down immediately."
The pilot completed an NTSB Form 6120.1/2.
He reported on the form that the accident cold have been prevented "By thorough ground, physical, preflight.
Do not use a chart, without actual in sight ck.
of fuel levels."
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 63, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
