National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RIDGEFIELD, CT
Accident Number: NYC01LA030
Date & Time: 11/02/2000, 1845 EST
Registration: N4654G
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that shortly before takeoff, she switched the airplane's fuel selector from the "right" position to the "both" position.
During the initial climb after takeoff, the airplane's engine experienced momentary roughness followed by a loss of power.
The airplane struck trees, fell to ground and a post crash fire ensued.
The majority of the airplane was consumed in the fire.
A complete teardown of the engine did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical failures.
Examination of the fuel selector revealed its position was approximately 35-degrees counterclockwise from the "both" tanks position, towards the "left" tank position; which would have resulted in a restricted fuel flow.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to verify the airplane's fuel tank selector position, which resulted in a loss of engine power.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION 2.
(C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - NOT VERIFIED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On November 2, 2000, about 1845 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172N, N4654G, was destroyed during a forced landing and post crash fire in Ridgefield, Connecticut, after takeoff from the Danbury Municipal Airport (DXR), Danbury, Connecticut.
The certificated private pilot sustained minor injuries.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the local flight.
The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a telephone interview, the pilot stated that she performed a pre-flight inspection of the airplane, and noted that the airplane's fuel tanks were completely filled.
Additionally, she stated that she drained fuel from the airplane's three drain sources and the fuel was absent of contamination.
She started the engine with the fuel selector positioned to the left wing fuel tank, and switched to the right wing fuel tank just prior to taxi.
She performed an engine run- up, which included a check of the carburetor heat system and then taxied to runway 26 for takeoff with the intention of practicing "touch and go" landings.
After the engine run-up she switch the fuel selector to the "both" position.
The time between the engine run-up and takeoff was "less than 5 minutes."
The pilot described the takeoff as "perfectly normal."
When the airplane was about 450 feet above the ground she glanced at the engine instruments, which were all in the normal range; however, immediately thereafter the airplane's engine experienced momentary roughness followed by a loss of power.
The pilot made a left turn and the airplane descend into treetops and initially came to rest about 12 to 15 feet above the ground.
The airplane then fell to ground and a post crash fire ensued.
The pilot exited the airplane through the front windshield, which was broken during the accident sequence, and the majority of the airplane was consumed in the fire.
The pilot reported 560 hours of total flight experience, with 250 hours in make and model.
Additionally, she stated that she flew the airplane eight days prior to the accident and did not experience any problems.
The airplane's engine also sustained fire damaged.
Both magnetos and the ignition harness were destroyed.
Additionally, the carburetor was destroyed by impact and fire damage.
The engine was retained and forwarded to Textron Lycoming, Williamsport, Pennsylvania, where it was examined under the supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration inspector.
A complete teardown of the engine did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical failures.
The airplane's fuel selector, which was partially melted, was retained and forwarded to the Safety Board's Materials Laboratory, Washington, DC, for further examination.
Examination of the fuel selector revealed its "as received" position was approximately 35-degrees counterclockwise from the "both" tanks position, towards the "left" tank position.
Review of the Airplane Information Manual, Section 4 - Normal Procedures, Before Takeoff Checklist instructed that the fuel selector valve be placed in the "both" position.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
