Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Neillsville, WI
Accident Number:
CEN15LA217
Date & Time:
05/02/2015, 0900 CDT 
Registration:
N8558G
Aircraft:
CESSNA 150F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot reported that the engine start and run-up were normal. About 20 minutes 
after takeoff for the personal cross-country flight, the engine power decreased to idle. The pilot 
applied the carburetor heat, and the engine regained cruise power. About 2 minutes later, he 
turned the carburetor heat off. The engine continued to produce cruise power for about 4 
minutes before it again decreased to idle. The pilot reapplied carburetor heat, and the engine 
power increased for about 1 minute before dropping back to idle. The pilot cycled the 
carburetor heat and verified the position of the engine and fuel controls, but he was unable to 
regain engine power. The airplane contacted trees shortly after touching down in a field. 
A postaccident examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any mechanical failures 
or malfunctions that would have precluded normal operation. Although the weather conditions 
were conducive for the formation of carburetor ice at glide power settings, the engine was set at 
cruise power when the initial loss of engine power occurred, and the application of carburetor 
heat did not regain the engine power. The airplane departed with about 10 gallons of fuel 
onboard. The flight lasted about 40 minutes, and the airplane consumes about 6 gallons per 
hour, which would have left about 6 gallons of fuel on board at the time of the accident, 3.5 
gallons of which were unusable. The postaccident examination revealed that fuel was onboard 
the airplane. The investigation could not determine the reason for the loss of engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because a postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation.
Page 2 of 6CEN15LA217
Findings
Environmental issues
Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN15LA217
Factual Information
On May 2, 2015, at 0900 central daylight time, a Cessna 150F, N8558G, collided with trees 
during an off airport forced landing in Neillsville, Wisconsin, following a loss of engine power. 
The private pilot, sole occupant, received minor injuries. The airplane was substantially 
damaged. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight, which was not operated on a flight plan. The flight originated from the 
Wausau Downtown Airport (AUW), Wausau, Wisconsin about 0820. The intended destination 
was the Neillsville Municipal Airport (VIQ), Neillsville, Wisconsin.
The pilot reported that the engine start and run-up were normal. He sat on the ground waiting 
for other aircraft traffic to clear then he taxied and took off without incident. About 20 minutes 
after takeoff, the engine power decreased to idle in about 1 second. The pilot applied the 
carburetor heat and the engine regained cruise power. About two minutes later, he turned the 
carburetor heat off. The engine continued to produce cruise power for about four minutes 
when it once again decreased to idle. He once again applied carburetor heat and the engine 
power momentarily increased to full power before dropping back to idle. The pilot cycled the 
carburetor heat, and verified the position of the throttle, magnetos, fuel selector, engine 
primer, and mixture with no change in the engine power from idle.
The pilot located a field which contained downward sloping terrain in which to land. The pilot 
cleared power lines that bordered the field. The airplane floated in ground effect and it came to 
an abrupt stop up against trees shortly after the main gear touched down.
A postaccident inspection of the airframe and engine by a Federal Aviation Administration 
airworthiness inspector did not reveal any mechanical failure/malfunction that would have 
prevented normal operation. The left fuel tank contained about ¼ tank of fuel and the right 
tank contained about 1/8 tank of fuel when the airplane was first examined after the accident. 
The FAA inspector stated the fuel system was intact.
The pilot stated that there was a strong odor of fuel in the area after the accident. The airplane 
held 26 gallons of fuel with 3.5 gallons being unusable. The pilot reported he departed with 
about 10 gallons of fuel on board. The fuel consumption for the airplane is about 6 gallons per 
hour.
The temperature and dewpoint reported at the Marshfield Municipal Airport (MFI), 
Marshfield, Wisconsin, located about 3 miles from the accident site at 0854 were 17 degrees 
Celsius (63 Fahrenheit) and 4 degrees Celsius (39 Fahrenheit) respectively. According to the 
FAA SAIB CE-09-35 "Carburetor Icing Prevention" chart, serious icing at glide power was a 
probability. A risk of carburetor icing at cruise power was not probable according to the 
bulletin.
Page 4 of 6CEN15LA217
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/25/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/21/2014
Flight Time:
475 hours (Total, all aircraft), 370 hours (Total, this make and model), 475 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N8558G
Model/Series:
150F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1966
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15062658
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/21/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1601 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7391 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
O-200
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN15LA217
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MFI, 1278 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
3 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0854 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
230°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
240°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Wausau, WI (AUW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Neillsville, WI (VIQ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0820 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
44.575278, -90.506667 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Pamela S Sullivan
Adopted Date:
11/29/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Mike Batson; FAA; Milwaukee, WI
Publish Date:
11/29/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91123
Page 6 of 6CEN15LA217
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
