National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TUSAYAN, AZ
Accident Number: LAX97LA060
Date & Time: 12/01/1996, 1036 MST
Registration: N3566X
Aircraft: Piper PA-32R-301T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 5 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot called the tower on the radio at 1009 and stated he was inbound to the airport with a low fuel state.
Shortly thereafter, the pilot reported that the engine had quit and he would not make the runway.
The aircraft landed on a forest service road and collided with trees during the ground roll.
In a written statement to responding sheriff's deputies the pilot reported that he 'miscalculated the fuel for the duration of the trip and ran out of gas.'
Examination of the fuel system revealed that it was intact and contained only residual fuel.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Fuel exhaustion due to the pilot's inadequate preflight planning and his miscalculation of the fuel required for the flight.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) FUEL CONSUMPTION CALCULATIONS - INACCURATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On December 1, 1996, at 1036 hours mountain standard time, a Piper PA-32R-301T, N3566X, collided with ground obstructions during a forced landing on a fire service road near the Grand Canyon Airport, Tusayan, Arizona.
The forced landing was precipitated by a loss of engine power during cruise.
The aircraft incurred substantial damage.
The certificated private pilot and the four passengers onboard were not injured.
The aircraft was operated by the pilot on a personal cross-country flight from St. George, Utah, to the Grand Canyon Airport.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the operation.
The flight departed St. George on the day of the accident at an undetermined time.
According to the Federal Aviation Administation Air Traffic Control Tower at Grand Canyon, the pilot called on the radio at 1009 and stated he was inbound to the airport with a low fuel state.
Shortly thereafter, the pilot reported that the engine had quit and he would not make the runway.
The aircraft landed on forest service road FS328 and collided with trees during the ground roll.
In a written statement to responding Coconino County Sheriff's deputies the pilot reported that he "miscalculated the fuel for the duration of the trip and ran out of gas."
Air Transport of Phoenix, Arizona, is the aircraft salvage firm retained by the owner to retrieve the wreckage.
The crew who picked up the aircraft were interviewed by telephone.
They reported that as they disassembled the aircraft the fuel system was documented to be intact, with only residual fuel in the tanks and lines.
The pilot did not respond to repeated mail and telephone requests for a statement.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
