National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RUIDOSO, NM
Accident Number: FTW97LA053
Date & Time: 12/01/1996, 0845 MST
Registration: N39812
Aircraft: Bellanca 17-30A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private pilot lost directional control of the airplane approximately 200 feet after a 'smooth landing' on runway 24.
The pilot reported that the airplane pulled to the left abruptly and control became erratic.
After the airplane left the runway, the pilot attempted to abort the landing by adding power.
He stated that the airplane became airborne, but he was unable to establish a positive climb rate, so he elected to reduce the power and land.
The airplane crossed the runway and came to rest north of the runway.
Examination of the airplane revealed that the left main landing gear tire was blown at the side wall.
The pilot stated that the blown tire precipitated the initial loss of control.
The passenger concurred with the pilot stating that 'the landing was very smooth.'
The recorded winds at the airport, 8 minutes before the accident, were from 280 degrees at 8 knots.
The pilot reported that the winds at the time of the accident were from 210 degrees at 8 gusting to 20 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to maintain directional control during landing roll, and his delayed aborted landing.
The gusty crosswind and blown left main tire were considered to be related factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 3.
(F) LANDING GEAR,TIRE - FAILURE 4.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(C) ABORTED LANDING - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On December 1, 1996, at 0845 mountain standard time, a Bellanca 17-30A airplane, N39812, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while landing near Ruidoso, New Mexico.
The airplane was registered and operated by a private owner under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The private pilot and his passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 112 nautical miles cross country flight for which a flight plan was not filed.
The personal flight originated from Santa Teresa, New Mexico, at 0800.
The pilot reported that his flare and touchdown on runway 24 at the Sierra Blanca Regional Airport, near Ruidoso, New Mexico, were uneventful.
He added that during the landing roll, about 200 feet beyond the touch down point, the airplane "abruptly pulled to the left" and as he corrected with right rudder, the airplane swung hard to the right.
The pilot further stated that the airplane veered to the left about 70 to 90 degrees crossing the runway.
The pilot added that he added power in an attempt to abort the landing.
The airplane became airborne but could not establish a positive climb rate, so the pilot elected to retard  the throttle and control was lost as the airplane touched down the second time.
Examination of the airplane revealed structural damage to all 3 landing gears and both wings.
The pilot reported that the left main gear tire was found blown at the side wall.
The 600x6 tire had accumulated a total of 200 hours.
The pilot stated that the blown tire precipitated the initial loss of control.
The passenger concurred with the pilot stating that "the landing was very smooth."
The recorded winds at the airport, 8 minutes prior to the accident, were from 280 degrees at 8 knots.
The pilot reported that the winds at the time of the accident were from 210 degrees at 8 knots, gusting to 20 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 3700 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 15 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 1712 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-520-K Registered Owner: ARTHUR L. DANIEL JR.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
