National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BRYAN, TX
Accident Number: FTW97LA054
Date & Time: 12/02/1996, 1545 CST
Registration: N290SB
Aircraft: Let L23
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, the glider was released from the tow plane at 3,000 feet.
After soaring for approximately 25 minutes in the vicinity of the airport, he maneuvered the glider to land on runway 17.
The pilot added that on final approach, at approximately 250 feet AGL, 'the sail plane encountered a sink' and he realized that he would not be able to clear power lines at the approach end of the runway.
The pilot stated that he elected to execute an 'off airport landing' in a field north of his position.
The pilot turned right and executed a downwind landing with a 15 knot tailwind in the field that he had selected.
During the landing roll, the root of the glider's right wing impacted a fence post.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot misjudged his distance and altitude during the landing approach.
Factors relating to the accident were: the high obstructions (power lines), and subsequent tailwind during the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) DISTANCE/ALTITUDE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH OBSTRUCTION(S) 3.
MANEUVER TO AVOID OBSTRUCTIONS - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 5.
(F) OBJECT - FENCE POST Factual Information On December 2, 1996, at 1545 central standard time, a Let L23 glider, N290SB, was substantially damaged while landing near Bryan, Texas.
The glider, owned and operated by West Wings Aviation of Bryan, Texas, was being operated under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the aircraft, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal local flight for which a flight plan was not filed.
The glider departed in tow from Coulter Field at 1515.
According to the pilot, the glider was released from the tow plane at 3,000 feet.
After soaring for approximately 25 minutes in the vicinity of the airport, he maneuvered the glider to land on runway 17.
The pilot added that on final approach, at approximately 250 feet AGL, "the sail plane encountered a sink" and he realized that he would not be able to reach the airport and clear the power lines at the approach end of the runway.
The pilot stated that he elected to execute an "off airport landing" in a field north of his position.
The pilot turned right and executed a downwind landing in the field he selected.
The pilot added that the 15 knot tailwind substantially increased the glider's ground speed and ground roll.
During the landing roll, the root of the glider's right wing impacted a fence post resulting in a loss of control.
Post accident examination of the glider by the operator revealed structural damage to the airframe as well as the right wing.
The pilot stated that the winds at the time of the accident were from 180 degrees at 15 knots.
The commercial pilot was rated in single and multi-engine airplanes.
He was properly endorsed by a flight instructor for solo flights in the glider and had accumulated a total of 8.9 hours in gliders, of which 4 hours were solo.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 28, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
