National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOMERVILLE, GA
Accident Number: MIA97LA033
Date & Time: 12/02/1996, 2025 EST
Registration: N6532S
Aircraft: Cessna 150H
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane's engine lost complete power, and the pilot requested radar vectors to the nearest airport.
While on short final, the airplane struck trees, turned 180 opposite the direction of travel, and impacted the ground.
The pilot stated that just after establishing radar contact with ATC, the airplane 'experienced [a] power failure.'
The engine then surged momentarily for about 30 seconds, then stopped.
The pilot did not try to restart the engine again.
He performed a forced landing, but was not able to reach the airport due to head winds.
The airplane had begun a descent from 6,000 feet, shortly before the engine failed.
The carburetor heat control was found in the 'cold' position, and the fuel selector was 'on.'
Fuel was found in both fuel tanks.
The airplane's engine was examined, started, and ran without any discrepancies noted.
About 31 miles west-southwest at Valdosta, Ga, the temperature and dew point at 1955 EST were 46 and 41 degrees, respectively.
According to icing probability charts, conditions at Valdosta were conducive for carburetor ice.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: carburetor ice, due to the pilot's improper use of carburetor heat, which resulted in a forced landing and impact with trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: DESCENT Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 2.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - ICE 3.
(C) CARBURETOR HEAT - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On December 2, 1996, about 2025 eastern standard time, a Cessna 150H, N6532S, registered to a private owner, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91, personal flight, crashed during a forced landing near Homerville, Georgia.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a VFR flight plan was filed.
The airplane was substantially damage.
The airline transport pilot, and one passenger were not injured.
The airplane's engine lost complete power, and the pilot requested radar vectors to the nearest airport.
The pilot was vectored to Homerville, and while on short final, the airplane struck trees, turned 180 opposite the direction of travel, and impacted the ground.
The pilot stated that just after establishing radar contact with ATC, the airplane "experienced [a] power failure."
The engine then surged momentarily, for about 30 seconds then stopped.
The pilot did not try to restart the engine again, and performed a forced landing, but was not able to reach the airport because of the head winds.
According to the FAA inspector's statement, the airplane had begun a descent from 6,000 feet, shortly before the engine failed.
The carburetor heat control was found in the "cold" position, and the fuel selector was "on."
Both fuel tanks, and the gascolator sump drain, "contained fuel."
The airplane's engine was examined, started and ran without any discrepancies noted.
The FAA inspector wrote in his statement that based on the engine run the cause of the loss of engine power "could not be determined."
He further stated "the possibility of carburetor icing does exist."
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 67, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
