National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Knox City, TX
Accident Number: FTW04LA070
Date & Time: 02/02/2004, 1630 CST
Registration: N8936W
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-235
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During a cross-country flight, the 194-hour private pilot decided to land in a field at his ranch.
Upon landing in the field, the left main landing gear tire sunk into the soft ground and the pilot lost control of the aircraft.
The aircraft turned to the left and the pilot employed right rudder in an unsuccessful attempt to counter the left turn.
The pilot reported that the field was "soft."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's attempt to land on terrain not suitable for landing.
A contributing factor was the soft terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT Factual Information On February 2, 2004, approximately 1630 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-235 single- engine airplane, N8936W, owned and operated by a private individual, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while landing in a pasture near Knox City, Texas.
The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The flight originated from Terrell Municipal Airport (TRL) near Terrell, Texas, at approximately 1430, with Knox City as its intended destination.
According to the 194-hour pilot, who was attempting to land in an open field at his ranch, at approximately 1430, after receiving weather information from Fort Worth Center, he departed Terrell Municipal Airport with the intent to land at his ranch located 8 miles west of Knox City.
When the pilot arrived at the area where he planned to land, he peformed a fly-by to look for any obstructions in the field.
The field appeared to be flat and open and the pilot executed a normal descent and landing.
The pilot added that he properly flared the airplane and touched down on the main gear, with the nose gear touching down approximately 30 feet later.
The pilot added that after firmly on the ground, he pulled all power and the aircraft rolled approximately 300 feet.
According to the pilot, the aircraft then veered to the left and he applied right rudder, but the pilot was not able to stop the left turn.
The pilot stated that approximately 30 feet later, the right wing impacted the ground and the nose gear collapsed.
The aircraft spun around and then the left wing and propeller impacted the ground.
The pilot stated that the ground was "soft," and the left main tire appeared to have sunk into the soft ground.
Examination by an FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, revealed that the left wing forward spar was fractured and the aft spar was bent.
Further examination revealed that the forward section of the left wing root separated from the fuselage.
The nose gear was found folded inside the wheel well.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 42, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
