National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PHOENIX, AZ
Accident Number: LAX04LA119
Date & Time: 02/06/2004, 1645 MST
Registration: N2462X
Aircraft: Cessna 182S
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane landed hard and porpoised down the runway.
The pilot reported that after a normal approach and touchdown on runway 25R, the nose gear collapsed and the airplane veered off the runway and nosed over.
A certified flight instructor in the traffic pattern behind and above the accident airplane observed the accident sequence.
He reported that the accident airplane appeared fast and was not on a stabilized approach.
After the airplane touched down, it began to porpoise, with each oscillation getting larger.
A mechanic stated that there was no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane.
He said the airplane appeared to have sustained a hard landing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's misjudged landing flare, which led to a hard touchdown and a porpoise.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) PORPOISE/PILOT-INDUCED OSCILLATION - NOT CORRECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR STRUT - OVERLOAD ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Factual Information On February 6, 2004, about 1645 mountain standard time, a Cessna 182S, N2462X, veered off the runway following a hard landing at Phoenix Deer Valley Airport (DVT), Phoenix, Arizona.
Westwind School of Aeronautics was operating the rental airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The personal local flight departed DVT about 1530.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area flight, and a flight plan had not been filed.
During a telephone interview with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in- charge (IIC), the pilot reported that she was attempting to land on runway 25.
After making a normal approach, she flared and touched down.
The nose wheel collapsed and she was unable to maintain control, resulting in the airplane veering off to the right of the runway.
She could not recall how hard the airplane had touched down on the runway surface, but noted that it did not seem abnormal.
During a telephone interview with the IIC, the operator of the airplane stated that the airplane landed hard and veered off the right side of the runway, resulting in the nose landing gear collapsing.
The airplane incurred damage to the firewall.
In a written statement, a witness, who was a certified flight instructor, reported that he was flying with a student in the traffic pattern behind the accident airplane.
He stated that as he turned onto final approach, he observed the accident airplane on short final.
The airplane did not appear to be on a stable approach and seemed to be fast.
He did not see the airplane make the initial touchdown, but witnessed it porpoise down the runway, with the nose wheel making contact first on each bounce.
The porpoising appeared to get successively worse, and the airplane continued off the runway.
An airframe and powerplant mechanic (A&P) assessed the damage to the airplane.
He stated that there was no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane.
He said the airplane appeared to have sustained a hard landing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 58, Female Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 3110 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 5 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 1835 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-540-A131A5 Registered Owner: Visicor, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
