National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Pittsburgh, PA
Accident Number: NYC04LA063
Date & Time: 02/01/2004, 1700 EST
Registration: N158SD
Aircraft: Saab-Scania AB (Saab) 340A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 22 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis The airplane was parked at the gate, when a baggage cart became disconnected from the tug which was towing it, and impacted the left side of the fuselage.
Examination of the tug revealed a broken E-hitch pin where the baggage cart became disconnected.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the baggage cart E-hitch pin, which resulted in the baggage cart separating from its tug, and subsequently impacting a parked airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: STANDING Findings 1.
The two flightcrew members, one flight attendant, and 19 passengers were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed for the flight which was destined for Toledo International Airport (TOL), Toledo, Ohio.
The scheduled passenger flight was to be conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
According to the operator, the airplane was parked at the gate, when a baggage cart became disconnected from the tug which was towing it, and impacted the left side of the fuselage.
Substantial damage to the airplane included a 23-inch tear in the fuselage, as well as five circumferential structure fractures.
Examination of the tug revealed a broken E-hitch pin where the baggage cart became disconnected.
Ground service personnel then examined all tugs and their associated baggage carts to identify any additional faulty gearshift levers.
During the inspection, one additional tug was identified as having a broken pin.
The pin was replaced, and the vehicle was returned to service.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Commercial Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
