National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Summerville, SC
Accident Number: ATL04LA074
Date & Time: 02/07/2004, 1245 EST
Registration: N21266
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-161
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot set the parking brake and attempted to start the airplane by rotating the propeller by hand.
The airplane started and moved forward, and the pilot climbed up on the right wing to enter the cockpit but slipped and fell to the ground.
The pilot grabbed onto the cabin step and was dragged as he attempted to gain access to the cockpit.
When the pilot realized a collision with a parked airplane was imminent, he released his hold on the cabin step.
The airplane taxied unmanned and collided with a parked airplane.
The pilot reported no mechanical malfunction with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate start procedure, which resulted in a run-away airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: STANDING - STARTING ENGINE(S) Findings 1.
(C) STARTING PROCEDURE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: OTHER Findings 2.
OBJECT - AIRCRAFT PARKED/STANDING Factual Information On February 7, 2004, at 1245 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N21266, registered to and operated by a private owner, taxied unmanned into a parked airplane at Summerville Airport, Summerville, South Carolina.
The personal flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The private pilot received minor injuries, and the airplane and a parked airplane sustained substantial damage.
The flight was originating from Summerville, South Carolina, at the time of the accident.
The pilot was preparing for a flight to Columbia, South Carolina, to deliver the airplane for avionics maintenance.
The pilot stated that when he engaged the starter, it made a spinning noise, and the airplane would not start.
The pilot set the parking brake and attempted to start the airplane by rotating the propeller by hand.
The airplane started and moved forward, and the pilot climbed up on the right wing to enter the cockpit but slipped and fell to the ground.
The pilot grabbed onto the cabin step and was dragged as he attempted to gain access to the cockpit.
When the pilot realized a collision with a parked airplane was imminent, he released his hold on the cabin step.
The airplane taxied unmanned and collided with a parked airplane.
Examination of the airplane revealed damage to the right wing spar and propeller, and the parked airplane sustained damage to the fuselage and left wing.
The pilot reported no mechanical malfunction with the airplane.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
