Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
PORTLAND, ME
Accident Number:
NYC95FA210
Date & Time:
09/01/1995, 1115 EDT 
Registration:
N6564H
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172M
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
After takeoff, while climbing through about 400 ft AGL, the pilot transmitted, '...I just lost.' 
Some witnesses saw smoke trailing from the airplane as it descended to just above the runway.  
Still in the air, and nearing the departure end of the runway, the airplane then climbed to about 
100 ft, and entered a left turn which was described by witnesses as at least 60 degrees of bank. 
Some witnesses reported the engine was smooth, while others reported the engine was erratic.  
While in the turn, the airplane  descended, struck the ground nose first, came to rest inverted, 
and burned. In a test run, the engine produced takeoff power.  The pilot had flown 6.5 hours in 
past 12 months.  The pilot received a checkout in the airplane in July 1995.  According to the 
instructor who gave the checkout flight, neither accelerated stalls nor simulated forced 
landings were done during the checkout. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
an engine malfunction for an undetermined reason, and the pilot's failure to maintain airspeed 
during a forced landing which resulted in an accelerated stall.  A factor was the pilot's lack of 
recent experience. 
Page 2 of 8NYC95FA210
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
----------
Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
2. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OPERATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 8NYC95FA210
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
     On September 1, 1995, at 1115 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172M, N6564H, struck the 
ground while maneuvering for a forced landing, after takeoff from the Portland International 
Jetport, Portland, Maine.  The airplane was destroyed, and the private pilot and two 
passengers were fatally injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan 
had been filed for the flight which was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
     The flight was destined for Chatham, Massachusetts.  At 1045, the pilot reported to Portland 
Clearance Delivery, that she was ready to taxi, and was cleared to taxi to runway 29.  At 1048, 
the pilot requested to return to the ramp due to a red light on the instrument panel.  After 
receiving information about the light, the pilot contacted Portland Clearance Delivery at 1103, 
and reported that she was ready to taxi to runway 29.  She was cleared as requested.
     At 1112:33, N6564H was instructed to, "...taxi into position and hold",  and at 1113:20, 
N6564H was cleared for takeoff with  a left turn on course approved.  These were 
acknowledged by the pilot.
     At 1114:18, and after becoming airborne, the pilot transmitted, "four hotel i just lost"  No 
further transmissions were received from the airplane.
     Several witnesses saw the airplane, which they thought was about 400 feet high, begin its 
descent.  One witness reported seeing gray smoke trailing from the airplane, while another 
witness reported seeing black smoke trailing from the airplane.
     Witnesses reported that the airplane leveled off about 5 to 10 feet above the runway, and 
continued toward the departure end. One witness reported that he could see the flaps extended 
to about 3/4 as the airplane went by.  The airplane was then observed to pull up to about 75 to 
100 feet, and enter a left turn.  Witnesses described the bank angle as 60 degrees or steeper.  
     One witness, at the airport entrance described the engine sound as erratic.  Two other 
witnesses in a parking lot, southwest of the accident site, described the engine sound as steady 
and at high power, or like other airplanes taking off.
     Witnesses reported that during the turn, the nose dropped and the airplane contacted the 
ground.  It came to rest on its back, after which a fire developed.  
     The accident occurred during the hours of daylight, at location 43 degrees, 38 minutes 
North and 70 degrees, 19 minutes West. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
     The pilot held a Private Pilot Certificate with airplane single engine land, single engine sea, 
and instrument airplane ratings.  She held an FAA 3rd Class Airman Medical certificate issued 
on November 15, 1993.  According to her pilot log book, her last biennial flight review occurred 
on October 8, 1994, in a Piper PA-28.
     Her pilot log book revealed the following times:
         Total Time              992   hours          Pilot-In-Command        880   hours
     Additionally, according to the pilot's log book, she had flown 24.3 hours in the preceding 3 
years.  In the preceding year, she had flown 6.5 hours which included a 1.5 hour checkout on 
Page 4 of 8NYC95FA210
July 10, 1995.  Her last logged flight prior to the accident occurred on July 19, 1995.
     According to her flight instructor, the checkout did not include forced landings or 
accelerated stalls.
     In her application to the flying club, she reported her total time in a Cessna 172 as 800 
hours.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
     The airplane, a 1975 Cessna 172M, had been modified with the installation of a Lycoming o-
360-A4M engine.  On August 25, 1995, the airplane was modified with the installation of a 
standby vacuum pump.  This included the installation of a red warning light on the instrument 
panel to warn of low vacuum, and occurred concurrently with an annual inspection.
     The airplane was last serviced on August 30, 1995, with 33.1 gallons of 100 low lead aviation 
grade gasoline.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
     The airplane wreckage was examined at the Portland International Jetport from September 
1, 1995, to September 3, 1995.
     Initial ground contact occurred 274 feet beyond the 200 foot overrun, on the departure end 
of runway 29, and 252 feet southwest of the left edge of runway 29.  A series of multiple ground 
scars on a heading of 220 degrees, for 77 feet led to the airplane which was inverted, and 
heading 360 degrees.
     The center section, including the cockpit and passenger cabin was destroyed by fire.  Cabin 
seats were laying loose in the burned area, and the seat rails were not identified.  The fuel 
selector was not identified.  The primer was found locked, and loose in the burned area with 
the knob missing.  
     The empennage remained attached by control cables.  The elevator trim was found extended 
.06 inches beyond it maximum limit of 1.88 inches.
     The wing spar was bent in the center section, with both wings bent forward.  The left aileron 
pushrod was fractured, and the aileron interconnect cable near the flap aileron junction in the 
left wing had failed with frayed ends, similar to a tension overload.  The wing flap jack screw 
was found in the fully extended position.  The left flap was destroyed, and the right flap was 
partially extended.
     The firewall was burned, and there were soot accumulations on the engine.  The fuel sump 
drain was crushed.  The fuel line leading to the sump drain was fractured.  
     The blades of the propeller were bent rearward.  Chord wise scratches were found on the 
front face of both blades.
     Valve train continuity was verified, and compression was found in all cylinders.  The engine 
oil filter was clean, and spark was obtained from all leads, of both magnetos.
     The mount for the carburetor was fractured.  The finger screen was clean.  The accelerator 
pump was operative.  The bowl was drained of a mixture of water and foam.  No fuel was found 
in the carburetor and there was no smell of fuel.  The carburetor was equipped with a single 
piece venturi which was in place.  
Page 5 of 8NYC95FA210
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
     Autopsies were conducted on the pilot and right front seat passenger on September 3, 1995, 
by Dr. Henry Ryan, Chief Medical examiner for the State of Maine.  An autopsy was conducted 
on the rear seated passenger on September 2, 1995, by Dr. Antonio Boschetti, Medical 
Examiner, State of Massachusetts. 
     Toxicological testing on the pilot, which was conducted by the FAA Civil Aeromedical 
Institute in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, was negative for drugs and alcohol. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH 
     The following items were examined in the NTSB Metallurgical Laboratory in Washington, 
DC:
     Left Aileron Push Rod         Finding:                                    "...bending overstress                                     
separation...."
     Fuel Line to Main Sump        Finding:                                    "...typical of an overstress                                       
separation with no evidence                                       of a preexisting crack."
     The engine was placed in a test cell at Textron Lycoming on September 22, 1995, and 
developed takeoff power.  A 1/4 inch hole was then drilled in the number 4 intake tube to 
simulate a hole found in the original intake tube.  Again, the engine developed takeoff power.  
At the completion of the engine test run, the carburetor was disassembled.  No evidence of a 
sticking float or contamination was found inside.  The main jet was clear.
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION 
     Emergency Procedures
     The following is from the Cessna 172M OWNER'S MANUAL, Section III, EMERGENCY 
PROCEDURES, Engine Failure, Engine Failure After Take-Off, Page 3-1:
     Prompt lowering of the nose to maintain airspeed and      establish a glide attitude is the first 
response to an      engine failure after take-off.  In most cases, the      landing should be planned 
straight ahead with only      small changes in direction to avoid obstructions.       Altitude and 
airspeed are seldom sufficient to execute      a 180 degree gliding turn necessary to return to the      
runway....
     Stall Speeds
     Using the airspeeds supplied in the Cessna 172M OWNER'S MANUAL, the stall speed 
increased by a factor of about 1.4 when the airplane was put into a 60 degree bank.
     According to AERODYNAMICS FOR NAVAL AVIATORS, Chapter 2, Airplane Performance, 
Page 176-178, Maneuvering Performance, a chart on page 176 revealed that induced drag 
increased by 100 percent in 45 degree bank, and 300 percent in a 60 degree bank.
     Additionally, the manual stated:
     ...Since the induced drag predominates at low speeds,      steep turns at low speeds can 
produce significant      increases in thrust or power required to maintain      altitude.  Thus, 
steep turns must be avoided after      takeoff, during approach, and especially during a      
critical power situation from failure or malfunction of      a powerplant.  The greatly increased 
induced drag is      just as important-if not more important-as the      increased stall speed in 
Page 6 of 8NYC95FA210
turning flight.  It is      important also that any turn be well coordinated to      prevent the 
increased drag attendant to a slideslip.
     Wreckage Release
     The aircraft wreckage was released to Mr. Bernard Coogan, the insurance adjustor for Airco, 
St. Louis, Missouri, on September 3, 1995.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
56, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/15/1993
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
992 hours (Total, all aircraft), 800 hours (Total, this make and model), 880 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N6564H
Model/Series:
172M 172M
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
17265489
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/25/1995, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
9 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4840 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A4M
Registered Owner:
BALD EAGLE FLYING CLUB
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
BALD EAGLE FLYING CLUB
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8NYC95FA210
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PWM, 74 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1131 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 9500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
310°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (PWM)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
CHATHAM, MA (CQX)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1114 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class C
Airport Information
Airport:
PORTLAND INTL JETPORT (PWM)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
74 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
29
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
8600 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     L HANCOCK
Adopted Date:
06/07/1996
Additional Participating Persons:
GLENN   GIBBONS; PORTLAND, ME
JAMES   BROWN; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
EMILE   LOHMAN; WICHITA, KS
RANDY   JENSON; EVERETT, WA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8NYC95FA210
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
