National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CAPE CORAL, FL
Accident Number: MIA97LA224
Date & Time: 08/01/1997, 0802 EDT
Registration: N93011
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilot was in cruise flight between 1,000 feet to 1,200 feet when he experienced a partial loss of engine power followed by a total loss of engine power.
He made a forced landing to the only available forced landing area which was nonsuitable.
The airplane collided with wires and terrain and a postcrash fire ensued.
Examination of the airframe and flight controls revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
Disassembly of the engine assembly revealed no precrash anomalies or discrepancies that would indicate the engine was not capable of running and producing power before the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Loss of engine power for undetermined reasons resulting in a forced landing to unsuitable terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane was destroyed by a postcrash fire.
The student pilot reported no injuries.
The flight originated from  Page Field, Fort Myers, Florida, about 42 minutes before the accident.
According to personnel on duty at Page Field Control Tower N93011 departed from runway 5 at about 0720.
At about 0801, the pilot informed them that he was 5 miles south of the airport and seemed to be losing power.
The tower operator asked the pilot to ident on the transponder, and asked what was the nature of his emergency.
The pilot stated he was losing power and altitude.
The pilot was instructed to proceed direct to the airport and asked to verify that he did not have an instructor pilot on board the airplane.
The pilot stated at 0801:59, "I dont have an instructor, " followed by " 011 I dont know."
There was no other recorded conversation with the pilot.
Examination of the airframe and flight control system revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
Continuity of the flight control system was confirmed for pitch, roll, and yaw.
The engine assembly was shipped to the engine manufacture for further examination in the presence of the FAA.
Textron Lycoming concluded that, "The engine disassembly did not reveal any precrash anomalies or discrepancies that would indicate that this engine was not capable of running and producing power prior to the accident."
For additional information see Textron Lycoming Accident Investigation Engine Disassembly Report.
The engine assembly and accessories were released to Mr. Donald Carter, President, Alternate Flying Club Inc., on September 30, 1997.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1670 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 450 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 7816 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-235-L2C Registered Owner: ALTERNATE FLYING CLUB INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
