National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SPARTA, WI
Accident Number: CHI97LA246
Date & Time: 08/01/1997, 1320 CDT
Registration: N654Y
Aircraft: Young RV-4
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that during landing, a gust of wind caught the airplane, and it bounced.
He added power to smooth out the landing, but it bounced once again.
He then added full power in an attempt to go-around, but he noticed the engine was vibrating from the propeller having struck the runway.
He reduced the power to idle, and then the airplane descended and contacted the terrain off the right side of the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions, and his improper recovery from a bounced landing, which resulted in an improper flare and hard landing.
The gusty wind was a related factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) FLARE - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On August 1, 1997, at 1320 central daylight time (cdt), a Young RV-4, N654Y, operated by a commercial pilot collided with the terrain while landing on runway 19 (4,295' x 100') at the Fort McCoy Airport, Sparta, Wisconsin.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The pilot and passenger were not injured.
The flight originated from Yankton, South Dakota, at approximately 1100 cdt.
The pilot reported he was intending to land at Sparta for fuel while en route to Oshkosh.
He reported that he chose to make a wheel landing since the wind was greater than 10 knots and not directly down the runway.
The pilot continued to report that upon landing, a gust of wind was encountered and the airplane bounced.
He applied power, but the airplane bounced one more time.
He reported he then added full power to perform a go- around but the engine was vibrating from the propeller having struck the runway.
He reported, "I immediately went to idle power and attempted to lower the nose but suspect I stalled."
The airplane descended and impacted the terrain off the right side of the runway.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 50, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
