National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PATRICIA, TX
Accident Number: FTW97LA300
Date & Time: 08/01/1997, 0740 CDT
Registration: N596PB
Aircraft: Poor Boys Toys Inc EXEC 90
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The experimental amateur built helicopter was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain while hovering in a field.
The pilot reported that the helicopter was in a hover and he was surveying the field.
He momentarily directed his attention to the instruments within the cockpit and during that time the helicopter contacted crops.
The pilot stated that the helicopter experienced a 'dynamic rollover,' and came to rest on its side in the field.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the pilot to maintain terrain clearance with the crops during a surveying flight.
A factor was the pilots diverted attention.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: HOVER Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - CROP 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
DYNAMIC ROLLOVER - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On August 1, 1997, at 0740 central daylight time, a Poor Boys Toys, Inc. Exec 90, experimental helicopter, N596PB, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while hovering in a field near Patricia, Texas.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the helicopter, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight from Lamesa Municipal Airport, near Lamesa, Texas, at 0700.
No flight plan was filed for the flight.
The pilot reported during a telephone interview, conducted by a representative of the Safety Board, that he was hovering the helicopter over a cultivated field.
The pilot further stated that he momentarily directed his attention to the gauges in the cockpit and during this time the skids of the helicopter became in contact with the crops.
The pilot stated that the helicopter experienced a "dynamic rollover" and came to rest on its side in the field.
According to the FAA inspector that traveled to the accident site, the pilot was not rated in helicopters; however, he was properly cleared by his flight instructor for the solo flight.
Examination of the helicopter by the FAA inspector revealed that both main rotor blades were bent.
The tailboon section of the helicopter was severed at the attaching point to the fuselage.
The windscreen was compromised.
Multiple attempts to obtain a completed copy of the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) were unsuccessful.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 41, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
