National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WASILLA, AK
Accident Number: ANC97LA115
Date & Time: 08/01/1997, 1535 AKD
Registration: N94TA
Aircraft: Bell 206-LIII
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis The pilot was receiving an evaluation flight from a U.S. Department of Interior, Office of Aircraft Services, helicopter specialist.
The intent of the flight was to certify the pilot to fly future government contracted flights.
The helicopter pilot performed several maneuvers during the evaluation, and then landed on the shore of a small lake to re-hook an external bucket to the bottom of the helicopter.
The terrain was level, but was in an area of soft marshy type tundra.
The helicopter was equipped with full length flat skis attached to the bottom of the landing gear skid tubes.
These tundra skis help prevent the helicopter skid tubes from sinking into soft terrain.
After the external bucket's cable was attached to the helicopter, the pilot began to lift the helicopter into a hover.
During the liftoff, the left skid tube remained stuck to the ground.
The helicopter then rolled onto its left side and received damage to the fuselage and rotor system.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadvertent dynamic rollover during liftoff.
Factors associated with the accident were soft terrain and a snagged landing gear skid.
Findings Occurrence #1: ROLL OVER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 2.
(F) LANDING GEAR,SKID ASSEMBLY - SNAGGED 3.
(C) DYNAMIC ROLLOVER - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On August 1, 1997, about 1535 Alaska daylight time, a high skid equipped Bell 206-LIII helicopter, N94TA, crashed during takeoff from a remote lake, about 4 miles west of Wasilla, Alaska.
The helicopter was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area evaluation ride under Title 14 CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.
The helicopter, registered to and operated by Trans-Alaska Helicopters Inc., Anchorage, Alaska, sustained substantial damage.
The certificated commercial pilot was not injured.
The evaluation pilot received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated at the Big Lake Airport, Big Lake, Alaska, about 1400.
The operator reported the pilot was receiving an evaluation flight from a U.S. Department of Interior, Office of Aircraft Services, helicopter specialist.
The intent of the flight was to certify the pilot to fly future government contracted flights.
The helicopter pilot performed several maneuvers during the evaluation, and then landed on the shore of a small lake to re-hook an external bucket to the bottom of the helicopter.
The terrain was level, but was in an area of soft, marshy type tundra.
The helicopter was equipped with full length, flat skis attached to the bottom of the landing gear skid tubes.
These tundra skis help prevent the helicopter skid tubes from sinking into soft terrain.
After the external bucket's cable was attached to the helicopter, the pilot began to lift the helicopter into a hover.
During the liftoff, the left skid tube remained stuck to the ground.
The helicopter then rolled onto its left side and received damage to the fuselage and rotor system.
: 4250 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 2 Hours Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft Airframe Total Time: 1068 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Allison ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: C30-P Registered Owner: TRANS-ALASKA HELICOPTERS INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
