National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BEMIDGI, MN
Accident Number: CHI97LA258
Date & Time: 08/01/1997, 1000 CDT
Registration: N40354
Aircraft: Maule M-4-220C
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that the approach and landing were normal.
After a ground roll of 100 to 175 feet, the airplane veered to the right.
It continued half way off the right side of the runway before coming to a stop.
According to the pilot, a skid mark was visible on the runway.
Postaccident inspection of the airplane after notification of the accident (14 days later) failed to reveal any failure/malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure or inability to maintain directional control of the airplane, as a result of an undetermined anomaly concerning of the right main landing gear brake.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL BRAKE SYSTEM - UNDETERMINED 2.
The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The pilot and two passengers were not injured.
The flight originated from New Richmond, Wisconsin, at 0800 central daylight time.
The pilot reported that everything was normal as he entered the traffic pattern and set up to land.
He continued to report, "Flared at correct position, cut throttle glided down runway 25 touchdown normal."
The pilot reported that after a ground roll of 100 to 175 feet the airplane "veered to right instantly & ended up on left wingtip with left gear collapsed 1/2 in grass on right side of 25."
The pilot reported that he had not used the brakes during the landing roll; however, skid marks from the right main landing gear were visible on the runway.
The accident was not reported to the National Transportation Safety Board until August 14, 1997.
Inspection of the brakes failed to reveal any failure/malfunction.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
