The commercial pilot was repositioning the airplane to a grass airstrip where it was to be 
loaded with chemical for aerial application work. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
with clear skies and 10-mile visibility. GPS data extracted from an onboard aerial guidance 
system showed that the airplane took off, climbed to 1,000 ft mean sea level (msl), and 
proceeded south on course. While en route, the airplane descended to 500 ft and turned to the 
southwest. About 8 minutes into the flight, the airplane began a rapid climb, turned to the 
northwest, and decreased and increased in altitude before it entered a rapid descent to the 
ground.
When the airplane did not arrive at the grass airstrip, one of the operator's crewmembers 
contacted the county sheriff's department and reported the airplane missing. The airplane 
wreckage was found in a cornfield about 18 nautical miles (nm) southwest of the departure 
airport and about 2 nm to the west of the direct course to the grass airstrip. No witnesses to the 
accident were identified.
Examination of the wreckage and ground scars revealed signatures consistent with the airplane 
impacting the ground in a steep, nose-down attitude. Control continuity was established from 
the cockpit to the flight control surfaces. An examination of the airplane's engine and systems 
revealed no anomalies that would have precluded normal operations.
The pilot's autopsy identified moderate three vessel coronary artery disease without evidence 
of previous scar or muscle injury, and he had a family history of sudden cardiac death in his 
father at age 39. Based on his age (38) and family history , the pilot was at increased risk of an 
acute cardiac event such as an arrhythmia or a heart attack that could have caused acute 
symptoms to include chest pain, shortness of breath, palpitations, or fainting. Any such 
symptom would likely have been impairing or incapacitating.
The pilot's toxicology showed evidence of the use of two potentially impairing medications, 
Suboxone, used to treat opioid addiction, and diphenhydramine, a sedating antihistamine. 
Suboxone is typically dosed based on the patient's response to the drug, which is influenced by 
Page 2 of 9CEN15FA331
the degree of underlying tolerance and addiction. Regular users are likely to become tolerant to 
the sedating effects of Suboxone, but there is a potential for abuse; users may increase their 
dose to obtain desired psychoactive effects . These effects are similar to those of other opioids 
to include euphoria, a feeling of well-being, relaxation, drowsiness, sedation, lethargy, 
disconnectedness, self-absorption, mental clouding, and delirium.
Compared to other antihistamines, diphenhydramine causes marked sedation, and altered 
mood and impaired cognitive and psychomotor performance may also be observed. In a 
driving simulator study, a single dose of diphenhydramine impaired driving ability more than a 
blood alcohol of 0.100. The usual therapeutic range for diphenhydramine is 0250 to 0.1120 
ug/ml, much lower than the measured level of 1.861 ug/ml in the pilot. However, 
diphenhydramine undergoes significant postmortem distribution; central levels may be three 
times higher than peripheral levels. Taking postmortem distribution into account still leaves 
the pilot at a high level of diphenhydramine, almost six times higher than the usual high end of 
the therapeutic range. The GPS data for the initial part of the flight, which shows the pilot in 
control of the airplane suggests that the pilot was regularly using high doses of 
diphenhydramine and may have become tolerant to some of its effects.
However, even if the pilot had become tolerant to some of the effects of Suboxone and 
diphenhydramine, in combination, they were likely causing some degree of impairment. If the 
pilot had taken extra Suboxone or diphenhydramine and unintentionally overdosed, the effects 
would likely have been acutely impairing or incapacitating.
The airplane's GPS track and its steep, nose-down impact attitude indicate that the pilot lost 
control of the airplane. Given that weather was not a factor and that the airplane was capable of 
normal operation, the most likely reason for the loss of control was pilot incapacitation. 
Whether the incapacitation was from overuse of a combination of sedating medications or an 
acute cardiac event could not be determined.
The pilot's inability to maintain control of the airplane as a result of incapacitation by drug 
effects or an acute cardiac event.
