The pilot receiving instruction and flight instructor departed the airport area, practiced basic 
maneuvers, and then returned to the airport to practice takeoffs and landings. The pilot 
receiving instruction successfully completed five full-stop landings. The flight instructor 
reported that, during the sixth takeoff, the tail came up a bit slower but not at an abnormal 
rate. He added that, at liftoff, the airplane™s pitch attitude was a bit higher than during the 
previous liftoffs and that the airplane was not climbing. As the flight instructor adjusted his 
position to see out the front windscreen, the airplane contacted the runway and then bounced. 
He determined that there was insufficient runway to land and stop the airplane, so he held the 
throttle in the full-power position to ensure that the pilot receiving instruction did not try to 
abort the takeoff. He maintained wings level and lowered the nose as much as possible until 
the airplane cleared a ditch and then touched down in a vineyard. The airplane contacted the 
ground in a level attitude, turned sharply 90 degrees, and then travelled about 30 ft before 
stopping. 
The pilot receiving instruction reported that it was hot and humid, that the wind conditions 
were variable, and that the airplane was near its maximum gross weight. He added that there 
were no mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded 
normal operation. It is likely that the combined effects of the pilot™s use of an increased pitch 
attitude, the airplane™s near maximum gross weight, and the environmental conditions 
degraded the airplane™s climb performance.
The pilot receiving instruction's use of an excessive pitch attitude during takeoff with the 
airplane near its maximum gross weight in hot and humid conditions, which degraded the 
airplane™s climb performance and resulted in a collision with obstacles during an off-airport 
landing. Contributing to the accident was the flight instructor's delayed remedial action.
On August 1, 2015, about 1030 Pacific daylight time, a Taylorcraft 12-m, N49153, experienced a 
runway excursion at the Selma Airport, Selma, California. The pilot was operating the airplane 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.  The private pilot under 
instruction (PUI) and the certified flight instructor (CFI) both received minor injuries. The 
airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings and the engine mount. The local 
instructional flight departed about 0900. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed, 
and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot flew south of the airport after departure to practice basic maneuvers, and then 
returned to the airport to practice takeoffs and landings. Seven to eight landings to a full stop 
were successfully completed. On the last takeoff, the airplane lifted off, but would not climb 
above 5 feet. It settled back to the ground about 3/4 down the runway, lifted off again to a few 
feet, and then touched down again before hitting an embankment. The airplane bounced over a 
canal, and crashed into a vineyard about 45 feet from the runway.
The pilot reported that it was hot and humid, the wind conditions were variable, and the 
airplane was close to maximum gross weight. He stated that there were no mechanical 
malfunctions or failure with the airplane.
The flight instructor stated that the last takeoff (6th) initially seemed like the previous ones. 
Power addition was the same; the tail came up a bit slower, but not at an abnormal rate. At 
liftoff, the pitch attitude was a bit higher than the previous takeoffs. The airplane did not seem 
to be climbing, so he adjusted his position to see out the front windscreen. As he did this, the 
airplane bounced. As the airplane went airborne again, he felt that it was not producing 
sufficient lift to fly. He determined that there was insufficient runway to set the airplane down 
and stop before going into a deep drainage ditch that was perpendicular to the end of the 
runway. He held the throttle in the full power position to insure that the PUI didn't try to abort 
the takeoff, maintained wings level, and lowered the nose as much as possible. He maintained 
that attitude until the airplane cleared the ditch, and touched down in the vineyard. It 
contacted the ground in a level attitude, turned sharply 90 degrees, and stopped in about 30 
feet.
