The private pilot was planning to conduct some practice takeoffs and landings. The pilot 
reported that he conducted a normal preflight and that the airplane had about 75 gallons of 
fuel on board. Shortly after takeoff and while on the base leg to the runway, the engine lost 
power. The pilot pushed the throttle, mixture, and prop levers full forward and then turned the 
auxiliary fuel pump on, but the engine did not respond. The airplane subsequently impacted 
trees near a residence and then came to rest on its right side. 
On-scene examination revealed that the left wing™s fuel bladder tank appeared intact but that it 
was absent of fuel and that the right wing™s bladder tank was torn and contained about 2 
gallons of fuel. However, the examination was unable to determine the quantity of fuel that 
may have leaked out after the fuel system was compromised during the accident. An engine test 
run was conducted, and the engine started and ran with no abnormalities noted. A review of 
the carburetor icing probability chart indicated that the airplane was operating in weather 
conditions associated with a serious risk of carburetor ice accumulation at glide power settings. 
The pilot was on the base leg of the traffic pattern, and he likely reduced engine power to a 
glide power setting because he was approaching the runway for landing.
The total loss of engine power due to carburetor icing. 
On August 1, 2015, about 1745 central daylight time, a Cessna 182 airplane, N1685R lost engine 
power while in the traffic pattern at the Watertown Municipal Airport (KRYV), Watertown, 
Wisconsin. The airplane impacted trees and was substantially damaged. The private rated pilot 
was seriously injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the local flight.
The pilot reported that he planned on doing some practice pattern work, including some touch-
and-goes landings in preparation for a flight review.  He added that the preflight and taxi were 
uneventful, and then he departed.  While on the base leg, the engine lost power; he advanced 
the throttle, mixture, and prop levers full forward, and then turned the auxiliary fuel pump on. 
The engine did not respond, he was unable to locate an open area for an emergency landing, so 
he decided to aim for nearby trees to arrest his descent. The pilot reported that the airplane 
had about 75 gallons of fuel on board.
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors reported that the airplane 
came to rest on its right side near a residence.  The empennage separated from the fuselage, 
with heavy damage to the right wing and fuselage.  The left wing's fuel bladder appeared intact 
but absence any fuel, the right wing's bladder tank was torn, and contained about two gallons 
of fuel.  The inspector wasn't able to determine the quantity of fuel that may have leaked out 
after the fuel system was compromised during the accident.  The airplane was recovered, and 
an engine test run was performed. An external fuel source was connected to the airplane; the 
engine was then started and run.  No abnormalities were noted.
At 1755, the automated weather observation facility located at KRYV recorded a temperature of 
82 degrees Fahrenheit (F), dew point 60 F.
The carburetor icing probability chart included in Federal Aviation Administration Special 
Airworthiness Information Bulletin No. CE-09-35, Carburetor Icing Prevention, indicated that 
the airplane was operating in an area that was associated with a serious risk of carburetor ice 
accumulation at glide power settings.
