As the commercial flight crew waited for a takeoff clearance on the taxiway, the tower 
controller asked if they would move aside to allow other aircraft to pass. As the captain made a 
right turn, a wind gust lifted the right side of the airplane and turned it clockwise. The airplane 
came to rest on its nose and its left wing for several seconds, then fell back upright on all three 
landing gear. The engine was secured, and all occupants deplaned through the main cabin 
door. Thunderstorms were reported west of the airport, moving east at the time of the accident, 
and wind gusts to 45 knots were recorded about the time of the upset. It is likely that the 
captain did not properly position the flight controls during the turning maneuver, which led to 
the wind picking up the wing.
An encounter with a wind gust during ground maneuvering and the captain's improper flight 
control positioning to account for wind conditions, which resulted in the airplane being blown 
onto its left wing.
On August 2, 2015, at 1437 central daylight time, a Cessna 208B, N942AC, operating as Air 
Choice One (call sign Weber) flight 2627, was substantially damaged when a wind gust lifted it 
up and it impacted the taxiway while awaiting takeoff clearance at Chicago O'Hare 
International Airport (ORD), Chicago, Illinois. The two flight crewmembers and five 
passengers were not injured; two passengers sustained minor injuries. The airplane was 
registered to and operated by Multi-Aero, Inc., under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 135 as a scheduled domestic passenger flight. Day visual meteorological 
conditions (VMC) prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed. 
The airplane had departed the terminal gate at 1410 and was destined for Southeast Iowa 
Regional Airport (BRL), Burlington, Iowa.
There had been numerous reports of wind shear and microbursts in the immediate vicinity. 
According to the captain and first officer's statements, they were awaiting takeoff clearance on 
runway 22L when the control tower asked that they move aside to allow other aircraft to pass. 
As the captain was making a right turn, a wind gust lifted the right side of the airplane and 
turned it clockwise. The airplane remained nose down, resting on its left wing for several 
seconds, then fell back upright coming to rest on all three landing gears. The engine was 
secured, and all occupants deplaned through the main cabin door. A post-accident examination 
showed the outboard portion of the left wing was bent up about 30 degrees, the left aileron was 
damaged, and all three propeller blades were impact damaged.
According to a special weather study conducted by the National Transportation Safety Board, 
the National Weather Service's (NWS) Surface Analysis Chart valid at the time of the accident 
depicted a low pressure system over northwestern Michigan, with a cold front extending to the 
southwest through Wisconsin, Minnesota, into Iowa and then westward into Nebraska. To the 
east of the low, a warm front extended across northern Wisconsin and Lake Michigan, into 
north-central Michigan. An outflow boundary associated with thunderstorms was depicted just 
east of the warm front over extreme eastern Michigan into Lake Huron.
The National Center for Atmospheric Research's (NCAR) Research Application Laboratory's 
(RAL) regional radar mosaic image 2 minutes prior to the accident depicted a defined line of 
thunderstorms over Lake Michigan and into northeastern Wisconsin in the vicinity of the 
warm front and another area over eastern Michigan associated with the outflow boundary. 
There was another large intense-to-extreme area of echoes observed in the vicinity of ORD 
moving eastward across northern Illinois at approximately 40 knots.
The NWS Storm Prediction Center (SPC) issued a Convective Outlook at 1116 CDT that 
indicated the potential for thunderstorms and a greater than 30% probability of wind gusts 
greater than 50 knots, and a 15% probability of hail 1 inch in diameter or larger, and a 2% 
probability of a tornado in the Chicago area.
ORD's special weather observation at 1429 indicated the wind to be from 230° at 17 knots, 
gusting to 24 knots, visibility 10 miles in thunderstorm, a few clouds at 5,000 feet agl, scattered 
clouds at 7,000 feet, ceiling broken at 9,000 feet, and broken at 20,000 feet, temperature 31° 
Celsius (C), dew point 19° C, altimeter 29.74 inches of mercury (Hg). Remarks: Peak wind from 
240° at 27 knots occurred at 1402 CDT, thunderstorm began at 1428 CDT, frequent lightning 
in cloud-to-cloud and cloud-to-ground to the west. Thunderstorm west moving east, 
temperature 31.1° C, dew point 19.4° C.
ORD's special weather observation at 1443 indicated the wind to be from 250° at 16 knots 
gusting to 45 knots. Runway 10L's visual range (RVR) was 700 feet variable to better than 
6,000 feet. Weather: thunderstorm, hail, and moderate rain, scattered clouds at 5,000 feet agl. 
Cumulonimbus and scattered clouds at 7,000 feet, broken ceiling at 9,000 feet, and broken 
clouds at 20,000 feet. Temperature, 27° C, dew point, 22° C, altimeter 29.76 inches of Hg. 
Remarks: Peak wind from 270° at 45 knots occurred at 1440 CDT, rain began at 1942, hail 
began 1943, thunderstorm began 1928, pressure rising rapidly, frequent lightning cloud-to-
cloud and cloud-to-ground overhead, thunderstorm overhead moving east, temperature 26.7° 
C, dew point 21.7° C.
