According to the airline transport pilot, about 30 minutes into the personal flight and while the 
airplane was at 3,000 ft mean sea level, the engine "seemed to lose power for a second." About 
1 second later, the engine "shut off completely." The pilot tried to restart the engine by turning 
on the electric fuel boost pump and then moving the fuel selector to each of the positions 
without success. He then moved the fuel selector back to the "both tanks" position and set the 
nose pitch for best glide speed; however, the airplane was unable to glide to the airport, so the 
pilot set it up for an off-field landing. During the forced landing, the airplane encountered 
uneven terrain, and the right wing struck a tree. 
A postaccident engine test run was conducted, and the engine would not start. Subsequent 
examination of the engine revealed that a fuel supply line fitting at the fuel manifold was loose 
and that fuel leaked excessively from the fitting when the electric boost pump was turned on. 
After the fitting was tightened, the engine started without hesitation and ran continuously at 
idle power. Due to three bent propeller blades and vibration, a higher power setting was not 
attempted. A review of the airplane and engine logbooks found no entries indicating that any 
recent maintenance had been conducted on the fuel system.
The improper installation of the fuel supply line fitting at the fuel manifold, which resulted in 
the line loosening in-flight, fuel leakage, and a subsequent total loss of engine power.
On August 1, 2015, about 1319 eastern daylight time, a Commander Aircraft Company 114-B, 
N6566D, was force landed following a reported loss of engine power during cruise flight near 
Reading, Pennsylvania. The airline transport-rated pilot and a private pilot-rated passenger 
were not injured, and the airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered to 
Precision Machine Tool Solutions LLC and was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 
Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Day, visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The local flight originated at Reading 
Regional Airport (RDG), Reading, Pennsylvania about 1250. 
The airline transport-rated pilot, who reported that he was the pilot-in-command, seated in the 
right, cockpit seat, reported the following. About 30 minutes into the flight, at 3,000 feet above 
mean sea level, while returning to RDG, the engine "seemed to lose power for a second." About 
1 second later, the engine "shut off completely." He assumed the controls and immediately 
began to accomplish the engine failure procedures. He turned on the electric boost pump and 
moved the fuel tank selector to all positions; the engine would not restart. He returned the 
selector to the "both tanks" position and set the nose pitch for best glide speed. He called RDG 
approach control and advised them of the situation. Unable to glide to the airport, he set up for 
an off-field landing. During the forced landing, undulating terrain was encountered, and the 
right wing struck a tree. The airplane came to a stop in a vegetable garden and both occupants 
exited the cockpit.
An inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) responded to the accident site 
and examined the wreckage. The fuselage, empennage, and left wing exhibited structural 
damage from impact forces. The right wing was sheared off at the root. Both wing tanks 
contained fuel, and there was evidence of fuel leakage at the accident site. The wreckage was 
recovered and moved to a recovery facility for further examination. 
On September 16, 2015, the engine was examined by an investigator from the NTSB and an 
inspector from the FAA. The wings had been removed from the airplane for transport to the 
recovery facility. The remaining fuselage was secured to a flatbed trailer for an engine test-run. 
Fuel was supplied via a 5-gallon container to the right wing side of the fuel selector. During the 
first attempt, the engine did not start. Subsequent examination of the engine revealed a loose 
fitting that connected the fuel supply line to the fuel manifold, with fuel leaking from the fitting 
when the auxiliary fuel pump was activated. The fitting was tightened and the engine then 
started on the first attempt without hesitation and ran continuously at idle power. Due to three 
bent propeller blades and vibration, a higher power setting was not attempted. 
 A review of the maintenance records for the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of 
recent maintenance on the fuel system. The most recent inspection was an annual inspection, 
completed on January 1, 2015. During that inspection, a pressure test of the fuel system was 
recorded. At the time of the accident, the engine had accrued 56 hours of operating time since 
the annual inspection of January 1.
