Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
LEBANON, OH
Accident Number:
IAD98LA087
Date & Time:
08/01/1998, 1040 EDT 
Registration:
N733LK
Aircraft:
Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The flight instructor was to demonstrate a sod field landing to the student pilot.  The instructor 
set up for approach and landing to the west, with winds from the east at 7 knots.  After 
touchdown, the instructor braked for a full stop but the airplane started to skid.  The instructor 
then added power and configured the airplane for a go-around.  He said he then attempted to 
abort the go-around because the flaps had not retracted, but the airplane again began to skid.  
During the skid, the flaps retracted and he again applied power for takeoff.  The instructor 
stated that he lacked the runway to stop and could not gain sufficient airspeed to fly.  At the 
end of the runway, in an effort to clear the highway at the departure end, the pilot 'popped' the 
airplane into the air.  While over the highway, the landing struck the roof of a passing car.  The 
airplane continued and landed in a field on the other side of the highway.  Examination of the 
airplane revealed no discrepancies with the flaps or the flap actuating system. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's delay in aborting the landing, which resulted in inadequate obstacle (car) clearance 
during initial takeoff climb.  A contributing factor is the pilot's decision to perform a tailwind 
landing. 
Page 2 of 7IAD98LA087
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND
2. (F) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
3. OBJECT - VEHICLE
4. (C) ABORTED LANDING - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
5. CLEARANCE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
Page 3 of 7IAD98LA087
Factual Information
 On August 1, 1998, at 1040 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172N, N733LK, was substantially 
damaged when it collided with an automobile during an aborted landing at the Brownies 
Lebanon Airport (19I), Lebanon, Ohio.  The certificated flight instructor, student pilot, and the 
driver of the automobile were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
instructional flight that originated at Blue Ash (ISZ), Ohio, at 1000.  No flight plan was filed for 
the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In two written statements, the flight instructor stated the purpose of the flight was to provide 
dual instruction to one of his students.  After several practice maneuvers and a recovery from a 
simulated engine failure, the student pilot asked the instructor to demonstrate a sod field 
landing.  The instructor set up for an approach and landing to the west at 19I.  The sod runway 
was approximately parallel to runway 27.  Both the sod and paved runways joined at the 
western ends.  
The flight instructor stated:
"Since we were only a few miles from Brownies (19I), I told him I would show him on the grass 
field over there.  I started a short, soft field approach with full flaps at 60 kts.  I would estimate 
my point of touchdown at 50 ft from the start of the runway.  As we attempted to slow down for 
a full stop the plane started to slide.  At that point (about 120 ft from touchdown) I decided to 
do a go around and try again.  I applied full power, took off the carb heat and attempted to 
raise the flaps.  As I glanced in at the Airspeed I noticed it was not climbing like it should, only 
to realize the flaps did not retract.  I tapped the brakes to see if stopping would be possible.  We 
again just slid, but at this point the flaps began to retract, causing a sudden loss of lift.  I now 
was at the tall grass at the end, and it further impeded my attempts to gain airspeed.  I 
approached the end of the runway and was still [too] slow to sustain flight.  As the ditch, fence, 
and road approached I attempted to "pop" the plane up to avoid hitting the ditch and 
cartwheeling into the fence or road.  I cleared the ditch and fence, but was forced to lower the 
pitch to avoid losing directional control of the aircraft from a full stall.  As the plane settled 
downward, it struck the roof of a passing car...Due to the extra drag from the grass and 
hesitation in the flaps, I was unable to gain enough airspeed for flight".  
The student pilot said:
"I requested that the instructor land on the grass runway so that I would know what grass field 
landings would be like in an emergency.  The instructor was in full control of the aircraft.  
Descent was with full flaps, idle power requiring little rudder adjustment.  Landing was soft on 
the grass at approximately the normal point for runway numbering (Say it would be about 30 
feet from the runway edge).  Upon braking, the aircraft seemed to slide, as if it were on ice.  The 
instructor determined to take off.  He proceeded to place carburetor heat off, full throttle, and 
flaps up.  The aircraft seemed sluggish, possibly even slowed or dragging.  The aircraft once 
airborne, passed over a barbed wire fence at the end of the runway.  At that point I heard the 
stall warning.  The instructor pitched the nose down.  The aircraft descended slightly and hit 
the roof of a Buick, gained some altitude, passing beyond the second lane of traffic and another 
barbed wire fence, landing in a field avoiding several trees".
In a written statement, a pilot who had flown N733LK approximately one month prior to the 
accident stated that the flaps failed to retract from the 40 degree position while he performed a 
Page 4 of 7IAD98LA087
touch-and-go.  He said, "The flaps on N733LK on touch and go stuck down...at 40 degrees 
around the dates of June 1-June 30 [1998]."
In a telephone interview, a Federal Aviation Administration Aviation (FAA) Safety Inspector 
stated the mechanic who recovered N733LK cycled the flaps through the full range several 
times.  The mechanic stated the flaps deployed and retracted with no malfunctions noted.
In a telephone interview, the flight instructor stated the flaps on another Cessna 172 in the 
operator's fleet failed to retract on a recent flight.  He said, "The same thing happened on July 
2, 1998."  The flight instructor stated he remembered the airplane's registration number and 
verified the date with the maintenance records.
On August 6, 1998, an FAA Inspector examined the flap operation of two Cessna 172's in the 
operator's fleet.  According to a written statement:
"Aircraft were checked by [Inspector]...both were good.  One aircraft was in for maintenance 
while he was there and they checked the flaps with a protractor, and the cable tensions, all to 
[specification].  The switches were all clean and no problems found there.  The maintenance for 
these aircraft are on the Cessna Maintenance Program."
In a telephone interview, the owner/operator said repairs were completed and N733LK was 
placed back in service on October 22, 1998, at 4,609 aircraft hours.  Maintenance entries 
reflected repairs to aircraft structure and skin.  No repairs were made to the flaps or the flap 
actuating system.  An annual inspection was completed on the airplane at 4,621 aircraft hours 
and an engine change was performed at 4,684 aircraft hours.  The owner/operator said that 
from the time of the repairs to the time of the interview, no problems had been noted in the 
performance or handling of N733LK. 
At the time of the accident, weather reported at the Cincinnati Municipal Airport (Lunken 
Field) was:  clear skies with winds from 080 degrees at 7 knots.  The temperature was 74 
degrees and the dewpoint was 54 degrees.
The flight instructor reported 390 hours of total flight experience of which 194 were in make 
and model.  He also reported 98 hours of experience as a flight instructor of which 84 hours 
were in make and model.
Page 5 of 7IAD98LA087
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
24, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/20/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
390 hours (Total, all aircraft), 194 hours (Total, this make and model), 293 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 86 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 22 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N733LK
Model/Series:
172N 172N
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
68373
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/26/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
69 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4602 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-H2AD
Registered Owner:
PHILIP N. SCHMIDT
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
PHILIP N. SCHMIDT
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
SCHMIDT AVIATION
Operator Designator Code:
Page 6 of 7IAD98LA087
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LUK, 483 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
19 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1053 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
30°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
BLUE ASH, OH (I77)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1000 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
BROWNIES LEBANON AIRPORT (19I)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
879 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2100 ft / 40 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
BRIAN      C RAYNER
Adopted Date:
01/28/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
LES   KORODY; CINCINNATI, OH
STAN   FASKE; CINCINNATI, OH
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7IAD98LA087
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
