The airplane sustained a loss of engine power in cruise flight at 6,000 feet mean sea level. The 
pilot observed the propeller RPMs increase and then noticed the engine was not producing full 
power. He selected both main fuel tanks and turned on the electric fuel pump. The airplane 
impacted a tree during the forced landing, resulting in substantial damage to the right wing. A 
postaccident examination of the wreckage, which included an engine operational test run, 
revealed no evidence of a mechanical malfunction. The recorded temperature, dew point, and 
calculated values aloft were plotted on an icing chart and their intersection fell in the ﬁserious 
icing (glide power)ﬂ range. The airplane Owner™s Handbook for emergency procedures during 
an engine failure indicated, in part, that the pilot should apply carburetor heat. The pilot 
reported that he did not use carburetor heat following the loss of engine power.
A loss of engine power due to carburetor icing as a result of the pilot not using carburetor heat.
On July 2, 2010, about 1215 central daylight time, a Piper PA-24-250, N5798P, piloted by a 
private pilot, sustained substantial damage on impact with a tree during a forced landing near 
Centerville, Missouri, following a loss of engine power in cruise flight.  The personal flight was 
operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed in the area at the time of the accident.  The flight was on an activated instrument 
flight rules flight plan.  The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.  The flight originated 
from the Moraine Air Park, near Dayton, Ohio, about 1040 and was destined for the Branson 
Airport, near Springfield, Missouri.
The pilot reported that he was in cruise at 6,000 feet above mean sea level when he saw the 
propeller RPMs jump and then noticed the engine not producing full power.  He turned on 
both main fuel tanks and the electric fuel pump.  He advised the air traffic controller that he 
had a problem.  He indicated that the terrain was hilly and wooded.  He lined up for a forced 
landing on a road.  When he descended, he noted a bridge across the road.  He ﬁhoppedﬂ the 
airplane over a fence and landed in a pasture that contained low brush and a small tree.  The 
airplane™s right wing sustained substantial damage on impact with the tree.
The airplane was examined on-scene by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors.  No 
airframe anomalies were detected.  The airplane wreckage was recovered from the field and 
held for further examination by a FAA inspector.  The FAA inspector was able to get the engine 
to run during the examination.
At 1152, the recorded weather about 112 nautical miles and 260 degrees from the accident site 
at the Springfield-Branson National Airport (SGF), near Springfield, Missouri, was: Wind 120 
degrees at 7 knots; Sky condition clear; Temperature 26 degrees C; Dew point 14 degrees C; 
Altimeter 30.17 inches of mercury.
A -2 degrees C per 1,000 feet standard lapse rate to 6,000 feet above mean sea level in 
reference to SGF was applied to the recorded temperature and dew point.  The surface 
temperature and dew point values and the calculated aloft values were plotted on the icing 
chart listed in Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin CE-09-35.  Both their intersection 
fell in the ﬁserious icing (glide power)ﬂ range.
The airplane owner™s handbook emergency procedures, in part, indicated:
Engine Failure:
The most common cause of engine failure is mismanagement or
malfunction of the fuel system.  Therefore, the first step to take after
engine failure is to move the fuel selector valve to the tank not being
used.  This will often keep the engine running even if there is no
apparent reason for the engine to stop on the tank being used.
If changing to the opposite fuel tank does not restore the engine:
(1) Check fuel pressure and turn on electric fuel pump, if off.
(2) Push mixture control to full rich.
(3) Apply carburetor heat.
(4) Check ignition switch.
The pilot reported that he did not use carburetor heat following the loss of engine power and 
did not note the indications on the carburetor temperature gauge.
