The commercial pilot was rated in helicopters only, and was receiving instruction in airplanes.  
He had accrued 8 hours of total airplane time, all of which was in the tail-wheeled accident 
airplane.  During this instructional flight, the pilot demonstrated difficulty with proper brake 
control, and the instructor elected to practice braking and turning.  While they taxied forward 
at 15 mph, the instructor asked the pilot to turn the airplane around.  The pilot initiated an 
immediate right turn to reverse direction that oriented the tail into the wind.  The tail rose up 
in the turn and the airplane continued around and over onto its nose.  The pilot said that he 
intended to slow the airplane before the turn, but that his braking was "uneven", and resulted 
in a "hard" right turn and the nose over.  Both pilots reported that there were no mechanical 
difficulties with the airplane.
the pilot's loss of directional control due to his uneven application of brakes.  A factor in the 
accident was the tailwind.
On November 2, 2004, at 1130 eastern standard time, a Cessna 120, N1811N, was substantially 
damaged during a ground loop and nose over at the Windham Airport (IJD), Willimantic, 
Connecticut.  The certificated flight instructor and the certificated commercial pilot, who was 
rated only in helicopters, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
local instructional flight that originated at Windham Airport, at 1055.  No flight plan was filed 
for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The instructor provided both a written statement and a telephone interview.  He explained that 
his student was a commercial helicopter pilot with only 8 hours of experience in airplanes; all 
of which was in the accident airplane.  The instructor had the pilot practice braking and 
turning on runway 27.  After the pilot taxied for some distance, the instructor asked him to 
"head back."  At the time, the airplane was traveling about 15 miles per hour.  The pilot 
initiated an immediate right turn to reverse direction that oriented the tail into the wind.  The 
tail rose up in the turn and the airplane continued around and over onto its nose.
The instructor said he expected the pilot to slow the airplane prior to the turn.  Instead, the 
application of brakes was "aggressive" and "uneven", and the airplane ground-looped to the 
right and continued directly into the nose over.
During a telephone interview, the pilot concurred with the instructor's version of events.  He 
said that he intended to slow the airplane before the turn, but that his braking was "uneven", 
and resulted in a "hard" right turn and the nose over.  Both pilots reported there were no 
mechanical deficiencies with the airplane.
The instructor reported 1,379 hours of flight experience, 75 hours of which were in the Cessna 
120.  The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate, with ratings for rotorcraft helicopter and 
instrument helicopter.  He reported 6,500 hours of experience in helicopters, and 8 hours in 
airplanes; all of which was in the accident airplane.
The weather reported at Windham Airport, at 1052, included an overcast ceiling at 5,500 feet 
and wind from 180 degrees at 3 knots.  The instructor reported that, at the time of the accident, 
the wind was from the southwest about 8 knots.
