Witnesses stated that they saw the accident airplane initiate a normal takeoff from runway 09, 
and while at a low altitude during initial climb, they saw it make what appeared to be a left turn 
from going west, toward the north, and it suddenly descended nose down in a steep left turn 
and impacted the runway. The controller at the North Perry Airport control tower stated that 
after the airplane took off from runway 09R, and while it was climbing out at an altitude of 
about 100 feet he received a radio communications call from he pilot stating that he had an 
engine problem. The controller replied stating, "anything you want," and this was the last radio 
communication he had with the accident airplane. The controller stated that he observed the 
airplane in a left descending turn, and the airplane impacted the ground. A mechanic employed 
with the operator stated that the pilot had made an earlier flight, and when he landed, he 
exited the airplane, entered the hangar, and spoke with the maintenance manager about an 
engine problem he had experienced. The mechanic said that the accident airplane had a history 
of engine problems, and when the pilot returned there were two problems. One problem was 
smoke oil leaning on the windshield, and the second problem was the engine 
missing/sputtering and occasionally ceasing to operate in flight. He said he overheard the 
discussion between the pilot and the maintenance manager, and it pertained to the operation 
of the fuel system. During examination of the accident airplane debris was found in the 
carburetor bowl and in the carburetor float chamber.  An electric fuel pump was found to 
contain a large quantity of debris in the fuel pump chamber.
Page 2 of 9MIA05FA020
Improper maintenance by company maintenance personnel, and the pilot-in-command's 
operating the airplane with known deficiencies, which resulted in  the loss of engine power due 
to fuel system contamination, and a loss of control while maneuvering to return to the airport.
HISTORY OF THE FLIGHT
On November 2, 2004, about 1216 eastern standard time, a Rawdon T-1, N2706D, registered to 
and operated by Van Wagner Aerial Media LLC, as a title 14 CFR Part 91 aerial advertising 
flight, crashed while departing from North Perry Airport, Pembroke Pines, Florida. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The commercial-rated pilot 
received fatal injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage. The flight was originating 
at the time of the accident.
Witnesses stated that they saw the accident airplane initiate a normal takeoff from runway 
09R, and while at a low altitude during initial climb, they saw it make what appeared to be a 
left turn from going east, toward the north, The witnesses further stated that as the airplane 
turned, it suddenly descended nose down, in a steep left turn toward runway 09L/27R. It 
impacted the runway in a left, turning, steep nose-down attitude. 
The controller at the North Perry Airport control tower stated that after the airplane took off 
from runway 09R, and while it was climbing out at an altitude of about 100 feet he received a 
radio communications call from he pilot stating that he had an engine problem. The controller 
replied stating, "anything you want," and this was his last radio communication with the 
accident airplane. The controller stated that he observed the airplane in a left descending turn, 
and it impacted the ground. It came to rest nose down, about 100 yards from the approach end 
of runway 27R.
The general manager of Van Wagner Aerial Media LLC stated that the accident airplane had 
recently completed a flight prior to the accident flight, and during the accident flight, the pilot 
was departing on his second aerial advertising flight of the day, with the intention of displaying 
the message "VOTE." He further stated that the airplane was carrying about 20 gallons of fuel 
in the left tank, 20 gallons in the right tank, and 15 gallons of fuel in the auxiliary tank.
A mechanic employed with the operator stated that the pilot had made an earlier flight, and 
when he landed, he exited the airplane, entered the hangar, and spoke with the maintenance 
manager about an engine problem he had experienced. The mechanic said that the accident 
airplane had a history of engine problems. He said that when the pilot had returned there were 
two problems. One problem was smoke oil leaning on the windshield, and the second problem 
was the engine missing/sputtering and occasionally ceasing to operate in flight. The mechanic 
said that while he was working on a smoke oil leakage problem he was within earshot and 
overheard the discussion between the pilot and the maintenance manager. He said the 
discussion pertained to the operation of the fuel system, and the maintenance manager told the 
pilot that based on how the fuel tanks are connected, neither the right main tank or the 
auxiliary tank can be allowed to run out of fuel, because air would be brought into the system, 
and the engine would cease operating. The mechanic further stated that after the discussion 
with the maintenance manager the pilot then added fuel and departed on the accident flight.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held an FAA commercial pilot certificate, with airplane single and multiengine land 
ratings. He also held an FAA second-class medical certificate, issued on June 29, 2004, with no 
stated waivers/limitations. 
The pilot's logbook was not provided to the NTSB, but according to information obtained from 
the company, he had accumulated 9,650 total flight hours, of which 7,650 total flight hours had 
been logged in single engine airplanes.  In the past 90 days he had flown the accident airplane 
about 20 hours. He had flown 10 hours in the last 30 days, and about 2 hours during the past 
24 hours. He had accumulated a total of about 32 hours as pilot-in-command in the accident 
airplane.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
N2706D is a Rawdon model T-1 airplane, serial number T1-26, and it was manufactured in 
1957.  The accident airplane had originally been a two-seat agricultural duster/sprayer 
airplane, and it had been altered to carry smoke oil, for use in sky writing/aerial advertising, 
and was certified in the restricted category. 
At the time of the accident, the airplane had accumulated about 4,516 total flight hours on the 
airframe.  The airplane was equipped with a Lycoming O-540-A1D5 reciprocating engine, 
which produces 250 horsepower, and a McCauley two-bladed propeller, model 
IA200/FA9044, The propeller was last overhauled on April 3, 2003.  
Maintenance records showed the airplane was last inspected on February 11, 2004, and at that 
time it had received an annual inspection.  At the time of the accident, it had accumulated 
approximately 51 flight hours since the last annual inspection. Its static system, altimeter, and 
transponder had last been tested on January 20, 2003. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and the North Perry Airport 1225, surface weather 
observation was, wind from 140 degrees at 13 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, sky condition, 
3,600 feet scattered, 5,500 feet broken, temperature 29 degrees Celsius, dew point 
temperature 21 degrees Celsius, altimeter setting 30.10 inHg.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was located on the North Perry Airport property, and had come to rest 
north of the centerline of the runway, about 524 feet from the beginning of runway 27R. 
Witnesses had stated that the airplane had initially impacted the ground in a left wing low, 
nose low attitude.  During the impact sequence the airplane made a series of gouges in the 
grass, and pieces of airframe were found in the vicinity of each gouge. The gouges/debris field 
had continued from the initial impact point, across the runway, and was oriented along an 
azimuth of about 340 degrees magnetic. The debris path from the initial impact point to the 
main wreckage was about 107 feet long.
At the accident scene the airplane was observed outfitted with a tank for smoke oil and aft of 
this was an auxiliary fuel tank, both of which were mounted aft of the single pilot 
compartment.  As the airplane was positioned vertically, the tail had partially separated due to 
impact forces, and had folded just aft of the auxiliary fuel tank. The aft fuselage then dangled 
down on the right side, partially held by the aircraft skin.
All components of the airplane necessary for flight were located in the vicinity of the wreckage. 
There was no evidence of fire having occurred at the scene, and the main wreckage of the 
airplane was positioned vertically, with both wings even with the surface of the asphalt runway, 
and both fixed main landing gear structures providing support to maintain it vertically. The 
airplane rested on its nose, with the top/canopy oriented to the south.  The impact had 
separated the engine from the airframe, and had crushed the pilot compartment.  The engine 
lay slightly to the left of the longitudinal axis, and forward of the vertical main wreckage. 
After the initial impact mark in the grass as viewed along the azimuth of the debris field, there 
was a single propeller slash in the grass, perpendicular to the debris path, and following the 
single slash mark, there was a large shallow crater into which the propeller had been deposited. 
The propeller had detached at the hub, and the fracture surface displayed signs consistent with 
overload.  As the propeller lay in the crater, it was positioned upside down and oriented length-
wise along the azimuth of the debris field, with one tip closer to the start of the debris field 
being imbedded in the dirt, and angled under the grass. One blade had a slight length-wise 
bend that was angled upward and in addition that same blade displayed s-type bending, and 
span-wise as well as chordwise scratching/burnishment on the forward flat portion of the 
propeller.  The other blade was relatively straight, and only possessed slight s-type bending.  
Control continuity was established for roll, pitch and yaw, and the control cables associated 
with the rudder and elevator had separated in the area where the apt fuselage, aft of the 
auxiliary fuel tank, had separated and all were consistent with overload, aft of the auxiliary 
tank. The flaps of both wings, as well as both ailerons had remained attached to their respective 
wing, and all had incurred some damage.  
The cockpit had been crushed, and portions of the instrument panel and its instruments that 
had become detached/damaged, or separated, and lay in the general path of the debris field.  
Remnants of the throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control linkages were identified and all 
were found to be detached and/or had jammed. Of the recovered instruments, the altimeter 
displayed about 100 feet. The tachometer displayed 2093.10 hours.
Fuel was found leaking from the airplane at the scene.  The right and left main fuel tanks as 
well as the auxiliary tanks/fuel lines had been breached. The outboard half of the right wing 
had incurred leading edge crushing had remained relatively intact. The outer section of the left 
wing had detached, and the left wing displayed accordion type upward crushing from the outer 
section of the remaining portion of the left wing, inward for about a third of the remaining 
length of the wing.  The detached outer portion of left wing lay about 30 feet away and slightly 
to the east, along the general path of the debris field. 
The two-fixed main conventional landing gear had incurred damage but they, along with the 
fixed tail-wheel had remained affixed to the fuselage. The horizontal stabilizer and elevator had 
been undamaged, and the vertical stabilizer and rudder had incurred punctures to the skin. 
 
Examination of the engine assembly revealed no evidence of any pre-crash anomalies. The 
examination showed that the engine rotated normally, and there was continuity of the 
crankshaft, camshaft, valve train, and accessory drives. Each cylinder produced normal 
compression. The lubrication system displayed no pre-impact anomalies. The oil filter adapter 
had incurred damage, and the oil was leaking, consistent with the impact.  
Carbon-like deposits were noted in the oil filter and the oil suction screen. The left magneto 
had incurred impact damaged and had separated from the accessory drive and it had also split 
ejecting the impulse coupling which lay separate in the debris field.  The right magneto had 
remained affixed to the engine and it incurred no damage, and when it was removed and field-
tested a spark was observed on all terminals. The spark plugs were examined and were found 
to not be the recommended spark plugs for the engine, and they exhibited characteristics 
consistent with those associated with normal wear.  
There was fuel in the carburetor, and debris was found in the carburetor bowl. The filter was 
clean, and the carburetor float chamber also contained debris.  The airplane was configured 
with an initial/common electric fuel pump as viewed from aft, moving forward. This 
initial/common fuel pump was followed by the gascolator, which was then followed by a 
firewall mounted electric fuel pump, which was followed by an engine driven fuel pump, all 
which were connected in series. The initial/common fuel pump receives fuel from the left main 
fuel tank, and from the right and the auxiliary fuel tanks that are both being connected 
together.  Fuel is routed to a common fuel pump, and from the common fuel pump it is routed 
to the gascolator, then to the electric fuel pump mounted on the firewall, and finally to the 
engine-driven fuel pump. 
During the examination of the fuel system, the first/common fuel pump was found to contain a 
large quantity of debris in the pump chamber. The debris included material with a thick "glob-
like" consistency, unidentified sediment, and large flakes of rust, consistent with the rust that 
was present on the interior wall of the pump body. All the debris/rust/sediment were 
suspended in a rust colored liquid mixture, and the mixture possessed a spell consistent with 
that of fuel.
The accident airplane's fuel system was configured with the left valve controlling the left main 
fuel tank, and the right valve controlling both the right main fuel tank and the auxiliary fuel 
tank. Both valves were found in the "on" position.
Examination of each successive item in the series connected fuel flow circuit that followed the 
initial/common pump, to include the gascolator, firewall mounted electric pump, and engine-
driven pump, all had correspondingly less contamination.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Postmortem examination of the pilot was performed by the Medical Examiner's Office, District 
17, Fort Lauderdale, Florida.  The cause of death was attributed to multiple traumatic injuries.  
No findings which could be considered causal were reported.
The FAA Toxicological Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, conducted tests on specimens 
obtained from the pilot.  Tests were conducted for the presence of carbon monoxide, cyanide, 
volatiles, and drugs. None were found to be present.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Title 14 CFR Part 43, Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance, Rebuilding, and Alteration. Part 
43 sets forth rules governing the maintenance, preventive maintenance, rebuilding, and 
alteration of aircraft having a U.S. airworthiness certificate, certain foreign-registered aircraft, 
and airframes, aircraft engines, propellers, appliances, and component parts of these aircraft.
In addition, Advisory Circular 43.13-1B Acceptable Methods, Techniques, and Practices - 
Aircraft Inspection and Repair, Chapter 8 Section 2, Fuel Systems, Fuel Filters, Strainers, and 
Drains, Paragraph 36 specifies how aircraft fuel systems should be maintained.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
On November 4, 2004, the NTSB released the wreckage of N2706D to Mr. Steve McCullers, 
General Manager, Van Wagner Media Inc., LLC.
