The pilot reported engine problems while on approach to the airport. During the forced 
landing, the airplane impacted a berm, and tall brush, causing substantial damage. A 
postaccident examination of the engine on the day of the accident revealed that the air box 
around the carburetor contained a small amount of water. The routine weather report taken at 
1653 reported the temperature as 42 degrees Fahrenheit (F) and the dewpoint as 25 degrees F. 
According to the carburetor icing chart, conditions were conducive for icing at glide and cruise 
power. In addition, several other pilots flying in the area at the time of the accident reported 
experiencing carburetor icing.
the loss of engine power due to carburetor icing. Contributing factors include the weather 
conditions conducive for carburetor icing, and a lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing.
On November 2, 2004, at approximately 1655 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-24-250, 
N7852P, operated by KW Aviation, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during 
a forced landing 3 miles north of Ogden-Hinckley Airport, Ogden, Utah. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The training flight was being conducted under 
the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan. The commercial certificated pilot 
and flight instructor sustained serious injuries. The local flight originated at approximately 
1530.
According to the FAA inspector who traveled to the scene, the pilot reported engine problems 
while on approach for landing to the Ogden airport. During the forced landing, the airplane 
impacted a berm, and tall brush, separating the empennage. The right main landing gear 
penetrated the right wing and the outboard 2 feet of the left wing was crushed and bent up. 
Both pilots sustained head injuries and neither are able to remember the events leading up to 
the accident.
A postaccident examination of the engine on the day of the accident, conducted by the FAA, 
revealed that the air box around the carburetor contained a small amount of water.  Further 
inspection of the engine and remaining airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
The Ogden routine weather report taken at 1653 reported the temperature as 42 degrees 
Fahrenheit (F) and the dewpoint as 25 degrees F. According to the carburetor icing chart, 
conditions were conducive for icing at glide and cruise power. The FAA inspector stated that 
several other pilots flying in the area at the time of the accident reported experiencing 
carburetor icing as well.
