National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: JEFFERSONVILLE, IN
Accident Number: CHI00LA233
Date & Time: 08/01/2000, 1645 EST
Registration: N1774C
Aircraft: Cessna 180
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported he was practicing takeoffs and landings on runway 18 with the winds from 240 at 7 knots.
The pilot reported that he made two wheel landings and one full stall landing without incident.
He reported that on the fourth landing, which was going to be a full stall, the airplane bounced and became airborne.
He continued to report that he let the airplane settle back to the runway in a three-point attitude.
He reported the next thing he remembered was the airplane veered to the right, the left wing tip contacted the ground, and the airplane nosed over.
The pilot stated the airplane stayed on the runway and he exited the airplane through the left side door.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot failed to maintain directional control of the airplane while landing.
A factor associated with the accident was the crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
The Airline Transport Rated pilot on board was not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
Visual meteorological conditions existed and no flight plan was filed.
The flight which originated at about 1605 eastern standard time from Louisville, Kentucky, was being operated as a personal flight under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot reported that he departed Bowman Airport in Louisville and flew to the Clark County Airport to practice takeoffs and landings.
He reported that the winds at Louisville were from 240 degrees at 7 knots and that the winds at Clark County were about the same.
The pilot reported that he made two wheel landings and one full stall landing without incident.
He reported that on the fourth landing, which was going to be a full stall, the airplane bounced and became airborne.
He continued to report that he let the airplane settle back to the runway in a three-point attitude.
He reported the next thing he remembered was the airplane veered to the right, the left wing tip contacted the ground, and the airplane nosed over.
The pilot stated the airplane stayed on the runway and he exited the airplane through the left side door.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Flight Engineer; Military Age: 37 Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
