National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CLARKSVILLE, TN
Accident Number: ATL00LA074
Date & Time: 08/02/2000, 0640 CDT
Registration: N86BC
Aircraft: Beech A36
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane collided with a tree during a climb-out from a missed approach.
The pilot declared an emergency, and the controller provided the pilot with vectors to another airport 4.4 nautical miles southwest; however, prior to reaching the second airport, the airplane's engine lost power.
The airplane collided with the ground and nosed over during an off-airport forced landing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to follow published instrument approach procedures, and collided with a tree while executing a missed approach.
Factors were low clouds, fog and a tree.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MISSED APPROACH (IFR) Findings 1.
(C) IFR PROCEDURE - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CLOUDS 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - FOG ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO LANDING AREA (EMERGENCY) Findings 5.
The airplane was destroyed and the instrument-rated private pilot and one passenger received serious injuries.
An instrument flight plan was filed for the personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed in the area.
The flight departed Dekalb/Peachtree Airport in Chamblee, Georgia, at 0600 eastern daylight time (EDT).
According to the pilot, at approximately 0620 EDT while en route to Outlaw Field, he requested radar vectors from Fort Campbell Approach Control for the localizer 35 approach into Outlaw Field.
According to radio transcripts, the controller advised the pilot on several occasions during the approach that the airplane was to the right of the localizer approach course, to which the pilot acknowledged.
After initiating the approach, the pilot stated that at 0630, he visually identified the runway threshold; however, the airplane's altitude was "to[o] high to make [a] safe landing," and he initiated the published missed approach procedure.
According to the pilot, during climb out, the airplane struck a tree and he declared an emergency.
The controller advised the pilot to fly a heading of 180 degrees and to maintain 2,500 feet above mean sea level.
The pilot responded, "We're trying, we can't get up... we're coming out of the mist here."
The controller attempted to provide vectors to Sabre Army Heliport, located 4.4 nautical miles to the southwest; however, approximately one mile from the heliport, the engine quit.
The airplane collided with the ground, then nosed over.
Following impact, a fire initiated in the left wing area.
A postaccident examination of the airplane was conducted by an FAA inspector.
The fuel tank on the left wing was ruptured.
The fuel selector was set to the left main fuel tank.
The NAV I navigational frequency was set to 110.6 MHz, which is the VOR (Very High Frequency Omnidirectional Range) located 800 feet to the right of runway 35 and 500 feet south of runway 5/23.
The localizer frequency is 111.7 MHz, and is aligned with runway 35.
According to radar data, the airplane's radar track indicated the airplane was aligned with the VOR antenna during the approach, and the airplane flew directly over the VOR just prior to the pilot initiating the missed approach procedure.
According to the pilot, there were no mechanical malfunctions with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 3400 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-550-B Registered Owner: BONANZA FIVE INC.
BEACH     SCOTT Adopted Date: 04/06/2001 Additional Participating Persons: KEITH   STEM; NASHVILLE, TN Publish Date: Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
