National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Anchorage, AK
Accident Number: ANC05LA093
Date & Time: 07/01/2005, 1935 AKD
Registration: N88110
Aircraft: Bellanca 7GCBC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private certificated pilot was conducting a personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, and was performing a glassy water takeoff toward the west from a lake in a float-equipped airplane.
He reported variable winds from the north.
The pilot said that during the takeoff, he lifted the left float out of the water, then the right float at 45 mph, and began a climb at 55 mph.
He said that when the airplane reached about 50 feet, it began a "very fast uncommanded roll to the right, and control forces went to zero."
The pilot also indicated there was no mechanical malfunction/failure, and the engine was producing power during the accident sequence.
The airplane descended toward the water, and the right wing and right float assembly struck the water and the airplane overturned.
The pilot and passenger were both wearing inflatable jackets, and exited the airplane.
An FAA airworthiness inspector examined the airplane as it sat on a trailer, after the pilot recovered and partially disassembled the airplane.
The inspector reported that the airplane's flap handle was set at 10 degrees.
The inspector did not indicate that he observed any mechanical malfunction.
A factor contributing to the accident was an inadvertent stall.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED(VS) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER,GLASSY Factual Information On July 1, 2005, about 1935 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Bellanca 7GCBC airplane, N88110, sustained substantial damage when it collided with the waters of Lake Hood during initial climb after takeoff from the Lake Hood Seaplane Base, Anchorage, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated by the pilot.
The private certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The flight was en route to Sterling, Alaska, and no flight plan was filed, nor was one required.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on July 2, the pilot reported that he was performing a glassy water takeoff from the west waterlane of Lake Hood.
He indicated that he lifted off the water at 45 mph, and began a climb at 55 mph.
The airplane then rolled to the right and descended toward the water.
The right wing and right float assembly struck the water and the airplane overturned.
The pilot and passenger were both wearing inflatable jackets, and exited the airplane.
A family pet did not escape from the airplane.
The pilot said the engine was producing power during the accident sequence.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations inspector, Anchorage Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), responded to the accident scene, and reported that the airplane contained about 30 gallons of fuel.
The float compartments contained additional fuel containers, an anchor, and rope.
An FAA airworthiness inspector examined the airplane as it sat on a trailer on July 5, after the pilot recovered and partially disassembled the airplane.
The inspector reported that the airplane's flap handle was set at 10 degrees.
He did not indicate that he observed any mechanical malfunction.
In the Pilot/Operator Aviation Accident Report (NTSB FORM 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, the pilot indicated that the water surface was glassy, with a variable wind from the north.
During the takeoff run, the pilot stated that he lifted the left float out of the water, then the right float, and accelerated for a climb.
He said that when the airplane reached about 50 feet, it began a "very fast uncommanded roll to the right, and control forces went to zero."
The pilot also indicated there was no mechanical malfunction/failure.
At 1957, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Lake Hood Seaplane Base was reporting, in part: Wind, calm; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, few at 3,800 feet, 10,000 feet broken; temperature, 72 degrees F; dew point, 53 degrees F; altimeter, 29.71 inHg.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
