Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
High Island A-442A, GM
Accident Number:
CEN10LA036
Date & Time:
11/01/2009, 1040 CST 
Registration:
N272M
Aircraft:
BELL 206
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The helicopter had landed on an off-shore oil platform and was refueled. It then took off with 
one passenger. Shortly after lifting off, the pilot "heard a loud pop as the nose of the aircraft 
passed over the edge of the helideck. The noise was simultaneously accompanied by 
illumination of the engine out warning light and a needle split indication was observed on the 
engine and rotor tachometer gauge. As the aircraft yawed and lost climb performance, the pilot 
lowered the collective pitch full down and activated the floats. Upon landing on the water, the 
aircraft rolled left until inverted. The helicopter was later recovered and the engine 
disassembled and examined. The only anomaly noted was a loose Pc line, which would cause a 
loss of fuel flow and subsequent loss of engine power down to or below idle. It was determined 
that the torque required to realign the B-nut would be between hand-tight and 27 inch-pounds. 
The required torque is 80 to 120 inch-pounds. Torque values on the other air line fittings 
between the power turbine governor and the fuel control were found to range from 55 to 85 
inch-pounds. A review of the engine maintenance records revealed that 36.7 hours prior to the 
accident, the turbine module was completely disassembled and overhauled. This would have 
required the removal and re-installation of the Pc line.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power due to maintenance personnel's failure to correctly torque the Pc 
line following removal and reinstallation of the turbine module.
Findings
Aircraft
Engine (turbine/turboprop) - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Installation - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN10LA036
Factual Information
On November 1, 2009, approximately 1040 central standard time, a Bell 206L-1, N272M, 
registered to and operated by Rotorcraft Leasing Company LLC, was substantially damaged 
when it impacted water following a loss of engine power shortly after lifting off from an oil 
drilling platform. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The 
non-scheduled domestic passenger flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135. The pilot was seriously injured and the passenger 
received minor injuries. The flight had just originated from platform High Island A442A, and 
was en route to platform High Island A515, both in the Gulf of Mexico.
According to the company accident report, the helicopter had landed on the platform and was 
refueled. It then took off with one passenger. Shortly after lifting off, the pilot "heard a loud 
pop as the nose of the aircraft passed over the edge of the helideck. The noise was 
simultaneously accompanied by illumination of the engine out warning light and a needle split 
indication was observed on the engine and rotor tachometer gauge. As the aircraft yawed and 
lost climb performance, the pilot lowered the collective pitch full down and activated the floats. 
Upon landing on the water, the aircraft rolled left until inverted. The pilot and the only 
passenger exited the aircraft and inflated their life vests and crawled onto the belly of the 
aircraft and inflated the life rafts. The pilot and the passenger hung on to the side of one of the 
inflated life rafts until a nearby crew boat arrived and pulled them out of the water."
The helicopter was later recovered and taken to the operator's base in Broussard, Louisiana, 
where, on November 19, 2009, the engine was disassembled and examined under the 
supervision of an FAA inspector. The only anomaly noted was a loose Pc line. According to 
Rolls Royce, a loose Pc line would cause a loss of fuel flow and subsequent loss of engine power 
down to or below idle.
Using a picture taken during the on-site engine examination, the position of the B-nut on the 
fuel control when torque paint was last applied was approximated. Re-connecting the B-nut to 
the fuel control fitting, the torque required to realign the B-nut was between hand-tight and 27 
inch-pounds. The required torque is 80 to 120 inch-pounds. Torque values on the other air line 
fittings between the power turbine governor and the fuel control were found to range from 55 
to 85 inch-pounds. The turbine wheels and nozzles exhibited signs of corrosion from salt water 
immersion. The engine controls were intact with no apparent damage.
A review of the engine maintenance records revealed that 36.7 hours prior to the accident, the 
turbine module had been completely disassembled and overhauled. This work would have 
required removal and re-installation of the Pc line.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Ditching
Page 3 of 5CEN10LA036
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
27, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/06/2009
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/18/2008
Flight Time:
1874 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1549 hours (Total, this make and model), 1874 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 139 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 39 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N272M
Model/Series:
206 L1
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
45365
Landing Gear Type: 
Emergency Float; High Skid
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/10/2009, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
85 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
13668 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ALLISON
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C30P
Registered Owner:
ROTORCRAFT LEASING 
COMPANY LLC
Rated Power:
650 hp
Operator:
ROTORCRAFT LEASING 
COMPANY LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
YTRA
Page 4 of 5CEN10LA036
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BPT, 15 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
95 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1000 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
172째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
6 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
45째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.21 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
16째C / 9째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
HI-A442, GM 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
HI-A515, GM 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1040 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
High Island A442A (A442)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
28.400000, -93.941667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
05/06/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Kevin Myers; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Baton Rouge, LA
Publish Date:
05/06/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=74996
Page 5 of 5CEN10LA036
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
