Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CONROE, TX
Accident Number:
FTW99LA128
Date & Time:
05/01/1999, 0740 CDT 
Registration:
N2638K
Aircraft:
Luscombe 8E
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
While at a cruise altitude of 3,500 feet msl, the pilot observed a fuel flow fluctuation, and the 
experimental airplane's engine lost power.  The pilot was unable to restart the turboprop 
engine and prepared for a forced landing to a road.  During the forced landing, about 100 feet 
agl, the pilot initiated a turn in order to see the traffic on the road.  As the airplane crossed the 
road, 'the left wingtip and left main gear contacted the asphalt road, very hard.'  The airplane 
came to rest upright in a ditch, which paralleled the road.  Examination of the fuel system by 
the pilot revealed a caterpillar was lodged in the forward facing vent to the right wing fuel tank. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of a blocked fuel vent.  A factor was 
the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
Page 2 of 6FTW99LA128
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,VENT - BLOCKED(TOTAL)
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - ROADWAY/HIGHWAY
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH
Page 3 of 6FTW99LA128
Factual Information
 On May 1, 1999, approximately 0740 central daylight time, a Luscombe 8E experimental 
airplane, N2638K, was substantially damaged during a forced landing, following a loss of 
engine power near Conroe, Texas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan 
was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 cross-country positioning flight.  
The aircraft was registered to and operated by the Don Luscombe Aviation History Foundation 
of Chandler, Arizona.  The airline transport pilot, sole occupant of the aircraft, was seriously 
injured.  The flight originated from Lafayette, Louisiana, at 0600, and was en route to Austin, 
Texas.
According to the FAA inspector, the pilot contacted Houston Center and reported the 
turboprop powered aircraft was experiencing engine problems.  Houston Center gave the pilot 
radar vectors to the nearest airport; however, the aircraft was unable to make the airport.
The pilot reported that he descended from 5,500 feet msl to 3,500 feet msl in order to take 
advantage of the "higher tailwinds."  After about 10 to 15 minutes, he observed a fuel flow 
"fluctuation from 15 GPH to 12 GPH, back to 15 GPH, then 11 GPH, and finally to about 2 
GPH."  Subsequently, the engine lost power.  "Two restart cycles were attempted.  One on the 
right tank, and a second on the left tank, though abbreviated due to proximity to the ground.  
The engine did not re-light, and power was not regained."
The 14,000-hour pilot reported to the NTSB investigator-in-charge that he was unable to locate 
the airport that ATC had identified as the nearest airport and prepared for a forced landing to a 
road.  At about 100 feet agl, he initiated a turn to the west in order to see the traffic on the road.  
The aircraft passed under a 35 foot high power line.  As the aircraft crossed over the road, "the 
left wingtip and left main gear contacted the asphalt road, very hard.  The gear sheared and 
ricocheted off the wing strut.  The propeller hit at a 15 degree nose down attitude, and the right 
gear sheared, leaving me [the aircraft] skidding on the belly."  The aircraft came to rest upright 
in a ditch, which paralleled the road.
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that both wings were structurally 
damaged, the firewall was buckled, and the empennage was bent.  There was evidence at the 
accident site of a fuel spill.
Examination of the fuel system by the pilot revealed a "caterpillar lodged in the forward facing 
vent" to the right wing fuel tank.  The other four small auxiliary holes in the tank cap did not 
"seem capable of venting the tank while fuel is used at a rate of 15 GPH."
According to the pilot, a post accident examination and test run of the engine was satisfactory.  
At the time of the accident, there were 30 gallons of fuel on board.
Page 4 of 6FTW99LA128
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial; Flight 
Engineer
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/11/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
14000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4000 hours (Total, this make and model), 10200 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 8 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Luscombe
Registration:
N2638K
Model/Series:
8E 8E
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
5365
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1700 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
60 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Apex
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
T62-AZ-32
Registered Owner:
DON LUSCOMBE AVN HIST. 
FOUNDAT
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
DON LUSCOMBE AVN HIST. 
FOUNDAT
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW99LA128
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
90°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
LAFAYETTE, LA (LFT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
AUSTIN, TX (AUS)
Type of Clearance:
VFR on top
Departure Time:
0600 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DOUGLAS    D WIGINGTON
Adopted Date:
06/21/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
GALE   HUEY; HOUSTON, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW99LA128
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
