Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SYLVAN SPRINGS, AL
Accident Number:
MIA99LA144
Date & Time:
05/01/1999, 0920 CDT 
Registration:
N5105G
Aircraft:
Cessna 172H
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The pilot stated that he preflighted the airplane before departure with no discrepancies noted.  
He departed with full fuel tanks and flew to a nearby area where he orbited several times.  He 
flew to another area then returned to the area where he orbited the first time.  He later stated 
that he applied carburetor heat, reduced the throttle, then after seeing the area again, applied 
the throttle and removed carburetor heat.  The engine did not respond.  He only verified that 
the mixture control was full rich, that the magneto switch was in the 'both' position, and 
pumped the throttle which increased engine rpm slightly.  He maneuvered the airplane for a 
forced landing and just before touchdown, he placed the mixture control in the idle-cutoff 
position and the magneto switch to the off position.  After touchdown, the airplane rolled 
through a fence then nosed over.  The airplane was recovered and using some of the fuel that 
was in the airplane at the time of the accident, the engine was started and found to operate 
normally.  Review of the icing probability chart revealed that the conditions were favorable for 
moderate icing at cruise power or serious icing at descent power. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The total loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. 
Page 2 of 6MIA99LA144
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. OBJECT - FENCE
Page 3 of 6MIA99LA144
Factual Information
 On May 1, 1999, about 0920 central daylight time, a Cessna 172H, N5105G, registered to a 
private individual, nosed over after a forced landing in a field near Sylvan Springs, Alabama.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 
CFR Part 91 instructional flight.  The airplane was substantially damaged and the student pilot, 
the sole occupant, was not injured.  The flight originated at 0905, from the Bessemer Airport, 
Bessemer, Alabama.
     The pilot stated that before takeoff, he preflighted the airplane with no discrepancies noted.  
The flight departed with full fuel tanks and after takeoff, he flew to the area of his mother-in-
law's house, circled the area, flew to another area, and returned to the area of his in-law's 
house.  He applied carburetor heat, reduced the throttle, for one last look, then pushed the 
throttle and carburetor heat controls; there was no response from the engine.  He pulled the 
throttle control then pushed it again but there was no response from the engine.  He later 
stated that he thought the engine was at idle rpm.  He then verified that the magneto switch 
was in the "both" position, but did not move it, and verified that the mixture control was in the 
""full rich" position, which had not been changed since takeoff.  He then pumped the throttle 
control and the primer control, and the engine responded momentarily with each application, 
but not enough to maintain altitude.  He began flying toward a field he noted and just before 
touchdown, he pulled the mixture control to the idle cut-off position, and placed the magneto 
switch to the "off" position.  After touchdown, the airplane traveled through a barb wire fence 
then nosed over.  He noted after exiting the airplane that fuel was leaking from the fuel tank 
vent line.
     The airplane was examination at the accident site by an FAA inspector who noted fuel 
leakage from both fuel tanks which contained automotive fuel.  The airplane was recovered and 
a serviceable propeller was installed for the attempted engine run.  Additionally, following the 
accident, the fuel tanks were drained but the drained fuel was added for the engine run.  The 
engine was started, operated at idle for 5 minutes, then operated to 1,700 rpm where magneto 
check was performed.  The left and right magneto drop was 60 and 50 rpm, respectively.  Also, 
carburetor heat was applied and the engine rpm decreased 125 rpm.  The throttle was 
increased full forward for about 15 seconds and the engine rpm increased to 2,300 rpm.  The 
engine was then secured.
     Review of the carburetor icing probability chart revealed the conditions were favorable for 
moderate icing at cruise power or serious icing at descent power.
Page 4 of 6MIA99LA144
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/08/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
25 hours (Total, all aircraft), 24 hours (Total, this make and model), 6 hours (Pilot In Command, 
all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N5105G
Model/Series:
172H 172H
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
17256222
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/02/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
16 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4672 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-300-D
Registered Owner:
ROBERT C. YOUNG
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
ROBERT C. YOUNG
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA99LA144
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BHM, 644 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0853 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
BESSEMER, AL (EKY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0905 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TIMOTHY    W MONVILLE
Adopted Date:
09/07/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
CLOVIS L JACKSON; BIRMINGHAM, AL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA99LA144
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
