Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
EDGEWOOD, TX
Accident Number:
FTW98FA291
Date & Time:
07/01/1998, 0923 CDT 
Registration:
N9689A
Aircraft:
Cessna 140A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness observed the airplane taxi out and takeoff on runway 13.  The witness reported that 
there were no unusual sounds coming from the engine.  Two other witnesses north of the 
airport reported that they heard the airplane's engine 'sputtering.'  The airplane was flying low 
over the trees at an altitude of approximately 50 to 60 feet above the ground.  Both witnesses 
reported that prior to the airplane starting a turn toward the approach end of runway 13, the 
engine 'stop[ped].'  As the airplane started to turn toward the runway, it 'took a nose dive' and 
impacted the ground. The fuel line from the gascolator to the carburetor was found fractured 
and separated from its fitting, which was still attached to the gascolator.  An examination of the 
fuel line by an NTSB metallurgist revealed that, 'the fuel line separated through the flexible 
hose as a result of extensive wear.'  According to entries in maintenance records, the aircraft's 
last annual inspection was completed on December 1, 1997, about 21.3 hours prior to the 
accident. Continuity was established to all flight controls. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain minimum required airspeed for flight.  Factors were the worn 
fuel line, which separated, and the failure of the maintenance personnel to locate the worn fuel 
line during the annual inspection. 
Page 2 of 7FTW98FA291
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE - WORN
2. FUEL SYSTEM,LINE - SEPARATION
3. (F) MAINTENANCE,ANNUAL INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO LANDING AREA (EMERGENCY)
Findings
4. (C) AIRSPEED(VS) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7FTW98FA291
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 1, 1998, at 0923 central daylight time, a Cessna 140A airplane, N9689A, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted the ground during a forced landing following the loss 
of engine power while on takeoff climb near Edgewood, Texas.  The instrument rated 
commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was fatally injured.  The airplane was 
registered to and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight 
plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 cross-country flight.  
The flight had originated from the Thompson Field Airport, Canton, Texas, about 5 minutes 
prior to the accident.
A witness at the Thompson Field Airport reported to the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) 
that she observed the airplane taxi to the approach end of runway 13 and taxi back to the 
vicinity of the hangar.  She thought that the pilot was going to park the airplane.  The airplane 
then turned around, taxied out, and departed on runway 13.  The witness further reported that 
there were no unusual sounds coming from the engine as the airplane was taking off.
Witnesses near the accident site, north of the airport, reported to the NTSB IIC that they heard 
the airplane's engine "sputtering."  One witness observed the airplane flying low over the trees.  
Both witnesses estimated that the altitude of the airplane was approximately 50 to 60 feet 
above the ground.  The witnesses further reported that prior to the airplane starting a turn 
toward the approach end of runway 13, the engine "stop[ped]."  As the airplane started to turn 
toward the runway, it "took a nose dive, hitting nose first, then right wing."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The 68-year-old commercial pilot's last biennial flight review was on October 29, 1996, and it 
was accomplished in a Cessna 172 airplane.  According to the pilot's flight logbook, as of June 
25, 1998, he had accumulated a total flight time of 698.7 hours, of which 134.2 hours were 
logged in the accident airplane.
According to FAA records, the pilot held a valid second class medical certificate, issued May 26, 
1998.  The certificate stipulated a limitation to wear corrective lenses for distant vision, and 
possess corrective lenses for near vision when operating an aircraft.   
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The 1950 Cessna model 140A, serial number 15410, was equipped with a Continental O-200-A, 
100 horsepower engine.  Maintenance records showed that the engine was overhauled on 
February 15, 1990, tachometer time 426.96 hours, with a total engine time of 3,522.36 hours.  
According to entries in maintenance records, the last annual inspection was completed on 
December 1, 1997, tachometer time 635.9 hours, with a total aircraft time of 3,686.84 hours.  
The tachometer at the time of the accident showed 657.21 hours.  A review of the airframe and 
engine records did not reveal evidence of any anomalies or uncorrected maintenance defects.
The son of the pilot reported to the NTSB IIC that he had flown the airplane the Sunday prior 
to the accident, and no discrepancies were noted.  After his flight, the airplane was fueled and 
then parked.
WRECKAGE IMPACT INFORMATION
Page 4 of 7FTW98FA291
Examination of the accident site revealed that the airplane impacted the ground on a measured 
magnetic heading of 262 degrees, and came to a stop 49.5 feet from the initial ground scar.  
The airplane came to rest upright on a measured magnetic heading of 358 degrees.
Examination of the airplane revealed that the front of the airplane from the firewall forward 
was displaced upward.  The leading edges of both wings were crushed aft, and the wing tip of 
the right wing was bent aft.
Examination of the engine revealed that one propeller blade was bent slightly forward and the 
other blade was straight.  Finger compression and continuity was established to all cylinders.  
Both magnetos were removed from the engine and sparked at all terminals when hand rotated.  
No fuel was found in the carburetor bowl; however, it was damp and had the smell of fuel.  The 
gascolator bowl was broken and its filter screen was clear.  The fuel line from the gascolator to 
the carburetor was fractured and separated from its fitting, which was attached to the 
gascolator.  The fuel line and fitting were removed and sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory 
for further examination.
Examination of the airplane's cockpit revealed that the throttle was at the idle position, the 
mixture control was full rich, the carburetor heat was off, the fuel selector was selecting both 
fuel tanks, and the ignition switch was selecting both magnetos.  Continuity was established to 
all flight controls.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The autopsy was performed at the Southwestern Institute Of Forensic Sciences, Dallas, Texas.  
There was no evidence found of any preexisting disease that could have contributed to the 
accident.
Toxicology analysis performed by the Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI), Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, was negative for drugs and alcohol.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The pilot had his seat belt fastened at the time of the accident; however, the aircraft was not 
equipped with shoulder harnesses.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The fuel line was examined at the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, D.C.  
Examination by an NTSB metallurgist revealed that, "the fuel line separated through the 
flexible hose as a result of extensive wear."
ADDITIONAL DATA
The airplane was released to the owner's son.
Page 5 of 7FTW98FA291
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
68, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/26/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
699 hours (Total, all aircraft), 134 hours (Total, this make and model), 610 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N9689A
Model/Series:
140A 140A
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15410
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/01/1997, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
21 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3708 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
ERNEST M. DEPUE
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
ERNEST M. DEPUE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7FTW98FA291
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
CANTON, TX (1TA7)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
MESQUITE, TX (HQZ)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0920 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DOUGLAS    D WIGINGTON
Adopted Date:
02/16/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
FRED R RAYMOND; DALLAS, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7FTW98FA291
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
