Page 1 of 3WPR18FA131
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Reno, NV
Accident Number:
WPR18FA131
Date & Time:
05/01/2018, 1930 PDT 
Registration:
N352BT
Aircraft:
AMERICAN AIR RACING LTD 
THUNDER MUSTANG
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On May 1, 2018, about 1930 Pacific daylight time, an experimental amateur-built, American 
Air Racing Thunder Mustang (Blue Thunder II), N352BT sustained substantial damage during 
a forced landing at Reno/Stead Airport, Reno, Nevada. The airplane was registered to TM-1 
Ltd. and operated by the airline transport pilot under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal 
Regulations 
Part 91 as a personal flight. The pilot was fatally injured. The local flight departed 
Reno about 1815. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The airplane was taking part in an in-flight photography mission with another Thunder 
Mustang, with the photographs being taken from a Beechcraft Bonanza. After about one hour 
of flight, which included multiple north-south passes north of the airport, the group agreed to 
end the mission and return to Reno.
As the airplane's approached within about 2 miles of the airport from the north, the accident 
pilot transmitted a "mayday" call over the common traffic advisory frequency. The pilot of the 
other Thunder Mustang replied, asking for a confirmation, and the pilot responded again with 
a mayday call adding that he intended to land on runway 14. The other pilot watched as the 
accident airplane began to descend towards the airport. He observed it overshoot the runway 
14 centerline to the south, and then begin a sweeping 180째 left turn followed by a right turn to 
rejoin the centerline. By this time the airplane was midfield and low over the runway, flying at 
what he judged to be a high speed. He could not tell if the airplane had touched down or was 
still floating, and as it approached the end of the runway, it veered off the right side and nosed 
over.
The airplane came to rest inverted in a gravel area about 20 ft right of the runway edge, and 80 
ft short of the runways paved end. The runway surface exhibited a 1,200-ft-long series of 
intermittent black rubber transfer marks, and propeller blade gouges leading from the runway 
centerline to the airplane.
A runway construction crew, along with the other pilots from the photography mission, all 
arrived at the accident site within about 3 minutes, followed a few minutes later by the local 
fire department. They observed that the vertical stabilizer had folded right against the 
Page 2 of 3WPR18FA131
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
horizontal stabilizer, and that the canopy was shattered by ground impact. The pilot remained 
in his seat within the airplane and his helmet appeared to be impinged against the gravel 
surface. After multiple attempts to move and lift the airplane, he was extracted about 45 
minutes later.
The airplane was equipped with a liquid-cooled, fuel injected, 12-cylinder engine manufactured 
by Ryan Falconer Racing Engines, and a three-blade constant-speed propeller manufactured 
by Hartzell Propellers. The engine's fuel pump, water pump, propeller governor, auxiliary 
alternator, and both the scavenge and pressure oil pumps, were driven by the engine 
crankshaft via pulleys and two parallel serpentine belts. Post-accident examination revealed 
that the water pump pulley had separated from the pump drive flange. The pulley mounting 
bolt heads had detached, leaving their threaded stud ends still in the flange. Both serpentine 
belts had also detached, along with the top of the engine coolant outlet hose, which was 
adjacent to the pulley (Photo 1). No other mechanical anomalies were noted, and the pump 
assembly was retained for further examination.
Photo 1: Water Pump Pulley Assembly
Page 3 of 3WPR18FA131
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AMERICAN AIR RACING LTD
Registration:
N352BT
Model/Series:
THUNDER MUSTANG NO 
SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
Yes
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KRTS, 5053 ft msl
Observation Time:
1435 UTC
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
4째C / 1째C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
4 knots / , 320째
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
29.91 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Reno, NV (RTS)
Destination: 
Reno, NV (RTS)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.661389, -119.867778
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eliott Simpson
Additional Participating Persons:
Donald F Morgan; Federal Aviation Adminstration FSDO; Reno, NV
Les Doud; Hartzell Propeller / Hartzell Engine Technologies; Montgomery, AL
Fred Roscher; 51 Aero; Reno, NV
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
