The flight instructor (CFI) was demonstrating an autorotation with a 180 degree turn to a soft 
sod area. The CFI reported that the helicopter touched down with only slight forward speed in 
a slightly nose low attitude. Following touchdown, the skids dug into the soft ground, and the 
helicopter began pitching forward. The CFI applied 'slight downward collective.' Subsequently, 
the helicopter nosed over, the main rotor blades contacted the ground, and the helicopter came 
to rest on its left side. The commercial pilot, who was receiving instruction, reported that the 
helicopter touched down smoothly in a level attitude 'carrying 5 to 10 knots forward speed.'  An 
FAA inspector recommended that local helicopter operators discontinue using the sod area for 
running landings and autorotations until the ground is considered hard enough for practice 
running landings. The CFI stated that at the time of the accident, the wind was variable, but 
generally aligned with the direction of landing. 
improper touchdown by the flight instructor.  A related factor was: soft sod in the 
touchdown/landing area. 
 On October 2, 1997, at 1440 central daylight time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N2163Y, registered 
to Flight Safety International, Inc., and operated by Petroleum Helicopter, Inc., as a Title 14 
CFR Part 91 instructional flight, was substantially damaged during a practice autorotational 
landing at the Acadiana Regional Airport, New Iberia, Louisiana.  The flight instructor 
sustained minor injuries, and the commercial pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a company flight plan was filed.  The flight originated from the 
Lafayette Regional Airport, Lafayette, Louisiana, about 40 minutes prior to the accident. 
According to the operator, the flight instructor was demonstrating an autorotation with a 180 
degree turn to the sod area adjacent to Seaway 34.  The operator added that "the winds were 
variable, but were generally aligned with the landing direction."  The fight instructor reported 
to the operator that "the aircraft touched down with only slight forward speed in a slightly nose 
low attitude."  Following touchdown, the helicopter began pitching over on its nose and the 
flight instructor applied "slight downward collective."  Subsequently, the helicopter nosed over, 
the main rotor blades contacted the ground ,and the helicopter came to rest on its left side. 
The commercial pilot receiving instruction stated in the narrative portion of the NTSB 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), that the aircraft touched down 
smoothly in a level attitude.  He added that "we were carrying 5 to 10 knots forward speed" 
during the landing. 
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that the tailboom was separated at 
the fuselage, the airframe sustained structural damage, and the main rotor and tail rotor blades 
were damaged.  The FAA inspector confirmed that the ground was very soft and this condition 
contributed to the skids of the helicopter to dig into the soft ground, resulting in the helicopter 
to nose over. 
The FAA inspector recommended that the local helicopter operators to discontinue using the 
sod area for running landings and autorotations until the sod area is hard enough to practice 
running landing.
