The pilot reported that the airplane lifted off at 70 knots.  After accelerating in ground effect 
the airplane became 'unstable in the roll axis' so he added power.  He reported that the left 
wing tip contacted the runway approximately 3/4 the way down the runway.  The pilot then 
added additional power at which point the left wing contacted the grass off the left side of the 
departure end of the runway.  The pilot then reduced the power to idle and landed the airplane 
in the grass collapsing the landing gear.  The pilot reported that the engines sounded normal 
throughout the accident sequence.  Investigation revealed another Beech 18 had taken off on 
the same runway, but in the opposite direction of N916TM less than one minute prior to the 
accident. 
the pilot's failure identify the unsafe condition (vortex turbulence) which existed due to 
departing airplane and his subsequent inability to control the airplane once encountering the 
turbulence. 
 On October 2, 1997, at 0605 central daylight time, a Beech E18S, N916TM, operated by May 
Air Express, collided with the terrain during takeoff on runway 31 (2,850' x 75') at the Lake 
Elmo Airport, Lake Elmo, Minnesota, while on a 14 CFR Part 91 positioning flight.  The 
airplane was substantially damaged.  Neither the pilot nor the pilot-rated passenger on board 
were injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The airplane was being flown to 
Minneapolis, Minnesota, to pick up a cargo load when the accident occurred.
The airplane lifted off at 70 knots.  He reported he allowed the airplane to accelerate in ground 
effect for several seconds after which time the airplane became "... unstable in the roll axis."  
He reported he added power as there was not enough runway left to land on.  The airplane was 
3/4 the way down the runway when the left wing tip touched the runway.  He reported that at 
this point he added more power at which point the left wing tip contacted the terrain off the left 
side of the departure end of the runway causing the nose to pitch up.  He then reduce the 
power to idle and the aircraft touched down in the grass collapsing the landing gear.
The pilot stated that the airplane normally lifts off between 70 and 75 knots when it is light.  In 
addition, he stated that the engines sounded normal during the accident sequence.
An inspector from the Minneapolis, Minnesota, FAA Flight Standards District Office reported 
that another Beech 18 had taken off on the same runway, but in the opposite direction of 
N916TM less than one minute prior to the accident.
