The pilot departed the airport for a short local flight.  The pilot stated he throttled back and 
could no longer maintain control of the aircraft.  He said he tried to increase the power, but the 
engine quit.  He descended in a left bank into trees.  The previous day the pilot added a door kit 
to the aircraft.  The manufacturer of the kit recommends adding a rudder trim tab to the 
aircraft.  No trim tab was found.  Examination revealed that the fuel in the tank had 'excessive 
oil to fuel ratio.'  The engine run unsuccessful until the spark plugs were changed. 
the improper oil to gas mixture in the fuel during refueling and the pilot did not follow the 
written instructions from the kit manufacturer.  Factors contributing to the accident were the 
pilot could not maintain directional control and the low altitude. 
 On October 1, 1997, at 1830 eastern daylight time (edt), a Mikowski Challenger II S, N19006, 
owned and piloted by a private pilot, was destroyed when it collided with the terrain shortly 
after takeoff.  The pilot reported serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time of the accident.  The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was not operating on a flight plan.  
The flight departed Home Acres Sky Ranch Airport, Lake City, Michigan, at 1828 edt.
In the pilot's written statement he said he took off to fly over a farm field.  The pilot said he 
"throttled back a little and started a shallow left turn."  He stated as he tried to get out of the 
bank, the airplane would not respond.  The pilot said he then "tried to give it more power and 
the engine quit."  He said the airplane "continued in the downward left spiral until it hit a tree."
Several witnesses saw and heard the crash.  One witness stated he "...observed an airplane that 
was flying really low to the trees and then [he saw] the airplane make a U-turn..." and crash 
into trees.  Other witnesses only heard the aircraft engine quit and heard the tree impact.
The owner/pilot of the aircraft reported putting a Challenger II door kit on his aircraft the day 
prior to the accident.  A notice that comes with the kit states that there will be right rudder trim 
necessary when flying the aircraft with the doors installed.  The manufacturer of the kit 
recommends adding a 6-inch by 3-inch trim tab on the rudder, which should be "deflected to 
the left about 20 to 30 degrees."  No trim tab was found on the aircraft.
A test of the engine by Optimus Aircraft Service of Lake City, Michigan, witnessed by two 
inspectors with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Grand Rapids FSDO, found the fuel 
in the tank had an "excessive oil to fuel ratio."  An attempt to run the engine was not successful 
with the original spark plugs.  New spark plugs were installed in the engine and the engine ran 
normal.
