The pilot attempted takeoff with the mixture controls in an intermediate lean position.  The 
right engine stopped running approximately 300 feet agl, and the pilot elected to land straight 
ahead rather than attempt a single engine return for landing.  When asked about the lean 
mixture setting for takeoff, the pilot stated that her mechanic had told her to do it that way. 
The pilot's improper use of the mixture controls. 
 On March 2, 1998, at 1230 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna 310C, N608G, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted terrain following takeoff from the William J. Fox 
Airport, Lancaster, California.  There were minor injuries to the commercial pilot and one 
passenger and no damage to ground structures or surrounding terrain.
The pilot stated to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that after the right 
engine stopped at an altitude of approximately 300 feet agl, the decision was made to land 
straight ahead with the gear down rather than attempt a single engine closed traffic pattern.
Upon examination of the aircraft cockpit following the forced landing, the FAA inspector found 
both mixture controls in an intermediate lean position.  When he interviewed the pilot as to 
why that position was used for takeoff, she stated that her aircraft mechanic had told her to do 
it that way.  No other airframe discrepancies were noted and the aircraft had been refueled 
prior to takeoff.
An examination of the aircraft engines was conducted and no evidence of mechanical 
malfunction was found in either engine.  Both rotated freely, had thumb compression on all 
cylinders with corresponding valve action, and ignition was verified to all sparkplugs.  There 
was no contamination found in the fuel systems and the engine oil was clear for both.  The 
spline drive on the right engine driven fuel pump was found partially severed and there was 
rust on the inside of the pump housing.  However, the pump was flow tested using an electric 
drill to turn it and it pumped a solid stream of fuel with no cavitation bubbles visible.
