While on final approach to runway 35 at the McGehee Catfish Restaurant Airport, the aircraft 
encountered a north-westerly crosswind and the pilot performed a go-around.  During a 
second approach to runway 35, an 'unpredictable crosswinds/windshear exceeded control 
capability of A/C,' and blew the aircraft to the right of the runway into the top of 30 foot trees.  
The pilot applied full power, the aircraft began to climb, and he turned into the wind. 
Subsequently, the aircraft struck a power line, and came to rest inverted about 100 yards south 
of the runway.  The pilot reported that at the time of the accident, the wind was from 330 
degrees at 18 knots gusting to 25. 
The pilot's improper compensation for the wind conditions. A factor was the crosswind. 
 On March 1, 1998, at 1415 central standard time, a Cessna 172K airplane, N84561, registered to 
and operated by a private owner, was substantially damaged following a loss of control during 
final approach at the at McGehee Catfish Restaurant Airport, Marietta, Oklahoma.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight.  The private pilot and one passenger were seriously injured, and the other 
passenger sustained minor injuries.  The flight originated from Tyler, Texas, at 1230.
The 1,386 hour pilot reported that while on final approach to runway 35, the aircraft 
encountered a north-westerly crosswind and he performed a go-around.  During his second 
approach to runway 35, an "unpredictable crosswinds/windshear exceeded [the] control 
capability of A/C," and blew the aircraft to the right of the runway into the top of 30 foot trees.  
The pilot further reported that he applied full power, the aircraft began to climb, and he turned 
into the wind.  Subsequently, the aircraft struck a power line, and came to rest inverted about 
100 yards south of the runway.
The pilot also reported that at the time of the accident, the wind was from 330 degrees at 18 
knots gusting to 25.
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that the firewall was damaged, and 
the nose landing gear assembly was separated from the aircraft.  The left and right wing struts, 
the right horizontal stabilizer, and the leading edge of the left wing were damaged.  He added 
that runway 35 is a 2,450 feet long, by 55 feet wide grass strip situated in a low area 
surrounded by hills and trees on both sides.
