The pilot reported that he was on approach to runway 30.  As he initiated the flare, he felt the 
airplane bleed off airspeed quicker than anticipated and realized that 'the aircraft was quickly 
starting to stall.'  The pilot stated that he knew that he was too high and applied power to arrest 
the stall but the left wing dropped and seemed to start flying again when power was applied.  
The pilot then attempted to abort the landing and execute a go-around but the aircraft veered 
to the left off the runway.  The left wingtip contacted the ground, followed by the engine and 
right wing.  The right wing broke off at the wing splice point and the aircraft nosed over and 
came to rest inverted.  The pilot reported that at the time of the accident he had logged only 1 
hour in this type of aircraft. 
The failure of the pilot to maintain adequate airspeed during the approach, which resulted in a 
stall.  An additional cause was the pilot's failure to maintain directional control during the 
attempted go around.  A factor in this accident is the pilot's lack of total experience in aircraft 
type. 
 On March 1, 1998, at 1641 hours Pacific standard time, a Sweet-House RD Mustang 2, 
N546SH, collided with terrain short of the runway 30 at the Madera, California, airport while 
attempting to land.  The aircraft sustained substantial damage and the pilot/owner, the sole 
occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed.  The local personal flight began at 1600 and was terminating at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that he was on approach to runway 30.  As he initiated the flare, he felt "the 
airplane bleed off airspeed quicker than anticipated," and realized that "the aircraft was quickly 
starting to stall."  The pilot reported that he "knew that [he] was too high and applied power to 
arrest the stall [but] the left wing dropped [and] seemed to start flying again when power was 
applied."  The pilot further reported that he then attempted to abort the landing and execute a 
go-around but the aircraft veered to the left off the runway.  The left wingtip impacted the 
ground and the pilot reported that he then "had no control over the aircraft."  The propeller 
and engine then impacted the ground and the right wing broke off at the wing splice point.  The 
aircraft nosed over and came to rest inverted.
The pilot reported that at the time of the accident he had logged only 1 hour in this type of 
aircraft.
