During the landing flare/touchdown, the airplane was configured for the gusting wind; 
however, during the landing roll, the wind 'gust let up and the airplane departed the paved 
runway to the left side. The turf was soggy and wet and the airplane went into a ditch 
paralleling the runway, collapsing the nose gear before the airplane stopped.' The pilot 
obtained weather briefings and was aware of the crosswind conditions at the destination 
airport. During the landing, there was a direct crosswind from the left with the winds at 10 to 
15 knots gusting at 20 to 25 knots. The pilot stated that the accident could have been prevented 
by landing at an alternate airport in order to land more directly into the wind. The pilot further 
stated that he is taking flight 'lessons in a tail dragger (tailwheel aircraft) in order to gain more 
experience of managing an aircraft in cross wind conditions.' 
The pilot's inadequate compensation for the gusting crosswinds. Factors were the gusting 
crosswinds and the pilot's lack of experience in gusting crosswinds. 
 On March 1, 1998, at 1600 central standard time, a Piper PA-32-300 airplane, N4GQ, 
sustained substantial damage following a loss of control while landing at Rayville, Louisiana.  
The airplane was owned and operated by a private individual under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The 
private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the personal cross country flight and a flight plan was not filed for the flight that 
departed Waco, Texas, at 1400.
During a personal interview, conducted by the investigator-in-charge, and on the 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot reported that he 
obtained weather briefings prior to and during the flight and was aware of the cross wind 
conditions at the destination airport.  During the landing on runway 36, there was a direct 
cross wind from the left with the winds at 10 to 15 knots gusting at 20 to 25 knots.  During the 
landing flare/touchdown the airplane was configured for the gusting wind; however, during the 
landing roll, the wind "gust let up and the airplane departed the paved runway to the left side.  
The turf was soggy and wet and the airplane went into a ditch paralleling the runway, 
collapsing the nose gear before the airplane stopped."
An FAA Designated Airworthiness Representative examined the airplane.  He found structural 
damage occurred to the propeller, nose gear, engine mount, firewall, and fuselage.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, the pilot stated that the accident could have 
been prevented by landing at an alternate airport in order to land more directly into the wind.  
The pilot further stated that he is taking flight "lessons in a tail dragger (tailwheel aircraft) in 
order to gain more experience on managing an aircraft in cross wind conditions."
