Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
KODIAK, AK
Incident Number:
ANC96IA077
Date & Time:
06/01/1996, 1430 AKD 
Registration:
N9608G
Aircraft:
Cessna 206
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he was landing on a beach near a remote river to pick up fishermen.  
During the landing roll-out, the pilot slowed the airplane to about 5 knots and was beginning to 
turn the airplane around.  The nose wheel encountered an area of soft sand during the turn and 
the nose wheel strut fractured.  The airplane was equipped with 10.5 X 28.5 X 15 tundra tires, 
wheels, and hubs that were installed on the main landing gear under an FAA Supplemental 
Type Certificate.  The STC requires that the airplane must be equipped with an FAA approved 
nose wheel/tire installation.  The airplane had an oversized 8.50 nose wheel tire and tube 
installed that was approved by an FAA FSDO inspector under a field approval.  The FAA's 
handbook for airworthiness inspectors indicates that modifications to landing gear are major 
alterations and require an STC. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for landing.  Factors in the accident were: soft terrain, 
the use of an oversize nose wheel tire, and the FAA's inadequate field approval process for 
tundra tires. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING
Findings
1. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT
2. (C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) INADEQUATE CERTIFICATION/APPROVAL,AIRCRAFT - FAA(ORGANIZATION)
Page 2 of 5ANC96IA077
Factual Information
 On June 1, 1996, about 1430 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Cessna 206, 
N9608G, sustained a broken nose wheel strut during landing on a remote beach, about 74 
miles southwest of Kodiak, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) cross-country positioning flight under Title 14 CFR Part 91 when the incident occurred.  
The airplane, registered to Redemption Inc., Kodiak, Alaska, and operated by Island Air 
Service, sustained minor damage.  The certificated airline transport pilot, the sole occupant, 
was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  VFR company flight following 
procedures were in effect.  The flight originated at the Kodiak airport about 1350.
The pilot reported that he was landing on a beach near the Ayakulik River to pick up 
fishermen.  During the landing roll-out, the pilot slowed the airplane to about 5 knots and was 
beginning to turn the airplane around. The nose wheel encountered an area of soft sand during 
the turn and the nose wheel strut fractured.  The airplane received damage to the engine 
cowling and propeller.
The airplane is equipped with Bushmaster Management Company, 10.5 X 28.5 X 15 (Model 
SWS-1100-A) tundra tires, wheels, and hubs that were installed on the main landing gear 
under a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) 
SA3611NM.  The STC requires that the airplane must be equipped with an FAA approved nose 
wheel/tire installation.  The airplane did have an 8.50 tire and tube installed that was field 
approved by an FAA airworthiness inspector from the Anchorage Flight Standards District 
Office (FSDO) on 5/11/89.
A review of the FAA's Airworthiness Inspectors Handbook, order 8300.10, revealed that in 
Volume 2, Chapter 1, Perform Field Approval of Major Repairs and Major Alterations, 
Paragraph 7, Required Engineering Approval, states in part: "...A.  Many alterations that are 
commonly called major alterations are actually major design changes and will require a 
Supplemental Type Certificate.  Previously unapproved major changes to structural strength, 
reliability, and operational characteristics affect the airworthiness of the product and therefore 
require engineering approval.  Typical major alterations in the category include the 
following:...(2)  Installation or relocation of equipment and systems or changes that may 
adversely affect structural integrity, flight, or ground handling characteristics of the 
aircraft...(5)  Changes in basic dimensions or external configurations of the aircraft, such as 
wing and tail platform or incidence angles, canopy, cowlings, contour or radii, or location of 
wing and tail fairings...(6)  Changes to landing gear, such as internal parts of chock struts, 
length, geometry of members, or brakes and brake systems...(8)  Changes to primary structure 
that may adversely affect strength or flutter and vibration characteristics."
Page 3 of 5ANC96IA077
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
25, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/07/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1950 hours (Total, all aircraft), 160 hours (Total, this make and model), 1850 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 250 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 90 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 6 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N9608G
Model/Series:
206 206
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
U20601808
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/04/1996, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
21 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8091 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-F48B
Registered Owner:
REDEMPTION INC.
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
ISLAND AIR SERVICE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
RI9A
Page 4 of 5ANC96IA077
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
60 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
10°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
, AK (ADQ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1350 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
SCOTT      R ERICKSON
Adopted Date:
03/31/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5ANC96IA077
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
