Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
PASCO, WA
Accident Number:
SEA96LA107
Date & Time:
06/01/1996, 1230 PDT 
Registration:
N1645A
Aircraft:
Piper PA-20
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The student pilot, who was flying solo at the time of the accident, reported that during the 
landing roll, the aircraft's left wing dropped and that he was unable to counter this wing drop 
with aileron.  He stated that the tailwheel-equipped aircraft began a 'sweeping [right-hand] 
turn' at this point.  He indicated on a sketch of the accident sequence that a 'L.H. tire skid 
mark' began at the point where the uncontrollable wing drop occurred, curving to the right 
until its termination point on the runway pavement, where he stated he believed the gear 
collapsed.  The aircraft came to rest on the right shoulder of the runway. FAA Advisory Circular 
61-21A, Flight Training Handbook, states that pilots of tailwheel aircraft must be especially 
vigilant for directional control problems during the after-landing roll since the aircraft's center 
of gravity is behind the main wheels, and notes that ailerons and rudder become less effective 
as the airplane slows during the landing roll.  The pilot reported that he had 87.4 total pilot 
hours including 33.8 hours in type, 16.4 solo hours in type, and 45.8 hours of tailwheel aircraft 
time; and had received his solo and tailwheel endorsements within the previous 2 1/2 months. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during the landing roll, which 
resulted in an inadvertent ground swerve and collapse of the left main gear. 
Page 2 of 6SEA96LA107
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
3. LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR STRUT - OVERLOAD
Page 3 of 6SEA96LA107
Factual Information
 On June 1, 1996, at approximately 1230 Pacific daylight time, a Piper PA-20, N1645A, being 
flown by a student pilot, sustained substantial damage in a loss of directional control and 
subsequent main landing gear collapse during landing rollout at Tri-Cities Airport in Pasco, 
Washington.  The pilot of the tailwheel-equipped aircraft, who was its sole occupant, was not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the 
local 14 CFR 91 solo instructional flight.
The pilot's landing attempt was on Pasco runway 21R (7,700 by 150 feet grooved asphalt.)  The 
pilot reported: 
Approach normal.  Flared for 3-point.  [Aircraft] ballooned slightly.  Added slight power 
to arrest second descent to a 3-point touchdown.  Right wing rose suddenly.  Pilot 
corrected....(windsock had just been observed with slight breeze from South).  Aircraft 
leveled momentarily; as ailerons lost effectiveness [aircraft] began sweeping [right hand] 
turn.  Pilot added takeoff power to realign [aircraft with centerline; power aggravated 
situation.  Pilot pulled power as aircraft passed through approximately 30 [degrees] from 
centerline.  [Aircraft] was settling on right hand side....Aircraft came to rest on shoulder of 
runway.
On a hand-sketched diagram of the accident sequence, the pilot indicated that a "L.H. tire skid 
mark" began at approximately the point where a "2nd wing drop" occurred which he "could not 
bring up [with] ailerons", and that the aircraft began a right turn at this point.  The pilot 
depicted the skid mark as curving to the right, and indicated at the skid mark's termination 
point on the diagram:  "gear folds under (I guess)".  The indicated termination point of the skid 
mark was on the pavement in the right half of the runway.  The pilot described the weather at 
the time of the accident as fair, temperature 70 degrees, and winds less than 5 knots.
FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 61-21A, Flight Training Handbook (1980), states the following 
regarding the after-landing roll:
The pilot must be alert for directional control difficulties immediately upon and after 
touchdown due to the ground friction on the wheels.  This is especially true in tailwheel-type 
airplanes because...the center of gravity [CG] is behind the main wheels....Any difference 
between the direction the...airplane is traveling and the direction it is headed will produce a 
moment about the pivot point of the wheels and the airplane will tend to swerve....The 
combination of centrifugal force acting on the CG and ground friction of the main wheels 
resisting it...may... impose a sideward force which could collapse the landing gear.  Tailwheel-
type airplanes are most susceptible to ground loops late in the after-landing roll because 
rudder effectiveness decreases with the decreasing flow of air along the rudder surface as 
the airplane slows.
AC 61-21A also notes in the same section that "as the forward speed of the airplane decreases, 
the ailerons will become less effective."
The pilot reported that at the time of the accident, he had 87.4 hours of total pilot time 
including 33.8 hours in the accident aircraft type, 16.4 hours solo in type, and 45.8 hours of 
tailwheel aircraft time.  The pilot's instructor authorization to solo the PA-20 on his student 
pilot certificate (per 14 CFR 61.87c), and his instructor tailwheel aircraft endorsement in his 
pilot logbook  (per 14 CFR 61.31g), were both dated March 18, 1996, about 2 1/2 months before 
Page 4 of 6SEA96LA107
the accident.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/05/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
88 hours (Total, all aircraft), 34 hours (Total, this make and model), 28 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N1645A
Model/Series:
PA-20 PA-20
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
20-843
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/20/1995, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
31 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2300 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
DENNIS E. KELSEY
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
DENNIS E. KELSEY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
KELSEY FIVE, INC.
Operator Designator Code:
Page 5 of 6SEA96LA107
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (PSC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1030 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
TRI-CITIES (PSC)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
407 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
21R
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
7700 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
GREGG        NESEMEIER
Adopted Date:
04/03/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA96LA107
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
