National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Summerville, GA
Accident Number: ATL03LA091
Date & Time: 05/04/2003, 1900 EDT
Registration: None
Aircraft: Homebuilt Unkown
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to family members, the uncertificated person operated his airplane from a private airstrip about 1/4 mile from the accident site.
Shortly after take off the airplane collided with the ground.
A  witness reported a loud noise, and thought a car had crashed.
The sheriff department dispatched deputies to the scene and discovered the downed airplane.
Examination of the downed airplane revealed that the flight controls were conected and moved freely.
The fuel tanks were not breached and fuel was found in both wing tanks.
The uncertificated pilot did not report any problems with the airplane prior to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain airspeed which resulted in an inadvertent stall, and subsequent collision with the ground.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On May 4, 2003, at 1900 eastern daylight time, a homebuilt, unregistered airplane, operated by an uncertificated pilot, collided with the ground while attempting to takeoff from a private grass airstrip in Summerville, Georgia.
The personal flight was operated under the provision of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the uncertificated pilot received serious injuries.
The flight departed Summerville, Georgia, at 1857 on May 4, 2003.
According to family members, the uncertificated pilot operated his airplane from a private airstrip about 1/4 mile from the accident site.
At the approximated time of the accident, a witness reported a loud noise and thought a car had crashed.
The sheriff department dispatched deputies to the scene and discovered the downed airplane.
The wreckage distribution  covered an area of 40 feet long and 30 feet wide along a magnetic path of 230 degrees.
Examination of the downed airplane revealed that the right wing had crush damage with pieces of tree bark embedded into the leading edge.
A broken tree with pieces of bark missing was located two feet away from the right wing.
The flight controls were connected and moved freely.
The fuel tanks were not breached and fuel was found in both wing tanks.
The uncertificated pilot did not report any problems with the airplane prior to the accident.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
