National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Gordon, NE
Accident Number: CHI03LA121
Date & Time: 05/04/2003, 1430 MDT
Registration: N9682P
Aircraft: Piper PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane sustained substantial damage when it stalled on takeoff and impacted terrain.
The pilot reported observing approaching weather which he described as a squall line approximately two miles west of his location.
He also noted that a light rain had started and was accompanied by pea-size hail.
Weather conditions reported by the Pine Ridge Airport (IEN) automated surface observing system, at 1530, were winds from 340 degrees at 14 knots, gusting to 21 knots, 10 miles visibility, and few clouds at 3,300 feet above ground level.
The weather report included a notation of thunderstorms in the vicinity and lightening in the distance to the west and southwest.
The pilot recalled taking off to the south and had begun his initial climb.
He reported that the aircraft started to buffet and he "knew a stall was coming."
In his statement the pilot noted the "aircraft stalled on takeoff, not enough altitude for recovery."
The aircraft bounced and the right wing and main landing gear impacted the terrain.
The aircraft then nosed over.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilots failure to maintain adequate airspeed which resulted in a stall.
Contributing factors to this accident were the rain, hail, and wind gusts.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - HAIL 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 5.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 flight and was not on a flight plan.
The pilot reported no injuries.
The intended destination was the pilot's private airstrip in Wounded Knee, South Dakota.
The pilot reported observing weather coming in from the west.
He described the approaching weather was a squall line approximately two miles west of his location.
He noted that a light rain had started and was accompanied by pea-sized hail and intermittent wind gusts.
The pilot reported taking off to the south and had begun his initial climb.
He reported the aircraft started to buffet and he "knew a stall was coming."
The pilot recalled thinking he would not be able to clear a rise that was ahead.
In his written statement the pilot noted the "aircraft stalled on takeoff, not enough altitude for recovery."
The aircraft bounced and the right wing and main landing gear impacted the terrain.
The aircraft then nosed over.
The pilot reported weather conditions at the scene as overcast clouds at 2,000 feet above ground level (agl), south winds at 10 knots, gusting to 25 knots.
He also noted light rain and hail.
Weather conditions reported by the Pine Ridge Airport (IEN) automated surface observing system, at 1530, were winds from 340 degrees at 14 knots, gusting to 21 knots, 10 miles visibility, and few clouds at 3,300 feet agl.
The report included a notation of thunderstorms in the vicinity and lightening in the distance to the west and southwest.
The pilot reported no malfunctions with the aircraft or engine prior to the accident.
The pilot stated that the accident could have been prevented by waiting for the frontal system to pass.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 50, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
