National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Roanoke, TX
Accident Number: FTW03LA143
Date & Time: 05/03/2003, 1500 CDT
Registration: N9789D
Aircraft: Piper PA-18A-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During the takeoff climb of the 3rd or 4th touch and go, "the engine lost power and began to sputter."
Prior to the flight, according to the cockpit fuel sight gauges observed by the private pilot, the left fuel tank indicated approximately 3/4 full of fuel, and the right tank indicated approximately 1/2 full of fuel.
The private pilot, who was receiving instruction for a tailwheel endorsement, stated the fuel selector was selected to the left fuel tank at the time the engine lost power.
After the engine lost power, the flight instructor initiated a forced landing to a field.
During the forced landing, the airplane impacted trees and terrain, and came to rest on its nose.
Examination of the airplane revealed the fuel system was intact, the left main fuel tank was empty, the right main fuel tank contained "plenty of fuel," and the fuel was clear of contaminants.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The flight instructor's inadequate in-flight planning/decision resulting in fuel starvation and the loss of engine power.
A contributing factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 2.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM - STARVATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 4.
The certified flight instructor (CFI) was not injured, and the private pilot receiving instruction sustained minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to Land Aviation LLC, of Argyle, Texas, and operated by Marcair, of Roanoke, Texas.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight.
The local flight departed Northwest Regional Airport approximately 1425.
The 260-hour private pilot was receiving a checkout for a tailwheel endorsement.
The private pilot reported that prior to the flight, according to the cockpit fuel sight gauges, the left fuel tank indicated approximately 3/4 full of fuel, and the right tank indicated approximately 1/2 full of fuel.
During the takeoff climb of the 3rd or 4th touch and go, "the engine lost power and began to sputter."
The private pilot stated that the fuel selector was selected to the left fuel tank at the time the engine lost power.
After the engine began to lose power, the CFI switched the fuel selector to the right tank position; however, no change in engine power was noted, and the CFI initiated a forced landing to a field.
During the forced landing, the airplane impacted trees and terrain, and came to rest on its nose.
An FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, reported that the right wing and the fuselage sustained structural damage.
The FAA inspector stated that the fuel system was intact, the left main fuel tank was empty, the right main fuel tank contained "plenty of fuel," and the fuel was clear of contaminants.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
