National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Skwentna, AK
Accident Number: ANC03LA048
Date & Time: 05/03/2003, 1200 AKD
Registration: N8240P
Aircraft: Piper PA-18-160
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported he was operating the airplane about 100 feet above the ground when he initiated a downwind turn.
He said that during the turn, the airplane encountered a downdraft, which pushed the airplane closer to the ground.
He immediately applied full power, but the engine did not appear to produce full power, and the airplane continued to descend.
He said due to the airplane's low altitude, he was unable to select a better landing area than a nearby frozen river.
The airplane landed hard on the ice, damaging the wings, fuselage, and landing gear.
The pilot indicated that he believed that the engine did not produce full power due to carburetor ice, which had accumulated since he had been operating the engine at a reduced power setting without carburetor heat.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to use carburetor heat, which resulted in the accumulation of carburetor ice, a partial loss of engine power, and a subsequent forced landing.
Factors contributing to the accident are a downdraft, the pilot operating the airplane at a low altitude, the presence of carburetor icing conditions, and the lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - DOWNDRAFT 2.
(F) LOW ALTITUDE FLIGHT/MANEUVER - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 4.
(C) CARBURETOR HEAT - NOT USED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #4: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On May 3, 2003, about 1200 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Piper PA-18-160 airplane, N8240P, sustained substantial damage when it collided with the frozen surface of a river during a forced landing following a partial loss of engine power.
The accident occurred about 80 miles northwest of Skwentna, Alaska.
The airline transport certificated pilot and the sole passenger were not injured.
The Title 14, CFR Part 91 personal flight operated in day visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The flight departed from an airstrip near Wasilla, Alaska, about 1030, and the destination was the area of the accident site.
The pilot contacted the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) on May 7.
He related that he and a passenger were on a pleasure flight, and that he had been flying about 100 feet above the ground at a reduced power setting.
He said he had initiated a 90 degree downwind turn, and hit a "sinker," which pushed the airplane towards the ground.
He immediately applied full power, but the engine did not seem to respond with maximum power.
The pilot indicated he did not have sufficient altitude to select a more desirable forced landing spot other than the frozen river nearby.
He said he leveled the wings, and the airplane hit hard on the ice, damaging the fuselage, wings, and landing gear.
When asked by the IIC if he was aware of why the engine did not seem to respond with maximum power, the pilot stated that he thought the engine had accumulated carburetor ice since he had been flying at a reduced power setting without the application of carburetor heat.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Commercial Age: 25, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
