National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Twentynine Palm, CA
Accident Number: LAX03LA146
Date & Time: 05/01/2003, 1400 PDT
Registration: N1607D
Aircraft: Cessna 170A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the landing rollout the airplane encountered a gust of wind and nosed over.
The pilot stated that approaching the airport he had received the local weather information from the airport's Unicom, which indicated the wind was from 320 degrees, at 12 knots, with occasional 28-knot gusts.
The pilot made a straight-in approach and touched down without incident on runway 26.
During the rollout, a wind gust was encountered.
The pilot indicated that despite his efforts at maintaining airplane control, he lost control and the airplane nosed over on the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation and his failure to maintain aircraft control.
The gusty wind condition was a contributing factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On May 1, 2003, about 1400 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 170A, N1607D, nosed over during landing rollout at the Twentynine Palms (uncontrolled) Airport, Twentynine Palms, California.
The airplane, operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged.
Neither the commercial pilot nor the passenger was injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed during the personal flight that was performed under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
No flight plan was filed.
The flight originated fromTehachapi, California, about 1250.
The pilot reported that approaching Twentynine Palms for landing he had received the local weather information from the airport's Unicom operator.
The pilot indicated that the wind was from about 320 degrees at 12 knots, with occasional 28-knot gusts.
The pilot made a straight- in approach and made a wheel landing without incident on runway 26, between 400 and 500 feet beyond the runway's threshold.
During rollout, the airplane began to weathervane to the right.
The pilot stated that he initially maintained directional control by applying rudder and left brake.
However, as he lowered the tail he lost control when a wind gust was encountered, and the airplane nosed over on the runway.
According to the pilot, during the accident no mechanical malfunctions or failures were experienced with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
