National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Montgomery, NY
Accident Number: NYC03LA096
Date & Time: 05/04/2003, 2300 EDT
Registration: N55854
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-180
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During the nighttime departure, the airplane accelerated normally, with the engine producing full power during the takeoff roll and initial climb.
Upon reaching approximately 300 to 400 feet above the ground, the engine began to lose power.
The CFI took the flight controls and performed a forced landing.
During the landing rollout, the airplane rolled through a shallow drainage swale, collapsing the nose and right main gear assemblies.
The airplane rotated to the right and came to rest upright.
Examination of the wreckage revealed that the fuel line, which ran between the fuel pump and the carburetor, was loose at the connection point on the carburetor.
When the electric fuel pump was activated, fuel was observed spraying from the connection point.
The airplane had accumulated about 20 hours of operation since a 100-hour inspection was performed 10 days prior to the accident.
A factor related to the accident was the dark night conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE FITTING - LOOSE 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,100-HOUR INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 4.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT Factual Information On May 4, 2003, about 2300 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-180, N55854, was substantially damaged during a forced landing, after experiencing a partial loss of power while departing from the Orange Country Airport, Montgomery, New York.
The certified flight instructor (CFI) and student pilot were not injured.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed the instructional flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the CFI, after completing a 1-hour cross-country flight, the airplane was taxied to runway 3, with the intention of practicing takeoffs and landings.
The CFI estimated that the fuel on board at the time of departure was approximately 34 gallons, and the fuel selector was placed on the right tank because the right fuel gauge was indicating slightly more fuel.
After the student completed the pre-takeoff checklist, the CFI confirmed that the fuel boost pump was on, the mixture was full rich, the carburetor heat was off, and the airplane was configured for takeoff.
During the departure, the airplane accelerated normally, with the engine producing full power during the takeoff roll and initial climb.
Upon reaching approximately 300 to 400 feet above the ground, the engine began to lose power.
The CFI took the flight controls and immediately executed the emergency checklist, which consisted of switching fuel tanks, confirming that the mixture was rich, the fuel boost pump on, and applying carburetor heat.
The CFI requested that the student attempt to switch the magnetos, which had no effect.
The CFI cycled the throttle several times, which made the engine surge briefly, but not produce enough power to maintain altitude.
The CFI advised the student that a landing would be made to a field, and instructed him to turn the fuel selector off, turn the boost pump off, and pull the mixture to lean.
As the ground came into view, the CFI observed a ditch approximately 8 feet deep, and extended the glide so the touchdown point would be beyond the ditch.
The airplane touched down clear of the ditch; however, during the landing rollout, the airplane rolled through a shallow drainage swale, collapsing the nose and right main gear assemblies.
The airplane rotated to the right and came to rest upright.
The wreckage was examined by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector.
He observed that the fuel line, which ran between the fuel pump and the carburetor, was loose at the connection point on the carburetor.
When the electric fuel pump was activated, fuel was observed spraying from the connection point.
Fuel was observed in both wing tanks, and was absent of debris and contamination.
Examination of the gascolator and the fuel line which ran between the fuel selector and the fuel pump, revealed an absence of fuel.
Blue stains were observed on the outer skin of the airplane, from the firewall area, extending about 4 feet aft.
The airplane had accumulated about 20 hours of operation since a 100-hour inspection was performed on April 25, 2003.
(2) Studs and nuts - for improper torquing and obvious defects.
(3) Internal engine - for cylinder compression and for metal particles or foreign matter on screens and sump drain plugs.
If there is weak cylinder compression, for improper internal condition and improper internal tolerances.
(4) Engine mount - for cracks, looseness of mounting, and looseness of engine to mount.
(5) Flexible vibration dampeners - for poor condition and deterioration.
(6) Engine controls - for defects, improper travel, and improper safetying.
(7) Lines, hoses, and clamps - for leaks, improper condition and looseness.
(8) Exhaust stacks - for cracks, defects, and improper attachment.
(9) Accessories - for apparent defects in security of mounting.
(10) All systems - for improper installation, poor general condition, defects, and insecure attachment.
(11) Cowling - for cracks, and defects."
Flight Instructor Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 34, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
