National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Montgomery, AL
Accident Number: ATL03LA086
Date & Time: 05/03/2003, 1745 EDT
Registration: N2938J
Aircraft: Cessna 150G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During cruise flight at 4500 feet mean sea level, the airplane collided with a flock of geese and began to vibrate violently.
The pilot made the decision to land the airplane and located a field for landing.
Upon initial touchdown on the field, the pilot realized that the field was marshy, and rough, and attempted a go-around.
The pilot stated he applied full power, but the airplane struggled to climb as the engine produced "2200 RPM, compared to the normal 2500 takeoff RPM."
He noticed a clearing to the left of the airplane, and while turning in the direction of the clearing, the landing gear and left wing clipped the trees.
The airplane came to rest on the ground about 30 feet beyond the trees, inverted.
The pilot transmitted distress calls over the Columbus Approach frequency and the National Guard frequency.
A nearby Air National Guard helicopter was directed to the accident location and airlifted the pilot to a nearby hospital.
Examination of the airplane revealed the right and left wing spars were buckled.
No mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by the pilot prior to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The in-flight collision with birds that resulted in a  partial loss of engine power, and subsequent in-flight collision with trees while maneuvering for an emergency landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) OBJECT - BIRD(S) ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE ---------- Occurrence #3: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO LANDING AREA (EMERGENCY) Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) ---------- Occurrence #5: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND 4.
The personal flight was operated under the provision of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the pilot received minor injuries.
The flight departed Columbus Airport, Columbus, Georgia, at 1449, on May 3, 2003.
According to the pilot, during cruise flight at 4500 feet mean sea level, the airplane collided with a flock of geese and began to vibrate violently.
The pilot made the decision to land the airplane and located a field for landing.
A traffic pattern approach to land was made, and the pilot set the flaps at 20 degrees and slowed to 70 knots.
Upon initial touchdown on the field, the pilot realized that the field was marshy, and rough, and attempted a go-around.
The pilot stated he applied full power, but the airplane struggled to climb as the engine produced "2200 RPM, compared to the normal 2500 takeoff RPM."
He noticed a clearing to the left of the airplane, and while turning in the direction of the clearing, the landing gear clipped a tree.
The left wing collided with another tree sending the airplane into a severe yaw to the left.
The airplane came to rest on the ground about 30 feet beyond the trees, inverted.
The pilot transmitted distress calls over the Columbus Approach frequency and the National Guard frequency.
A nearby Air National Guard helicopter was directed to the accident location and airlifted the pilot to a nearby hospital.
Examination of the airplane revealed the right and left wing spars were buckled.
No mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by the pilot prior to the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 19, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
