Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Nome, AK
Accident Number:
ANC11LA041
Date & Time:
06/01/2011, 2140 AKD 
Registration:
N168TT
Aircraft:
ECLIPSE AVIATION CORP EA500
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing gear not configured
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot indicated that, prior to the accident flight, the wing flaps had failed, but he decided to 
proceed with the flight contrary to the Airplane Flight Manual guidance. While conducting a 
no-flap approach to the airport, he decided that his airspeed was too fast to land, and he 
initiated a go-around. During the go-around, the airplane continued to descend, and the 
fuselage struck the runway. The pilot was able to complete the go-around, and realized that he 
had not extended the landing gear. He lowered the landing gear, and landed the airplane 
uneventfully. He elected to remain overnight at the airport due to fatigue. The next day, he 
decided to test fly the airplane. During the takeoff roll, the airplane had a severe vibration, and 
he aborted the takeoff. During a subsequent inspection, an aviation mechanic discovered that 
the center wing carry-through cracked when the belly skid pad deflected up into a stringer 
during the gear-up landing.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot landed without lowering the landing gear. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's 
decision to fly the airplane with an inoperative wing flap system.
Findings
Aircraft
Landing gear system - Not used/operated (Cause)
TE flap actuator - Malfunction (Factor)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Forgotten action/omission - Pilot (Cause)
Alertness/Fatigue - Pilot
Page 2 of 5ANC11LA041
Factual Information
On June 1, 2011, about 2140 Alaska daylight time, an Eclipse EA-500 Airplane, N168TT, 
sustained substantial damage during a go-around at the Nome Airport, Nome, Alaska. The 
commercial pilot and the sole passenger were not injured. The airplane was registered to and 
operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a 
personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules flight 
plan was in effect. The flight originated from the Ugolny Airport (UHMA), Anadyr, Russia.
In a written statement to the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot said that he was 
flying a visual approach to runway 10. He noticed that his airspeed was exceptionally high, but 
he elected to continue the approach. On short final to the runway, he realized that he was not 
going to be able to land, and decided to go-around. During the go-around procedure, the 
airplane™s fuselage contacted the runway. The pilot was able to continue flying the airplane, 
and realized that he had not extended the landing gear during the approach. He then lowered 
the landing gear, and landed the airplane uneventfully. He said that the only damage to the 
airplane he noticed was a broken antenna and some missing paint on the belly skid pad. 
The pilot was told that there were no U.S. Customs officers in Nome at the time, and that he 
would need to fly to Anchorage to clear customs. He said that he was very fatigued, and decided 
that he would fly to Anchorage the next morning.
On June 2, the pilot decided to make a test flight before proceeding to Anchorage. During the 
takeoff roll, the airplane encountered a vibration that the pilot said felt ﬁlike a violent nose 
wheel shimmy.ﬂ He aborted the takeoff and elected to have the airplane inspected by a 
mechanic. Upon inspection, a mechanic discovered that the center wing carry-through 
structure was cracked when the belly skid pad deflected upward into a stringer that the 
structure was attached to.
The pilot initially reported no mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident, but 
later stated that the airplane flaps were inoperative during the accident flight. The pilot stated 
in an email that there was an indication of a flap failure, and that he had landed in Japan and 
Korea without the flaps.  The IIC verified that the inboard flap actuator had over-traveled 
during retraction, and the flaps were stuck in the retracted position. According to the Eclipse 
Airplane Flight Manual (AFM), Section 3: ﬁEmergency Procedures - Flapsﬂ; a ﬁFLAPS FAILﬂ 
caution message displayed by the Crew Alert System on the ground requires an action of ﬁDO 
NOT FLY.ﬂ
The airplane is equipped with a Diagnostic Storage Unit (DSU), which is capable of recording 
select airplane and flight parameters. Data from the DSU was downloaded after the accident 
flight and sent to the NSTB Vehicle Recorders Division for examination. The downloaded DSU 
data for the accident flight contained parameters regarding the airplane's airspeed, altitude, 
pitch, heading, flap handle position, landing gear handle position, landing gear position, and 
engine thrust lever angle. The data retrieved from the DSU showed that, during the accident 
approach, the airplane's flap handle was in the up position, the airspeed during the approach 
never dropped below 140 knots, and the landing gear and landing gear handle remained in the 
up position. This data corroborates the pilot's account of the events.
According to the Eclipse AFM, Section 7:  ﬁLanding Gear Warning,ﬂ a visual ﬁCONFIG GEARﬂ 
warning, and aural ﬁLanding Gearﬂ warning sounds if any of the gear is not down and locked 
Page 3 of 5ANC11LA041
under three conditions:
1.Flaps extended to LDG setting and altitude below 12,500 feet Mean Sea Level (MSL).
2.Airspeed less than 120 knots, both throttles less than 30 percent, and altitude less than 
12,500 feet MSL.
3.Airspeed between 120 and 140 knots, either throttle less than 30 percent, and altitude 
below 12,500 feet MSL.
The airplane was also equipped with a Honeywell KGP-560 Enhanced Ground Proximity 
Warning System (EGPWS). However, this model EGPWS does not provide aural warnings for 
flap or landing gear configuration.
Under the conditions reported by the pilot, and supported by the DSU data, the airplane would 
not have generated a landing gear warning during the accident approach and landing.
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Flight control sys malf/fail
Landing-flare/touchdown
Landing gear not configured (Defining event)
Approach-VFR go-around
Abnormal runway contact
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Foreign; Private
Age:
63
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/28/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2370 hours (Total, all aircraft), 205 hours (Total, this make and model), 2370 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 29 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 22 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ANC11LA041
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ECLIPSE AVIATION CORP
Registration:
N168TT
Model/Series:
EA500 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
000042
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/18/2010, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
343 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W CANADA
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PW610F-A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
950 lbs
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
POAM
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
2153 ADT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 1700 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 8000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.78 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Anadyr (UHMA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Nome, AK (PAOM)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0300 UTC
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Nome (PAOM)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
10
IFR Approach:
Visual
Runway Length/Width:
6001 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Go Around; Straight-in; 
Traffic Pattern
Page 5 of 5ANC11LA041
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
64.512222, -165.445278
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Christopher R Shaver
Adopted Date:
03/08/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Dave Cox; FAA, Fairbanks FSDO; Fairbanks, AK
Jack Harrington; Eclipse Aerospace; Albuquerque, NM
Publish Date:
03/08/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=80720
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
