Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Stockton, CA
Accident Number:
WPR11LA244
Date & Time:
06/01/2011, 1620 PDT 
Registration:
N68012
Aircraft:
HILLER UH-12E
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The pilot initially reported that he was conducting low level agricultural drying of cherry trees 
when the tail rotor contacted a tree during a turn. He felt a shake or vibration through the 
controls and looked for a place to land. He was maneuvering the helicopter towards a road 
when the helicopter experienced a full left yaw. The pilot applied full right pedal to counter the 
yawing motion and entered autorotation through the trees to the ground. Subsequently the 
pilot revised his statement saying that the skids of his helicopter were at least 10-15 feet above 
the tallest tree when he felt a shake or vibration through the controls. Postaccident 
examination of the airplane by a mechanic and a FAA inspector found continuity between the 
tail rotor and the linkages through the drive train which lead to the main transmission. Control 
system continuity was also established. The tail boom near the tail rotor transmission was 
twisted clockwise, shearing the aluminum, which is consistent with a tail rotor imbalance 
condition. Tail rotor blade #1 was sheared off about one quarter of the distance between the 
blade root and the blade tip, and rotor blade #2 had compression deformation of the trailing 
edge near the blade root. The sheared off portion of tail rotor blade #1 was located in the 
orchard. Visual inspection found a circular impact deformation in the leading edge at the blade 
tip, separation of the blade tip weight from the blade, deformation of the blades surface area, 
and compression bending of the blade's trailing edge. The damage to blade #1 was consistent 
with an impact to a tree limb.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from obstacles.
Page 2 of 6WPR11LA244
Findings
Personnel issues
Attention - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Monitoring environment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Tree(s) - Response/compensation (Cause)
Page 3 of 6WPR11LA244
Factual Information
On June 1, 2011, about 1620 Pacific daylight time (PDT), a Hiller UH-12E, N68012, performed 
an emergency autorotation into a grove of cherry trees while performing low level agricultural 
operations near Stockton, California.  Alpine Helicopter's was operating the helicopter under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 137.  The commercial pilot was not 
injured and the aircraft sustained substantial damage. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time for the local area agricultural flight. 
The pilot initially reported that he was conducting low level agricultural drying of cherry trees 
when the tail rotor struck a tree during a turn. Later in the week the pilot revised his statement 
saying that the skids of his helicopter were at least 10-15 feet above the tallest tree when he felt 
a shake or vibration through the control surfaces. He looked for a place to land and was 
maneuvering the helicopter towards a road when the helicopter experienced a full left yaw. The 
pilot applied full right pedal to counter the yawing motion and entered autorotation through 
the trees to the ground. The main rotor blade, tail rotor blade, tail boom, front fuselage, skids, 
and the undercarriage of the helicopter were substantially damaged. The pilot did not report 
any emergency alarms or cautionary lights accompanying the accident sequence and sustained 
no injuries on impact. 
Post accident examination of the aircraft by a mechanic and a FAA inspector found continuity 
between the tail rotor and the linkages through the drive train which lead to the main 
transmission. Control system continuity was also established. The tail boom near the tail rotor 
transmission was twisted clockwise, shearing the aluminum. Tail rotor blade #1 was sheared 
off about one quarter of the distance between the blade root and the blade tip, and rotor blade 
#2 had compression deformation of the trailing edge near the blade root. The sheared off 
portion of tail rotor blade #1 was located in the orchard. Visual inspection found a circular 
impact deformation in the leading edge at the blade tip, separation of the blade tip weight from 
the blade, deformation of the blades surface area, and compression bending of the blade's 
trailing edge.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) 
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 4 of 6WPR11LA244
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
31, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/14/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/20/2010
Flight Time:
2382 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1375 hours (Total, this make and model), 2294 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 70 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 27 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
HILLER
Registration:
N68012
Model/Series:
UH-12E 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted; Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
1500
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/11/2011, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
66 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7316 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
V0-540
Registered Owner:
DOZHIER JOEL C
Rated Power:
305 hp
Operator:
Alpine Helicopter Service, 
Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
LWZG
Page 5 of 6WPR11LA244
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 6000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 9000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 10°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Lodi, CA (l53)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Lodi, CA (l53)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1400 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Airport Information
Airport:
Lodi Airport (L53)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
38.091389, -121.359167 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jefferey R Rich
Adopted Date:
08/30/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
David T Jensen; Federal Aviation Administration; Oakland, CA
Publish Date:
08/30/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=79286
Page 6 of 6WPR11LA244
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
