Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Wonewoc, WI
Accident Number:
CEN13LA216
Date & Time:
04/01/2013, 1220 CDT 
Registration:
N8033B
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that, during the flight before the accident flight, the engine began running 
roughly during cruise flight with the right wing fuel tank selected. After attempting to resolve 
the issue by applying carburetor heat, he made a precautionary landing at a nearby grass 
airstrip. After landing, the pilot loosened the right fuel tank cap and heard a "whoosh" sound 
and the metal fuel tank "crinkle." The pilot stated that he thought he had resolved the fuel tank 
venting issue when he removed the right fuel tank cap. After spending 30 minutes on the 
ground, the pilot restarted the engine with both fuel tanks selected and performed an 
uneventful engine run-up before departing. Shortly after takeoff, the engine experienced a total 
loss of power, and the pilot executed a forced landing into a marsh. A postaccident examination 
revealed that the external and cross-tank vent lines were obstructed by foreign material likely 
deposited by insects. In this condition, the engine responded to cockpit controls during an 
operational test run. Following the engine test run, the right fuel tank cap was loosened, and a 
"whoosh" sound was heard. Testing of the right fuel cap revealed a restriction to the flapper-
valve assembly, which prevented air from passing freely through the vented cap as designed. 
The combination of a restricted vented fuel cap and the obstructed vent lines likely prevented 
the fuel from flowing to the engine and resulted in fuel starvation and the total loss of engine 
power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The restricted vented fuel cap and obstructed fuel vent lines, which resulted in a total loss of 
engine power due to fuel starvation.
Findings
Aircraft
Page 2 of 5CEN13LA216
Factual Information
On April 1, 2013, at 1220 central daylight time, a Cessna model 172 airplane, N8033B, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power shortly after 
takeoff from Three Castles Airpark (4D1), Wonewoc, Wisconsin. The commercial pilot was not 
injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot, under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, without a flight plan. Day visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the personal flight. The flight originally departed Park Falls Municipal Airport 
(KPKF), Park River, Wisconsin, at 1030, and was destined for St Louis Metro-East Airport 
(3K6), St. Jacob, Illinois.
The pilot reported that he planned on making one fuel stop during the cross-country trip, 
although he had not selected the actual airport because the airplane still had ample fuel. The 
engine began running rough during cruise flight while operating on the right wing fuel tank. 
After attempting to resolve the issue with an application of carburetor heat, he made an 
uneventful precautionary landing at a nearby grass airstrip (4D1). After landing, the pilot 
reported that he couldn't find anything wrong with engine during a visual check of the engine. 
However, he heard a "whoosh" sound and heard the metal fuel tank "crinkle" as he loosened 
the right fuel tank cap. The pilot reported that he attributed these sounds to an accumulated 
pressure differential that occurred during his rapid descent while operating on a single fuel 
tank. The left wing fuel tank contained about 2 gallons of fuel. The right tank contained about 
10 gallons of fuel. The pilot stated that he thought he had resolved the fuel tank venting issue 
when he removed the right fuel tank cap. The pilot subsequently restarted the engine, with the 
fuel selector drawing fuel from both fuel tanks, and performed an uneventful engine run-up 
before departing again. Shortly after takeoff, at an altitude of about 300 feet, the engine began 
running rough. The pilot reported that the engine lost power completely at an altitude of about 
200 feet as he attempted to return to the airport. The airplane's left wing collided with a tree 
during the forced landing into a seasonal marsh.
A postaccident examination was performed by a Federal Aviation Administration 
Airworthiness Inspector. The inspector reported that the external fuel tank vent line, located 
on the left wing strut, was obstructed by foreign material likely deposited by insects. 
Additionally, he noted that the cross-tank vent line was also obstructed. The engine responded 
to cockpit controls during a postaccident operational test run. Following the engine test run, 
the inspector heard a "whoosh" sound as he loosened the right fuel tank cap. Testing of the 
right fuel cap revealed a restriction to the flapper-valve assembly, which prevented air to pass 
freely through the vented cap as designed. Although there was no foreign object debris or 
material noted around the valve seat, the rubber-flap material would remain engaged to its 
corresponding metal seat when pressure was applied via plastic tubing. The air restriction 
became progressively less apparent after several applications of pressure and suction by the 
FAA Inspector.
Page 3 of 5CEN13LA216
History of Flight
Initial climb
Fuel related
Fuel starvation
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
29, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/21/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/07/2011
Flight Time:
325 hours (Total, all aircraft), 194 hours (Total, this make and model), 197 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N8033B
Model/Series:
172 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
29833
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/21/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4488 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-300-A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN13LA216
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
VOK, 912 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
16 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1155 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
357째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 4300 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
18 knots / 23 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-1째C / -11째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Park Falls, WI (PKF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
St Jacob, IL (3K6)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1030 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Three Castles Airpark (4D1)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
921 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Snow; Wet
Runway Used:
28
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2740 ft / 90 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
43.670000, -90.232500 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
01/30/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Timothy H Anderson; Federal Aviation Administration - Milwaukee FSDO; Milwaukee, WI
Publish Date:
01/30/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86558
Page 5 of 5CEN13LA216
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
