National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Carrollton, OH
Accident Number: CHI08LA151
Date & Time: 06/01/2008, 1330 EDT
Registration: N74898
Aircraft: BELL 47D1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that he had departed the airport and had flown about 8 miles when the helicopter's cyclic began to shake violently during cruise flight.
When he attempted to land, he could not get the helicopter to hover so he attempted a run-on landing.
The pilot reported that the helicopter's skid caught some high grass or rough terrain and then the helicopter rolled on its side.
The pilot reported that the helicopter was operating normally prior to the accident.
The inspection of the helicopter revealed no preexisting anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The airframe vibration for an undetermined reason.
The commercial helicopter pilot was not injured.
The 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight departed the Carrollton County-Tolson Airport (TSO), Carrollton, Ohio, at 1315 en route to Wheeling, West Virginia.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported he had departed TSO and had flown about 8 miles when the helicopter's cyclic began to shake violently.
When he attempted to land, he could not get the helicopter to hover so he attempted a run-on landing.
The pilot reported that the helicopter's skid caught some high grass or rough terrain and the helicopter rolled on its side.
The pilot reported that the helicopter was operating normally prior to the accident.
The inspection of the helicopter by a helicopter mechanic revealed no preexisting anomalies.
A broken hydraulic hose was sent to the National Transportation Safety Board's Investigator-In- Charge (IIC) for inspection.
The inspection of the hose revealed no pre-impact anomaly.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
