National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Baldwin City, KS
Accident Number: DFW08CA158
Date & Time: 06/01/2008, 1626 CDT
Registration: N43865
Aircraft: Aeros Venture
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The 280-hour flight instructor was providing a 137-hour private pilot instruction in a weight- shift experimental light sport aircraft so he could obtain a sport pilot rating.
The instructor said that they were both at the control bar as the pilot was practicing a normal approach to land.
However, when the airplane was about 50 feet above the ground, the wind started to push the airplane to the left of the centerline.
The pilot was unable to get the airplane back on course with the runway and the instructor attempted to take over the controls.
There was not a positive exchange of controls and the airplane drifted further to the left and rapidly approached power lines, buildings, and trees.
The instructor realized that they would be unable to out climb these obstacles and elected to fly the airplane onto the ground under the power lines.
The airplane subsequently collided with a mailbox and a hangar resulting in substantial damage to the airplane's wing.
The buggy, a landing gear strut, the propeller, and windshield were also damaged.
The pilot reported there were no mechanical deficiencies with the airplane or the engine.
The instructor stated that once the airplane started drifting off centerline, the landing should have been aborted and a go-around executed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain proper runway alignment and the instructor's delayed remedial action to abort the landing, which resulted in a collision with a mailbox and hangar.
A factor was the crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
OBJECT - OTHER 2.
(C) PROPER ALIGNMENT - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 3.
OBJECT - HANGAR/AIRPORT BUILDING 4.
(C) REMEDIAL ACTION - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 5.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
