Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Punta Gorda, FL
Accident Number:
ERA09LA079
Date & Time:
12/05/2008, 1635 EST 
Registration:
N370CT
Aircraft:
Flight Design CTSW
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot was practicing takeoffs when he made his third departure. The pilot stated that as the 
airplane was approaching take off speed, a gust of wind caused the airplane to veer to the right. 
He stated that he utilized the flight controls to stay pointing straight and on the centerline of 
the runway. The wind gust subsided and the airplane started "fishtailing" on the runway. The 
pilot then reduced power and applied brakes, while attempting not to "oversteer" the airplane. 
The airplane was almost stopped when the nose gear of the airplane departed the left edge of 
the runway, sank into the sand, and the airplane nosed over. Examination of the airplane 
revealed no preimpact deficiencies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during a rejected takeoff. Contributing to 
the accident was a gust of wind.
Findings
Aircraft
Fireseals - Damaged/degraded
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Gusts - Not specified (Factor)
Page 2 of 6ERA09LA079
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 5, 2008, approximately 1635 eastern standard time, a Flight Design CTSW 
special light sport airplane (S-LSA), N370CT, was substantially damaged during landing at 
Charlotte County Airport (PGD), Punta Gorda, Florida.  The certificated sport pilot was the sole 
occupant of the airplane and received no injuries. Day visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight.  The flight was conducted 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
In a written statement the pilot reported that he had been practicing touch and go pattern work 
and he was in the process of making his third departure. As the airplane was approaching take 
off speed, a gust of wind caused the airplane to veer to the right. The pilot utilized the flight 
controls to stay pointing straight and on the centerline of the runway. The wind gust subsided 
and the airplane started "fishtailing" on the runway. The pilot then reduced power and applied 
brakes, while attempting not to "oversteer" the airplane. The airplane was nearly stopped when 
the nose gear of the airplane departed the left edge of the runway, sank into the sand, and 
airplane nosed over. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 58, held a sport pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land, 
issued November 15, 2007, which was also the date of his most recent biennial flight review.  
The pilot reported no medical certificate and utilized his driver's license in lieu of a medical 
certificate. The pilot reported 146 hours of total flight experience, 103 hours were in airplane 
make and model as pilot in command. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane (serial number 05-10-01), was manufactured in Germany, in 2005. It 
was registered with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) on a special airworthiness 
certificate for light sport operations on December 29, 2005. The airplane was powered by a 100 
horsepower Rotax 912ULS engine. The engine was equipped with a 3-blade fixed pitch, 
Neuform CR3-65-47-101.6 propeller. The two-seat, single-engine land airplane was equipped 
with a fixed tricycle landing gear and had accrued 176 flight hours. The maximum gross weight 
of the airplane was 1,320 pounds and the weight at the time of the accident was 1,020 pounds.
Examination of the airplane was conducted by an FAA inspector and control continuity was 
confirmed to all control surfaces from the control column and rudder pedals.
The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on August 4, 2008 and it had 
accrued 175.9 hours time in service at the time of the accident. The engine had accrued 175.9 
hours total time in service at the time of the accident and 9 hours since the last inspection.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1353 recorded weather at PGD included variable winds at 6 knots, visibility 10 statute 
miles, clear skies, temperature 25 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 11 degrees C, and an altimeter 
setting of 30.15 inches of mercury.
The weather reported an hour prior to the accident and an hour after the accident showed calm 
Page 3 of 6ERA09LA079
winds.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The airport has no air traffic control tower and the runway that was utilized was runway 33 a 
5,688-foot-long, 150-foot-wide, asphalt runway. Runway 33 was equipped with a precision 
approach path indicator (PAPI) system located on the left side of the runway. The runway 
utilized a left hand traffic pattern and the runway markings were considered non-precision 
markings in good condition.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The nose gear strut was bent aft and to the left at its base. The firewall was buckled and the 
airplane skin under the engine was crumpled. The composite structure of the wing tip was 
damaged exposing the wing spar. The vertical stabilizer was damaged and the rudder was 
separated at the top hinge attachment point. The propeller tips exhibited damage torsional 
bending consistent with ground contact while the engine was developing power. Examination 
of the passenger compartment revealed no breech in the support structure of the frame. The 
seat pan and shoulder harness showed no evidence of stress or fractures. Damaged was 
observed on the nose wheel, wing, vertical stabilizer, and fire wall.  
The pilot reported no mechanical malfunctions prior to the accident.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
CFR Part 61.303 (a)(2) and (b)(1) states in part "a sport pilot may operate any light sport 
aircraft for which you hold the endorsements required for its category, class, make and model. 
A person using a current and valid U.S. driver's license must comply with each restriction and 
limitation imposed by that person's U.S. driver's license and any judicial or administrative 
order applying to the operation of a motor vehicle."
According to the pilot of the accident flight, the pilot operating handbook is "reasonable" with 
information about the airplane and its systems. There have been occasions when the pilot had 
further questions and was able to find the necessary information by utilizing either the 
manufacturer's website or a flight instructor to gather the needed information. 
According to personnel at the maintenance shop that worked on this airplane, and other LSAs, 
they obtained training from both Rotax and Flight Design on task specific areas in the 
applicable Maintenance manual. However, one mechanic did state that normally airframe 
manufacturers do not require training specific to their product, only training on the 
documentation required.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Other weather encounter
Loss of control on ground (Defining event)
Takeoff-rejected takeoff
Runway excursion
Page 4 of 6ERA09LA079
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Sport Pilot
Age:
58, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Sport Pilot None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/15/2007
Flight Time:
146 hours (Total, all aircraft), 103 hours (Total, this make and model), 146 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Flight Design
Registration:
N370CT
Model/Series:
CTSW 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Special Flight
Serial Number:
05-10-01
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/04/2008, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
9 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
176 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
912 ULS
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ERA09LA079
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PGD, 26 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1653 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.12 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Punta Gorda, FL (PGD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Punta Gorda, FL (PGD)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1450 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Charlotte County Airport (PGD)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
26 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
33
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
5688 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Touch and Go
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
26.918611, -81.990278 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Shawn Etcher
Adopted Date:
05/12/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael E Minner; FAA/FSDO; Tampa, FL
Publish Date:
05/12/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ERA09LA079
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
