Page 1 of 28
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Boise, ID
Accident Number:
WPR12FA089
Date & Time:
02/03/2012, 0856 MST 
Registration:
N321LC
Aircraft:
GARZA LANCAIR IV-TP
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The amateur-built, experimental, high-performance airplane was fueled to capacity and the 
pilot had planned a cross-country flight. During an initial takeoff, the airplane climbed to about 
60 feet above ground level (agl) before touching back down; the pilot transmitted to the air 
traffic controller that he had a problem. The controller asked if the pilot needed any assistance, 
and the pilot responded that he was going to taxi back and "see if I can figure it out," indicating 
that there was not a catastrophic failure and the pilot was intending to troubleshoot the 
problem. The pilot then taxied to a ramp area where the airplane was stationary for almost a 
minute and a half. Although the pilot's actions during this period are not known, it is likely that 
he was attempting to troubleshoot a problem with the airplane because the recorded engine 
parameters are consistent with the pilot cycling the propeller. 
Thereafter, the pilot stated his intention to stay in the traffic pattern, and he taxied the airplane 
back to the runway. The airplane became airborne about 18 seconds into the takeoff; the pilot 
then made a request to turn back to land. The airplane turned to the left and continued to 
climb until it reached its peak altitude of about 320 feet agl. Witnesses indicated that the 
airplane then entered a spin, completed about one revolution, and impacted terrain in a nose-
low attitude before coming to rest in a dirt area between the parallel runways. A fire started 
upon impact. 
At the peak of the airborne portion of the first rejected takeoff, about 5,860 feet of runway 
remained. When the pilot made the request to turn back to land during the second takeoff, over 
5,160 feet of runway remained, but because the airplane was 260 feet higher and had a higher 
airspeed than previously, the pilot likely thought he would not be able to land on the runway 
surface straight ahead. A performance study indicated that the airplane experienced a loss of 
thrust during the accident takeoff about 1 second before the pilot's request to return. 
Postaccident examination revealed no evidence of a preimpact uncontained engine failure, 
inflight fire, or flight control system malfunction. Fuel system continuity could not be 
confirmed due to thermal damage incurred during the postcrash fire. Review of the engine 
parameters revealed that, during the accident takeoff, the greatest anomaly in the airplane's 
Page 2 of 28WPR12FA089
parameters was that the fuel pressure dropped to a minimum psi while the fuel flow increased 
and the torque delivered to the engine shaft (Q) increased excessively. Shortly thereafter, fuel 
pressure recovered when the fuel flow reduced and Q retarded to an idle setting. Q also 
dropped to an idle setting during the previous takeoff. The reason for these variations could 
not be explained. In comparing prior flights to the accident flight, the maximum Q attained 
during takeoff climb was lower than the Q for the accident takeoff, and the fuel pressure did 
not drop to the same level as during the accident flight, which are indicative of a problem with 
the airplane.
The airplane was equipped with a Turbine Starter Limiting/Monitoring System, capable of 
limiting power by restricting fuel flow, which was designed to act as a start sequence controller, 
an engine protection limiter, and an engine monitor/recorder. It is possible that this 
system/installation malfunctioned and engaged during the accident takeoff; however, the 
system was destroyed in the postcrash fire and could not be examined. Consequently, no 
determination regarding its performance during the accident flight is possible.
The data showed that the pilot's most recent flight in the airplane was 6 days before the 
accident, at the same airport. During that flight, he also performed an initial rejected takeoff, 
suggesting that he was possibly having problems at that time; he made a successful flight 
thereafter, but remained in the traffic pattern. 
A simulation of the accident flight indicated that, during the airplane's left turn, the angle of 
attack at which the wing stalls was exceeded. A former engineer and general manager of the kit 
manufacturer stated that if the engine failed during takeoff, the airspeed would rapidly decay, 
and the pilot would have to push the nose down to maintain flying speed. He noted that 
following a loss of power, the nose would remain in a nose-up attitude, and unless the pilot 
made corrective pitch inputs (reducing the angle of attack) within about 4 to 5 seconds, the 
airplane would rapidly reach a critical angle of attack and stall, which would result in the wing 
simultaneously dropping. It would not be possible to recover from the stall at altitudes below 
1,500 ft agl.
Based on the results of the simulation for the accident flight, witness statements, statements 
from a former employee of the kit manufacturer, it is likely that pilot was attempting to return 
to a runway (either the takeoff runway or the parallel runway). The pilot did not push the nose 
down to maintain flying speed and stalled the airplane well below 1,500 ft agl, and the airplane 
was spinning when it impacted the ground. Although beyond the end of the takeoff runway was 
flat, unpopulated hard-dirt surface, suitable for a straight-ahead emergency landing, it is 
unknown why they pilot chose to return to the airport rather than lower the nose and land 
there.
Twenty-six percent of Lancair airplanes have been involved in accidents, and 19 percent have 
been involved in fatal accidents. In 2008 and 2012, the FAA convened two safety groups 
specifically to address the airplane's "unusually high accident and fatality rate compared to 
other amateur-built aircraft." The study noted that based on the statistics, the kit was involved 
in fatal accidents at "a rate that is disproportionate to their fleet size." As a result of studies 
developed by these safety groups, the FAA acknowledged that accidents would continue to 
occur if no action was taken. Thus, the FAA issued a notice that Lancair pilots should "review 
and thoroughly understand all information regarding stall characteristics and obtain 
Page 3 of 28WPR12FA089
specialized training regarding slow flight handling characteristics, stall recognition, and stall 
recovery techniques;" install an angle-of-attack indicator to better predict a stall; and have 
their airplane evaluated by an experienced type-specific mechanic to ensure proper rigging, 
wing alignment, and weight and balance. The notice was recalled shortly after its release and 
another notice was released later to include other high-performance experimental amateur-
built aircraft.
When asked about what he disliked about the flight characteristics of the airplane, the pilot had 
told a technician who refueled the airplane that it was "squirrelly." According to the FAA, 
depending on the complexity of the systems installed, pilots likely will require orientation and 
specially-tailored training to operate this airplane safely. Although the pilot was properly 
certificated in accordance with existing Federal Aviation Regulations and his estimated flight 
experience in the airplane was 13 hours 40 minutes, no evidence was found indicating that the 
pilot had received flight instruction in the accident airplane model, even though he was aware 
that insurance companies required him to do so in order to receive coverage.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss or commanded reduction of engine power during the initial climb for reasons that could 
not be determined because of postaccident impact damage and fire destruction to engine 
systems and components. Also causal were the pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed 
and airplane control while attempting to return to the runway despite unpopulated, flat terrain 
immediately ahead that was suitable for an emergency landing; his decision to take off again 
with a known problem; and his lack of training in the make and model airplane.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Training with equipment - Pilot (Cause)
Organizational issues
Adequacy of safety program - FAA/Regulator
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 4 of 28WPR12FA089
Factual Information
1.0 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 03, 2012, at 0856 mountain standard time, an experimental amateur-built 
Lancair IV-TP, N321LC, impacted terrain following a loss of control while on the initial takeoff 
climb from Gowen Field, Boise, Idaho. The airline transport pilot, the sole occupant, was fatally 
injured, and the airplane was destroyed. The airplane was owned and operated by the pilot 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The local personal flight was 
originating from Boise when the accident occurred. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan had been filed.
Numerous witnesses located at the airport observed the airplane on an initial rejected takeoff 
and on the subsequent accident flight. A majority of them stated that, during the initial rejected 
takeoff, the airplane departed 10R and climbed to about 5 to 10 feet (ft) above ground level 
(agl) before touching back down on the runway. The pilot taxied back toward the west end of 
the airport. Shortly thereafter, the airplane departed 10R again and climbed to about 100 to 
200 ft agl. It then began to roll to the left while rapidly losing altitude. The airplane completed 
about one revolution and impacted terrain in a nose-low attitude. The airplane came to rest in 
a dirt area between runways 10R and 10L, and a fire started upon impact. Airport personnel 
responded to the accident and extinguished the fire with a fire suppressant. 
The Boise Air Traffic Control (ATC) Facility provided the recorded radio communications 
between the pilot and controllers. The pilot was initially cleared onto runway 10R and 
instructed to "line up and wait." About 1 minute later, he was cleared for a departure to the 
south, and the airplane took off from the 9,760 ft long runway about 0846:38. He transmitted 
to the controller 40 seconds later that he was going to "land here and stop– we got– we got a 
problem." An ATC controller asked if he needed any assistance to which he responded by 
saying, "negative, I'm going to taxi back and see if I can figure it out." About 9 minutes later, he 
told the controller that he would like to depart and stay in the traffic pattern for a "couple laps." 
The tower controller cleared the pilot for takeoff at 0854:40, and at 0855:44, the pilot made his 
last intelligible transmission when he requested that he would "like to turn back in 
and–uh–land– coming back in–uh–three." An indiscernible transmission was made 9 
seconds later that may have been the pilot saying "Boise." 
Flight track data recorded from the airplane's onboard global positioning system (GPS) by the 
onboard Aerosonic Op Technologies Electronic Flight Instrumentation System (EFIS) was 
extracted from compact flash memory cards recovered from the wreckage. The EFIS data 
consisted of 23 parameters with 1 sample taken every 5 to 7 seconds. The recorded data 
covered the last 14 start cycles of the EFIS, and the last start cycle included data from the 
accident flight and the rejected takeoff immediately preceding the accident flight. The EFIS 
data for the last start cycle spanned from 0838:03 to 0856:00, or 25 minutes 57 seconds, with 
the airborne portion of the accident flight consisting of the last 28 seconds, from 0855:32 to 
0856:00. Comparing the times of the pilot's radio transmissions (as recorded in the ATC 
transcript) to the times of events recorded in the EFIS data revealed that the ATC transcript 
time lags the EFIS time by about 23 seconds. The EFIS times are used in this report, and the 
times of radio transmissions recorded in the ATC transcript have been adjusted accordingly (by 
subtracting 23 seconds). 
A review of the data (see Figures 01 and 02 in the public docket) revealed that after the engine 
Page 5 of 28WPR12FA089
started at 0838:39, the airplane made a continuous taxi (as indicated by variations in 
groundspeed and heading) from 0844:18 to 0846:07, at which point the nose was aligned with 
the runway heading (around 100 degrees). From 0846:07 to 0846:32, the airplane remained 
stationary on the centerline about 270 ft from the approach end of the runway with the torque 
delivered to the engine shaft (Q) remaining around between 13 to 14 percent, consistent with 
an idle setting. 
The airplane began the takeoff roll at 0846:32 and became airborne about 0846:59. The 
airplane climbed 60 ft over the next 10 seconds to 2,845 ft msl, which was the highest attained 
altitude on that flight and corresponded to about 3,900 ft from the arrival end of the runway, 
which equates to about 40-percent down the runway with 5,860 ft remaining. At this time, 
0847:09, the airplane had reached 108 kts (the highest airspeed of the flight); the pitch 
attitude had decreased from 8.1 to 4.4 degrees nose-up; the Interstage Turbine Temperature 
(ITT) had decreased from 581 degrees to 376 degrees Celsius (C); Q had dropped from 89.6 to 
13 percent; and fuel flow dropped from 56 to 20 gph. The pilot transmitted that he was going 
land, and the airplane touched down around 0847:21. The pilot made a right turn to the south 
to exit onto taxiway D. The airplane continued northwest along taxiway B, made a turn west to 
taxiway F, north onto taxiway J, and taxied on the ramp toward the pilot's hangar.
When the airplane was adjacent to the hangar (about 175 ft north of the hangar door), the pilot 
maneuvered to have the nose on a heading of about 060-degrees. From about 0852:25 to 
0853:51, the airplane was stationary, and it is unknown what the pilot's actions were during 
that 1 minute 26 second period. The engine parameters indicated that the propeller rotation 
speed (Np) fluctuated from about 1,140 rpm, down to 490 rpm, and then up to 1,614 rpm, 
which corresponded to Q values of about 14, 29 and 34 percent, respectively.
Thereafter, the pilot taxied back to runway 10R (a 1 minute 4 second trip to the hold-short line) 
and turned on the centerline about 110 ft from the arrival end of the runway, where the arrival 
threshold makings were located. The airplane began the takeoff roll at 0855:14 and became 
airborne about 18 seconds later at 0855:32, which corresponds to being positioned about 1,780 
ft from the arrival end of the runway (see Figure 02 in the public docket). Immediately after 
becoming airborne, between 0855:32 and 0855:44, the fuel pressure dropped from 26 to 15 psi 
and then to 14 psi; fuel flow increased from about 54 to 65 gph; the airspeed increased from 99 
to 104 kts; and Q increased from 104 to 113 percent torque. 
At 0855:44, the pilot made his request to turn back to land, and the data began to show 
significant changes in the recorded parameters at this time. The airplane was in a 12-degree 
nose-up pitch attitude and had climbed to about 205 ft agl, corresponding to about 4,150 ft 
from the arrival end of the runway and about 200 ft right of the runway's centerline. The 
airplane rolled from 1.7 degrees right to 1.6 degrees left; the airspeed increased from 124 to 132 
kts; the fuel flow decreased from 65 to 56 gph; the fuel pressure increased from 14 to 31 psi; Q 
decreased from 113 to 66 percent; and a drop in Np of about 70 rpm was recorded.
The airplane continued to climb for 10 seconds until 0855:54, when it reached about 320 ft agl, 
the highest altitude attained during the flight. The data revealed that at this point, the airplane 
was in a 16-degree bank to the left, and it continued to roll to 49 degrees within 6 seconds. 
Additionally, Q had reduced to 16 percent; ITT dropped to 379 degrees C, the lowest during the 
entire flight; fuel flow had reduced to 19 gph; the fuel pressure remained around 32 psi; and 
the gas generator speed (Ng) had reduced to around 62 percent. The last 4 data points, 
encompassing the last approximate 16 seconds of the flight, revealed that the heading changed 
Page 6 of 28WPR12FA089
from 107 to 21 degrees, with Q decreasing from 16 to 14 percent. The accident site was located 
about 400 ft north of the last recorded position. 
1.1 PERSONNEL INFORMATION
A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman and medical certification records 
revealed that the pilot, age 51, held an airline transport pilot certificate with category ratings 
for multiengine land, multiengine sea, and single-engine land airplanes. His certificate was 
endorsed with a type rating in the Cessna Citation (A/CE-500 and 525S), and he was 
authorized to act as pilot-in-command in the experimental Hunter Viperjet. He additionally 
held a private pilot certificate with a single-engine sea airplane rating. The pilot's most recent 
first-class medical certificate was issued January 2011, with no limitations.
The pilot's personal flight records were not recovered. On his last application for a medical 
certificate the pilot reported a total flight time of 3,600 hours. 
1.1.1 Lancair Familiarity/Experience
The pilot's brother recalled that in August the pilot had looked at and considered purchasing a 
Lancair IV-TP, but decided against that specific airplane because it was "rough" in appearance. 
In December, the pilot told his brother that he had found the accident airplane in North 
Carolina and had been looking for a Lancair IV-TP for several months in an effort to make 
quick/fast flights. The pilot had written a series of emails trying to determine how to acquire 
insurance and was told that to obtain insurance he would need to complete a training program 
for Lancairs, despite his flight experience in turbine high-performance airplanes. The facilities 
that provide such training reported that they did not receive any inquiries about training from 
the pilot. 
The recorded EFIS data, which included data from the multifunction display (MFD) and 
primary flight display (PFD) were used to estimate the pilots' total flight time in the Lancair. 
The pilot received delivery of the airplane on December 31, 2011, and then it was fueled twice 
on January 3, 2012, first with 43 gallons and then later in the day with 61 gallons. The MFD 
indicated the airplane was flown in Boise about 40 minutes on December 31 and about 50 
minutes on January 2. The airplane completed a 2 hour 30 minute flight from Boise to 
Sandpoint, Idaho, on January 4 and then returned later that day. 
In addition, EFIS data indicates that the airplane completed a roundtrip flight from Boise to 
Sandpoint, Idaho, totaling about 2 hours and 40 minutes. On January 11, the airplane made a 
roundtrip from Boise to Richland, Washington, totaling about 2 hours 5 minutes. The following 
day, the airplane made a roundtrip from Boise to Bullhead City, Arizona totaling about 4 hours 
15 minutes. The last flight recorded before the day of the accident flight was on January 28, 
when the airplane was flown in the traffic pattern in Boise for approximately 40 minutes. 
The flight times recorded above sum to 13 hours 40 minutes, are presumed to be the pilot's 
total flight experience in the Lancair. No evidence was found indicating that the pilot had 
received flight instruction in the accident airplane or in any other Lancair IV-TP.
1.1.2 Personal History
Over approximately 10 years prior to the accident, media interviews of the pilot appeared in 
numerous newspapers, magazines, and trade journals. Many of these articles were reviewed 
and used with NTSB interviews of the pilot's family, friends, and aviation connections to help 
give insight to the pilot's history. The pilot started his employment at Micron Technology, Inc., 
Page 7 of 28WPR12FA089
in 1983 and was promoted 11 times to become the company's president in 1991 and chief 
executive officer (CEO) in 1994, the position he held at the time of the accident. Various 
sources indicate that the pilot had owned over 20 airplanes and participated in various 
airshows.
The pilot was described as having a passion for high-risk recreation. He participated in 
activities such as motocross, skydiving, race car driving, and flying high-performance 
airplanes. He had experience flying a variety of airplanes including, but not limited to: Extra 
300, Fairchild PT19, Aero L29, Hawker Hunter, Aviat Husky, Boeing Stearman, and Cessna 
Citation. The pilot was involved in an accident in July 2004, when he was performing an 
aerobatic maneuver and did not allow adequate clearance from the ground resulting in a 
collision. 
Friends and family of the pilot classified his health as "excellent," and his spouse reported that 
he did not take any medications nor did he regularly use alcohol. She stated that he slept well 
and regularly. She estimated that the night prior to the accident, he went to bed around 
midnight and awoke around 06:00-07:00, which was normally the amount of sleep he would 
get. She believed he was going to Glendale, Arizona, on the day of the accident, and he had 
indicated that he would be back to their house in Boise around 1630. The pilot's spouse and 
brother both indicated that there was nothing different in the pilot's life or big changes that 
had occurred prior to the accident; he appeared to be in excellent health and regularly 
exercised. A corporate pilot that flew the Micron Technology, Inc., jet regularly recalled that 
the pilot returned from Miami, Florida at 1205 the morning of the accident, which was the last 
time he saw the pilot. The exact time the pilot returned home is unknown. 
1.2 AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The Lancair IV-TP is an amateur-built experimental airplane constructed mainly of composite 
materials. The high-performance, pressurized airplane is equipped with four seats, retractable 
tricycle landing gear, and traditional flight control surfaces. The accident airplane received a 
special airworthiness certificate in the experimental category for the purpose of being operated 
as an amateur-built aircraft in March 2007. The builder started construction of the aircraft in 
November 2004 and completed the aircraft in January 2007. The equipment on the airplane 
was not a standard Lancair installation for a IV-TP, rather, a firewall forward package provided 
by an outside supplier (not Lancair); Walter/General Eclectic M601E was the standard 
installation.
The airplane was equipped with a Diemech Turbines, Inc. M601D engine, serial number (s/n) 
864030, and, according to the manufacturer, is rated at 724 shaft horse power (SHP). The 
Diemech M601D is a two-spool engine consisting of a gas generator which drives a power 
turbine which drives a reduction gearbox. The gas generator compressor is a mixed 
configuration consisting of two axial flow stages and one centrifugal stage. Inlet air enters the 
compressor section radially just forward of the accessory section and travels forward through 
the two axial stages and one centrifugal stage. The exiting compressor air enters an annular 
combustor arrangement for mixing with fuel for the combustion process. The expanded flow 
path gases are then directed to the gas generator turbine by the gas generator turbine nozzles. 
The remaining expanded flow path gases exiting the gas generator are then directed to the 
power turbine for the final power extraction before exiting the engine forward of the 
compressor inlet. 
Page 8 of 28WPR12FA089
The power turbine then drives the propeller system by means of the reduction gearbox. The 
accessory gearbox which is located on the aft end of the engine drives all engine accessories by 
a direct shaft coming from the compressor spool. Typical engine accessories are the main fuel 
pump, fuel control unit, starter / generator which are all on the rear gearbox and the propeller 
governor, which is driven by the reduction gearbox located at the front of the engine. 
The airplane was equipped with a constant-speed three-bladed Avia Propeller V508/E/84/B2 
(s/n 120651110), that was manufactured in 1981; the blades were 84 inches in length. The 
propeller governor was a Jihostroj LUN7815.02-8 (s/n 853059), and the overspeed governor 
(limiter) was a Jihostroj 065-2600 (s/n 903-071). 
1.2.1 Maintenance Records
The airplane's maintenance records were obtained from the pilot's hangar, where they were 
located with maintenance-related documents/manuals for his other airplanes. In addition, 
information was obtained from the FAA and Jihostroj Aero Technology and Hydraulics, the 
manufacturer of the fuel control unit (FCU) installed on the airplane.
According to the records examined, the airplane, serial number 003, had accumulated a total 
time in service of about 375 hours when the pilot purchased it on December 31, 2011. The most 
recent condition inspection was recorded as completed on April 11, 2011, at a total time of 
339.3 hours. During that inspection, it was noted that the airplane was modified with 
removable rudder pedals (co-pilot seat) and the outside air temperature (OAT) probe was 
relocated to the bottom of the right wing tip, where the winglet is affixed to the right wing. 
According to the logbooks, the most recent maintenance was performed on June 27, 2011, and 
consisted of an interior "refurbishment" which included these noted maintenance actions: the 
interior panels and seats being reupholstered in leather, replacement of the carpet, seatbelt re-
webbed. 
A review of the airplane's documents further revealed that the Diemech Turbines, Inc. M601D 
engine was originally manufactured in 1986 as a Walter 601D and was installed on the airframe 
with a time in service of 2,950 hours; the last major overhaul occurred before the engine was 
installed on the accident airframe. The logbook indicated that on April 04, 2011, the engine was 
inspected in accordance with the Turbine Power Technology 300-hour scope sheet at a 
tachometer time of 339.3 hours. The Turbine Starter Limiting/Monitoring System (TSLM) 
recorded the engine total time (since being installed on the airframe) at the time of the accident 
as 387.5 hours, equating to 387 cycles. 
1.2.2 Configuration/Instrumentation
The engine's SHP at 100-percent Q was 724 SHP and at 112-percent it was 810 SHP. According 
to Lancair experts, during a normal takeoff rotation speed would be about 75 kts and would be 
flown about 90-percent Ng. Due to the fast acceleration, a reduced power setting ensures the 
pilot's ability to operate within limitations. The maximum value of Np was 2,080 rpm.
The engine controls were actuated by three levers located on the center panel of the cockpit. 
The left lever, the throttle, controlled the power at forward and reverse propeller thrust ratings. 
The middle lever controlled propeller speed and feathering. The right lever, the condition lever, 
actuated the fuel shut-off valve and, if the emergency circuit was on, it controlled engine power 
by metering the fuel flow. 
The airplane had fabricated winglets. The avionics package included an Aerosonic Op 
Page 9 of 28WPR12FA089
Technologies EFIS that was tied to the PFD and MFD and a backup Dynon EFIS. The Op 
Technologies system enabled the pilot to have visible on the PFD all basic flight 
instrumentation, a navigation display, and engine instrumentation. Upon application of power, 
the system would automatically display the airspeed, attitude, altitude, and vertical speed 
indicators on the upper portion of the screen. 
1.2.3 Fuel System
The airplane's fuel system was non-standard for a Lancair IV-TP installation. It was equipped 
with long range fuel tanks that increased the capacity of the fuel system to 175 gallons and 
consisted of four fuel tanks: left wing (58 gallons), right wing (58 gallons), aft auxiliary (24 
gallons) and the belly (30 gallons). The amount of unusable fuel was 5 gallons. The fuel system 
included three low-pressure electric fuel pumps, all of which could be activated by the pilot: 
one main pump and two transfer pumps (rated at 40 to 50 gph and 28-psi). 
The aft tank, located behind the pilot's seat, was routed through a transfer pump and check 
valve to the left wing tank; the fuel was added to this tank via a filler cap on the top of the tank 
accessed through the baggage door. The left tank fuel pickup was located at the lower wing root 
and routed to the fuel selector. The belly tank was routed through a transfer pump to the right 
wing tank. The right tank fuel pickup was located at the lower wing root and routed to the fuel 
selector. 
From the fuel selector, the fuel flow continued via the main electric fuel pump to the pressure 
header tank. The pressure header tank was comprised of a 1 gallon stainless- steel cylinder with 
a 10 micron filter affixed to the bottom. The pressure header tank was designed for the fuel to 
be fed from the electric fuel pump into its main housing and when the fuel pressure was 
adequate, the fuel would be forced through a 10 micron filter attached to the bottom and 
continue up through the enclosed center core of the tank. From the tank, the fuel continued by 
the fuel pressure sensor and then the fuel flow sensor to the fuel control unit (FCU), meaning 
the pressure and flow displayed on the instrument panel were based on what the pressure 
header tank was supplying to the FCU. At the top of the header tank was a check valve that 
ported excess fuel back to the fuel selector, which would then route that fuel to the wing tank 
that was selected. The fuel selector in turn, had two return lines, one connected to each wing 
tank. 
1.2.4 Prior Issues
The pilot had emailed the airplane's prior owner on January 12, 2012, stating that he had 
noticed that fuel from the aft fuel tank was feeding slowly to the left wing tank even when the 
aft fuel pump was not on, which he assumed was due to the fuel valve not closing completely. 
The pilot additionally stated that it was "not a big deal," but that it had happened on "both 
flights" he took. On January 18, the pilot emailed the prior owner again stating that the left fuel 
tank would constantly weep, and fuel would run down the bottom of the wing to the root and 
drip under the fuselage (near the wheel well). He additionally noted a strong odor of jet fuel 
from behind the co-pilot seat and queried the prior owner as to his thoughts if the fuel was 
coming from the aft fuel tank as it feeds to the left fuel tank. 
The previous owner responded by stating that he had only experienced the left fuel tank 
leaking when it was near full fuel. He noted that as for the odor, he was not aware of any reason 
for the smell of fuel in aft cabin. According to a Lancair IV-TP expert, when full fuel is added to 
the wings and the air temperature rises, the fuel will trickle through the vents. The fuel will 
Page 10 of 28WPR12FA089
then follow the wing shape and flow down to the wing root, where there is a fuel odor in the 
cockpit.
A corporate pilot employed at Micron recalled flying the accident airplane with the pilot on two 
occasions; he had not flown a Lancair IV-TP before and the purpose of the flights was for him 
to try flying it. On the first flight the corporate pilot was positioned in the right seat, and they 
traded off flying while performing a series of touch-and-go practice takeoffs and landings in the 
Boise traffic pattern. The second flight was later in January, and they flew roundtrip from 
Boise to Sandpoint. He recalled that while on the ground in Sandpoint, they had folded the left 
seat back in an effort to store luggage in the rear. In manipulating the seat position, the teeth 
became misaligned; they were unable to return the seat's position back to upright; and it 
remained wedged in a reclined 45-50 degree angle. The pilot originally wanted the corporate 
pilot to fly the return leg, but he could not operate the airplane with the seat that far reclined so 
the pilot flew back to Boise from the right seat. 
From reviewing the pilot's email communications and interviewing his friends and family, it 
appeared that he was satisfied with the airplane in general.
1.2.5 EFIS Data
The airplane's past EFIS flight data was retrieved in an effort to ascertain the parameter values 
during the last approximate ten flights. A review of those flights (excluding the accident flight) 
revealed that during takeoff the following was common:
-Q: the maximum torque attained during the takeoff climb was usually between 80 to 95 
percent. 
-Pitch: the average maximum pitch was 13-degrees nose-up, with the highest being 18-degrees 
nose-up.
-Fuel Flow: the fuel flow values varied between 50 to 65gph, with the majority between 50 and 
60 gph.
-Fuel Pressure: the fuel pressure values during takeoff varied between 27 to 35 psi, with a 
majority between 28 to 30 psi. At no time was the fuel pressure recorded as dipping below 25 
psi with the exception of one ground run where it momentarily dropped to 0 in conjunction 
with other parameters not being recorded consistent with the pilot manipulating an electrical 
power source. 
-ITT: the ITT values during takeoff were between 500 to 600 degrees C (According to a Lancair 
expert, this would normally be between 650-720 degrees C).
-Np: the Np values reached a maximum between 2,000 and 2,080 rpm. 
A review of the EFIS flight data additionally disclosed that on January 28, 2012, the last flight 
prior to the accident flight, the airplane performed a rejected takeoff in Boise. During that 
flight, the airplane reached a maximum airspeed of 46 kts and likely did not become airborne. 
The fuel flow during the first 5 seconds dropped from 42 to 18 gph (idle), with the fuel pressure 
remaining consistent around 30 to 32 psi. Additionally, Np decreased from about 1,970 to 
1,245 rpm; Q decreased from 52 to 12 percent; and ITT dropped from 505 to 380 degrees C. 
The airplane landed and taxied back to the runway, departing again about 2.5 minutes later on 
an uneventful flight where the pilot performed touch-and-go takeoffs and landings in the traffic 
pattern. 
Page 11 of 28WPR12FA089
1.2.6 Fuel Pressure and Fuel Flow
Based on the airplane's records, it is believed that the airplane was equipped with a fuel supply 
monitoring system (FSM), although the unit was not identified/recovered in the wreckage 
likely due to the extensive fire damage. The fuel pressure warning was set to be activated at 6 
psi. The airplane plans show that it was to be equipped with three fuel flow sensors, each 
positioned between one of the three fuel pumps and the header tank, although it is not know 
where in actuality they were located on the airplane. The system was designed to give the pilot 
a warning indication of a low fuel flow. The low-fuel pressure transducer was fitted to the main 
fuel pump supplying to the header tank, which was where the low level warning indicator senor 
was fitted. Given that, during the accident flight, the recorded flows and pressures did not drop 
below the set parameters, it is not likely the pilot received any such warning. 
1.2.7 Fuel Quantity
Local fixed based operator (FBO) personnel fueled the airplane several minutes before engine 
start on the day of the accident at the pilot's request. A sample of fuel from the truck used to 
refuel the airplane was obtained, and the refueling technician was interviewed. The EFIS 
recorded data indicated that both tanks contained 58 gallons of fuel at the start of the initial 
takeoff attempt, and just prior to the accident (the second takeoff attempt), the right tank 
contained 54 gallons and the left contained 58 gallons. According to the refueling technician, 
the pilot had requested that the airplane be refueled to capacity, and the records indicated he 
purchased 102 gallons of Jet A. The technician recalled filling the wing tanks first, followed by 
the belly tank and then the aft tank. 
1.2.8 Emergency Circuit
The engine was designed with an emergency circuit for engine control if the FCU becomes 
faulty, and the pilot is unable to control Q with the throttle. The emergency circuit becomes 
effective by the pilot turning-on the isolating valve (ISOL) switch in the cockpit. To use the 
emergency circuit, the power should be reduced to idle (via the throttle lever) and the 
condition lever (right lever) placed in the idle position (normal fuel-on mid-position and 
labeled). The ISOL switch can then be selected on, and thenceforth the condition lever can be 
used as a throttle.
Diemech's Operations Manual states that "if a reduction in torque and an increasing ITT 
occurs, the probable cause would be mechanical" and that "the ISOL will not work and we 
suggest you land the plane soon." It further states that "if a reduction in torque, N1, and/or ITT 
occurs and adding of power does not make a change, there is a probable problem with the 
FCU–," and the pilot should "reduce power to idle (throttle) and make sure the condition lever 
is in the indent position +/- 1/3 forward." It states that thereafter, the pilot can "select [the] 
ISOL valve and use condition lever as throttle.
Several Lancair IV-TP owners with many hours of flight experience in the airplane stated that 
the process of engaging the emergency circuit takes several seconds, and there would likely be 
insufficient time to activate the ISOL switch and reapply power to the engine if under 500 feet 
agl. This time limitation is based on the pilot awareness and reaction time, rather than a 
mechanical limitation. 
1.2.9 Weight and Balance 
NTSB investigators estimated the airplane's gross take-off weight (GTOW) and center of 
Page 12 of 28WPR12FA089
gravity. The estimate assumed that the airplane had 112 gallons of Jet A fuel distributed in the 
wing tanks, and that the belly and aft tanks were full. The GTOW was estimated to be 3,837 
pounds, with a center of gravity at 90.13 inches aft of datum. The weight and balance record in 
the airplane indicated that the maximum allowable takeoff gross weight was 4,300 pounds, 
and the allowable CG range was from 86.5 to 94.5 inches aft of datum). A sheet detailing the 
weight and balance computations is appended to this report.
The Lancair-recommended maximum GTOW for a Lancair IV-TP with the turboprop engine 
and winglets was 3,550 pounds. FAA regulations governing amateur-built aircraft identify the 
builder as the manufacturer of that individual aircraft and, as such, the builder is allowed to set 
the weight limits, including maximum GTOW, at any desired value.
Because each aircraft is unique in its construction, the builder must determine the stall speeds 
for that particular aircraft. Documents relating to the stall speeds specific for the occurrence 
aircraft were not found during the investigation. 
1.2.10 Performance Study
The performance parameters used were based on the recorded EFIS data, and on computer 
simulations in which the airplane's flight controls were manipulated so as to approximately 
match the flight path of the airplane recorded in the EFIS Global Positioning System (GPS) 
data. The simulations used a simple model of the Lancair IV-TP (flaps in the retracted 
position), a weight of 3,807 lbs (the estimated GTOW less the recorded fuel flow during the 
flight), and the weather conditions recorded at the time of the accident. The engine power in 
the simulation was based on recorded propeller speed (Np) and engine torque (Q) data. The 
complete simulation report is in the contained in the public docket for this accident.
The Lancair IV is an experimental aircraft constructed by individuals from "kits" provided by 
the designer, Lancair International, Inc. Lancair was not able to provide any usable 
aerodynamic or performance data with which to construct a simulator model; consequently, 
the simulator model used in the performance study was based on theoretical aerodynamic 
relationships grounded in classical aerodynamics and the airplane's geometry; a report of flight 
tests of another Lancair IV-TP; estimated stall speeds provided to the Transportation Safety 
Board of Canada (TSB); estimates of angle of attack, lift, and drag based on the recorded 
PFD/EFIS data from the accident flight of N66HL ( NTSB accident # WPR12FA180); and 
comparisons with other aircraft. 
The objectives of the simulation were to:
-obtain a "match" of the recorded EFIS GPS positions using the recorded pitch and roll 
information and engine power.
-verify the self-consistency of the recorded data by comparing the EFIS data to self-consistent 
simulation data.
-provide estimates of performance parameters that were not recorded on the EFIS.
-quantify the lift coefficient (CL) required to fly the final maneuver recorded by the EFIS and 
determine its proximity to CLmax (the value of CL at stall). 
Two simulations were conducted, one used a nominal model of propeller efficiency (n) 
throughout the takeoff, and the second introduced a sudden, artificial drop in n at 0855:43 in 
an effort to better match the airspeed decay recorded on the EFIS. In both simulations, the 
Page 13 of 28WPR12FA089
CLmax of 1.3 was reached before the end of the EFIS data, consistent with the airplane's 
maneuvers resulting in a stall. 
The 100% values of shaft horsepower (724 SHP) and Np (2080 rpm) result in a 100% value of 
torque (Q) of 1,828.1 foot-pounds. Consequently, the actual Q (in ft*lbs) on the propeller shaft 
could be computed from the percent Q recorded by the EFIS by multiplying by (1,828.1/100). 
The thrust delivered by the propeller was computed from the computed SHP, the true airspeed, 
and a model of n. The simulation SHP was limited to the maximum nominal SHP of the engine 
(724 SHP), even though the NP and Q recorded on the EFIS indicated higher power levels early 
in the takeoff. The fidelity of the simulations could be improved by allowing the engine to 
achieve these higher power levels, though the conclusions would not be materially affected.
The EFIS data matched the simulator scenario that included the sudden drop in n at 0855:43 
(that reduced the simulation thrust) better than the scenario that did not include a drop in n. 
The n drop was merely a means for reducing the simulation thrust while preserving the engine 
power implied by Q and Np values recorded in the EFIS data. It is unknown whether the 
required drop in thrust indicated a modeling error in the simulation (e.g., an unaccounted-for 
dependency of the airplane's drag on the power level, etc.), an actual malfunction in the 
propeller or other part of the propulsion system, or some other phenomenon. 
The n-drop simulation was able to follow the EFIS flight track fairly well (until about 08:56:00, 
when the EFIS recorded a large drop to a pitch angle to -6.7-degrees, which the simulation did 
not duplicate). The results of the simulation could be used to determine additional information 
about the flight, such as angle of attack and CL values required to fly the EFIS track. The 
nominal simulation (without the n-drop), in contrast, started to deviate from the recorded 
EFIS speed and position data shortly after the pilot's "turn back in" request. These results 
indicate that the n-drop simulation represented the actual aircraft better than the nominal 
simulation. The n-drop simulation indicated that the airplane reached the flaps-up CLmax of 
1.3 at about 0856:00. 
1.2.11 TSLM
The airplane was equipped with a VR Avionics Turbine Starter Limiting/Monitoring System 
(TSLM). It was designed to act as a start sequence controller, an engine protection limiter, and 
an engine monitor/recorder. The unit was capable of in-flight power limiting and utilized an 
analog controller to activate the Electro-Hydraulic Transducer (EHT) valve, which was a 
component of the electrohydraulic transducer on the FCU. The EHT valve was used to limit the 
power generated by the engine by restricting the fuel flow. 
The electrohydraulic transducer controlled pressure in the compartment of the main metering 
needle in the FCU and thus the needle's position. Therefore, the fuel supply is dependent on 
the control signal from the integrated electronic limiter unit. It is designed as an independent 
subassembly mounted on the FCU body. 
Although not identified in the wreckage (due to the post accident fire damage), the airplane 
should have been equipped with a limiter -disabling toggle switch in the cockpit enabling the 
pilot to select the limiting function off. 
The TSLM's main display in the cockpit (designed to fit in a standard 2.25 inch hole) showed 
the following 6 parameters in real-time: ITT, N1 (compressor speed), Np, Q, oil pressure and 
voltage. Each value was given in both numeric decimal and a bar-graph form; if a parameter 
was exceeded, and therefore subject to being limited, the value would flash. Following a flight, 
Page 14 of 28WPR12FA089
the data could be extracted and read out on the manufacturer's computer program, TSLM 
Link., which was the method in which the unit's data was recovered after the accident.
The TSLM's exceedances on the accident unit were set with the following parameters:
Full limiting ITT= 715 degrees
Beta limiting Np= 1900 rpm
Full limiting Compressor rpm (N1)= 101.5 percent
Full limiting Np= 2080 rpm
Full limiting Q = 104 percent
Enable Full (in-flight) limiting= No
Enable beta prop limiting= Yes
The recorded data showed the number of times each of the following exceedances were reached 
since the engine was overhauled and installed on the airplane:
ITT reached Max ITT= 32
ITT exceeded 800 degrees= 3
Max N1= 1
Max Np= 58
Max Q = 96
According to the manufacturer of the TSLM, exceedance graphs are triggered (recording starts) 
when one or more of the 6 parameters goes one digit above the set max limit, and recording 
stops after all 6 parameters have dropped to their max limit or below it for at least 5 seconds. It 
is thus possible to get multiple parameters exceeding at the same time and end up with only 
one graph. The ITT exceedance is further monitored at two levels (upper and lower). If an 
exceeding parameter should dip below its max limit and within 5 seconds go above it again, it 
would result in another exceedance event/entry grouped with the same graph.
For example, oil pressure on the TSLM is measured to the nearest 1 psi. Thus, with the max 
limit set at 39 psi, a recording is triggered when oil pressure measures 40 psi or more. 
Parameters are tested at 100 per second (every 10ms), but recorded at 10 samples per second. 
Thus within 100ms from reaching 40 psi or more, graph capturing starts. The recording graph 
stops after oil pressure stays at 39 psi or below for 5 seconds (if no other parameter exceeds 
during this time).
The system on the airplane was set up so that limiting could only occur while the airplane was 
on the ground (determined by a squat switch), and/or, the Np limiting could only occur with 
the propeller in beta. An Np exceedance would only be visible in the cockpit if beta was 
activated, otherwise it would just show in the recording. If the limiter is limiting, the pilot 
would see the TSLM light illuminate followed by a reduction of power (the pilot is able to 
advance the throttle and override the reduction in power). 
For the unit to register the propeller in beta, the pilot would have to manipulate the propeller 
lever back past the flight-idle gate into beta phase, which would ground a microswitch and 
display beta mode by illuminating a light on the panel. If the microswitch grounded due to a 
Page 15 of 28WPR12FA089
malfunction in the switches system, the TSLM would perform as if the airplane was in beta and 
limit Q by restricting fuel. There was no recording/capturing on the TSLM specifically for beta 
mode or EHT activation unless it occurs while an exceedance recording (abnormal event) is in 
progress.
Upper ITT exceedances are defaulted to record if the engine reaches in excess of 800 degrees 
C, and lower ITT exceedances are defaulted to record if the engine reaches in excess of 735 
degrees C. A lower exceedance requires borescope inspection, and an upper exceedance 
requires a teardown inspection. The N1 exceedances were set at 100 percent, and the purpose 
was to protect the turbine rotors from stretching to the point of serious damage by contacting 
the engine casing as well as protecting all rotors from encountering catastrophic vibration 
modes.
The TSLM would show EHT activation via a graph line named "EHT+" (green) that would 
display TSLM input to indicate a current was flowing in the return wire; the other "EHT" line 
(blue) would display the output controlled by the TSLM.
1.2.12 TSLM Data
A review was conducted of the airplane's recorded data on the manufacturer's TSLM Link 
program, which captures the exceedances although the values of the parameters that caused 
the exceedances are not available (only a graph). The last start before the accident flight was 
recorded as occurring at 386:37:00, which refers to the total hours, minutes, and seconds that 
the engine had operated since it was installed on the airplane. At the time of the start of the 
accident flight, the engine had accumulated 387:13:00 hours. The exceedance summary 
showed that the engine encountered an Np exceedance at 386:49:27 which continued for about 
5 seconds. An oil pressure exceedance occurred at 386:52:00 and continued for about 5 
seconds. The last recorded exceedance for that flight was an N1 exceedance, which was the only 
N1 exceedance ever recorded for the engine. It occurred at 386:57:34 and was recorded as 
occurring for 5 seconds although the graph showed that N1 was between 77 to 79 percent (with 
the maximum limit set at 101.5 percent). It is unknown if the exceedances occurred in flight or 
on the ground. The manufacturer did not know what could cause the trigger of this exceedance 
graph without the engine reaching that exceedance, although a representative stated that in the 
field he had seen such exceedance graph histories with erroneous charting (i.e., the exceedance 
was real, but the data plotted in the chart was erroneous).
The flight on the day of the accident had a start recorded at 387:13:00 and the graph looked 
similar to the previous start graph. The TSLM recorded six exceedances between this startup 
and the end of its data, although it was not possible to accurately match the with the EFIS data. 
The first exceedance was an Np exceedance and recorded as occurring at 387:29:40, equating 
to 16 minutes and 40 seconds after start and captured 5.5 seconds. The graph displayed that N1 
stayed between 92 and 95 percent and ITT oscillated from about 580 to 600 degrees C. Np 
appeared to peak just above 2,080 RPM (the maximum limit) and level out at 2,000 RPM; the 
EFIS data showed that about 16 minutes and 40 seconds after the flight the Np was 
transitioning from 1,114 to 1,774. There were 5 exceedances that occurred thereafter, all of 
which were ITT exceedances that were recorded as occurring at 387:30:00. The first 
exceedance was an ITT lower exceedance, the second was an ITT upper exceedance, followed 
by a lower exceedance with the remaining two being upper exceedances. Of these recorded 
exceedances, only two graphs were produced, one of which was 24.90 seconds and the other 
was 22.80 seconds. The longer duration graph showed very little fluctuation in values, and ITT 
Page 16 of 28WPR12FA089
was recorded as being around 950 degrees C. 
The shorter graph showed a rise in ITT from about 470 degrees C up to about 875 degrees C 
within 0.25 seconds and continued to rise to the same 950 degree C valuation of the longer 
graph. Additionally, the green EHT+ line indicated that current was flowing to the wire for the 
first 0.25 seconds that the graph was displaying the recorded parameters.
1.2.13 Handling
The technician that refueled the airplane before the flight stated that while he was rolling up 
the fuel hose, he conversed with the pilot about the airplane's flight characteristics. He queried 
the pilot as to what he liked about the airplane, and the pilot responded that the speed 
capability reached about 300 to 310 kts with a range of about 1,000 to 1,200 miles. When 
asked what he disliked about the airplane, the pilot noted that it was "squirrelly." 
The Micron corporate pilot that had flown with the pilot in the accident airplane stated that he 
had frequently flown for the pilot in a professional capacity. He had known the pilot about 14 
years, but only flew with him for about 15 to 20 hours. Most of that time was the corporate pilot 
getting checked out to fly one of the pilot's airplanes. 
The corporate pilot further stated that the accident airplane was the most responsive airplane 
he had ever flown. He described the airplane as characteristically having an abundant amount 
of power and that the controls needed very little pressure/manipulation to maneuver the 
airplane. He recalled that any pitch movements or power changes needed to immediately be 
compensated with rudder adjustments due to the drastic change in yaw. He remembered that 
the pilot wanted to add strakes or a fin on the airplane to help with the controllability. He 
further stated that the pilot was unfamiliar with the panel, which made the airplane even more 
challenging. 
According to a Lancair IV-TP expert with many hours of flight experience in various 
models/configurations of the airplane, the governor was originally designed for blade lengths 
between 99 to 106 inches. Due to the accident airplane's shorter propeller blade length of 84 
inches, the pilot could easily encounter an overspeed condition. Therefore when accelerating 
for takeoff, it was crucial for the pilot not to advance the engine power too quickly, so as to 
allow the governor enough time to make the required propeller pitch changes without over 
speeding the propeller. 
The expert additionally stated that around the time of the accident, he tested a new propeller 
governor for an Avia Propeller (not the same governor as the accident airplane). On the first 
flight, the propeller's beta light illuminated during takeoff (even though it was not in beta), and 
the engine was limited when the propeller exceeded 1,900 RPM. He quickly realized that the 
engine was being limited and reduced Np via the propeller lever. He remarked that during this 
event, the airplane was almost not flyable due to the amount of rudder pedal input needed 
during the frequent changes in power resulting from the limiter's effect on the engine. 
A former Lancair engineer and general manager was interviewed with regards to the Lancair 
IV-TP handling characteristics; the complete interview is contained in the public docket for 
this accident. He stated in the circumstance of a sudden power reduction in the Lancair IV-TP, 
the airspeed will rapidly decay, and the pilot must push the nose down to maintain flying 
speed. He noted that following a loss of power, the nose would remain in a nose-up attitude, 
and unless the pilot made corrective pitch inputs (reducing the angle of attack) within about 4 
to 5 seconds, the airplane would become unrecoverable. He added that the airplane would 
Page 17 of 28WPR12FA089
rapidly reach a critical angle of attack and stall while simultaneously rapidly dropping a wing 
(the wing that would drop would depend on the particular airplane and how it was 
constructed). If the airplane stalled in such manner at traffic pattern altitude, there would be 
no possibility of a pilot recovering. According to the former employee, the departure from 
controlled flight and the abrupt wing drop are the characteristics that would make the situation 
unrecoverable. 
The former employee added that in the scenario of a sudden power reduction during takeoff 
due to FCU malfunction, there would be no time for the pilot to adjust the propeller to coarse 
pitch, use the ISOL valve, and then use the condition lever as the throttle control. If the pilot 
does not immediately pitch the nose in a 4 to 5 second timeframe, the airplane will stall. By the 
time the pilot identifies that there is an engine problem and configures the levers accordingly, 
there would be no time to recover the airplane. He advises that pilots use a go/no-go decision 
altitude of 1,500 ft agl, where, regardless of the situation, they will land straight ahead in the 
event of an engine failure if under that altitude. He clarified that if the engine torque reduces to 
idle during takeoff, there is no possibility of turning back to the runway until at least 1,500 ft 
agl. This is because of the airplane's heavy wing loading, and its glide ratio of about 7:1 at a fine 
propeller pitch and 18:1 at full feather (where the best glide speed is about 120 kts indicated).
The former employee opined that the accident airplane's stall speed (in the accident 
configuration) would likely have been in excess of 80 kts indicated. He estimated that the 
airplane's approach speed would have been about 110-120 kts indicated. 
The former employee further stated that a pilot cannot use full engine power during takeoff on 
the ground, because the IV-TP was not designed for such a high-horsepower engine and does 
not have enough rudder authority to compensate for the p-factor at full power, and will 
consequently depart off the left side of the runway. He noted that having fuel in the baggage 
area (the aft fuel tank) greatly affects the airplane's center of gravity, and the airplane will be 
extremely sensitive in pitch. 
According to a Lancair IV-TP expert, he had performed a variety of tests in the airplane which 
included stalling in a variety of scenarios, configurations, altitudes and power settings. He 
stalled the airplane from 31,000 to 15,000 feet incrementally with 1-4 G's of loading. After 
hundreds of stalls and over 1,500 hours testing in the Lancair IV-TP he offered the following 
remarks. 
He stated that the airplane will stall and the nose will drop about 15-degrees and with 
symmetrical wings, will remain straight ahead. A wing can drop left or right depending on 
slight induced yaw. For the straight ahead stall and subsequent recovery it is critical to keep the 
ball centered or the wing will drop. It is very sensitive to a ball slightly out of center. During 
recovery it is very responsive to lowering the nose and reducing the angle attack above all else. 
The recovery is immediate with a reduction in angle of attack. Never is power applied until 20 
percent above the indicated stall speed. If power is on during the stall entry he will reduce to 
idle immediately upon stall onset.
1.3 METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
A routine aviation weather report (METAR) for Boise was issued at 0853. It stated: skies clear; 
visibility 10 statute miles; wind from 110-degrees at 5 knots; temperature 28 degrees 
Fahrenheit; dew point 19 degrees Fahrenheit; and altimeter 30.14 inHg. 
1.4 WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Page 18 of 28WPR12FA089
The wreckage was located at an estimated 43 degrees 33 minutes 45 seconds north latitude and 
116 degrees 12 minutes 57 seconds west longitude, and at an elevation of about 2,860 feet msl. 
The accident site was in the grassy median just north of a paved service road that runs between 
parallel runways 10L-28R and 10R-28L and between taxiways D and C. The wreckage was 
about 1.25 nm from the beginning of runway 10R and about 0.4 nm from the end of the 
runway. 
Past the end of the runway, there lies about 0.8 nm of flat, unpopulated hard- dirt surface. 
Beyond that lies a sand-gravel pit and several buildings, with flat terrain between. To the north 
(left) of the runway heading, the interstate was oriented northwest-southwest and crossed the 
extended runway centerline about 2 nm from the end of the runway. On a bearing of about 175-
degrees and 1 nm away was a 1 nm- long closed runway; flat terrain extended in that direction 
for 3 nm. 
The first identified point of impact consisted of a crater in the soft terrain where a propeller 
blade was imbedded; small pieces of airframe and debris surrounded the disrupted dirt. 
Numerous portions of the airframe were located in the debris field leading from the initial 
impact to the main wreckage, the largest of which was a majority of the right wing. The main 
wreckage was located in an upright position about 80 ft from the initial impact point on a 
magnetic heading of 046 degrees. The main wreckage had sustained thermal damage and 
consisted of the engine, inboard portion of the left wing, and fuselage (from firewall to aft 
baggage area).
Pictures and diagrams of the wreckage location and surrounding terrain are contained in the 
public docket for this accident.
1.5 MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Ada County Coroner's Office, Boise, Idaho, completed an autopsy on the pilot. The FAA 
Forensic Toxicology Research Team at the Civil Aviation Medical Institute (CAMI) performed 
toxicological testing of specimens collected during the autopsy. The results of the testing were 
negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, and listed drugs.
1.6 TEST AND RESEARCH
The complete examination reports are contained in the public docket for this accident. 
1.6.1 Airframe Examination
The cowling was separated at the firewall and showed no evidence of fire damage. The top 
section remained intact, and both sides were affixed to portions of the bottom section. The 
lower area of the bottom section was not present although numerous sections of skin (around 1 
foot by 1 foot) were identified as being part of that section due to distinguishing features (e.g., 
vent slots, intake curvature, etc.). The inside skin contained a loose dirt covering in areas, but 
there was no oil, soot, or discoloration noted. 
The firewall and engine mounting brackets had sustained crush damage and were thermally 
deformed. The nose wheel over-center links were crushed forward and upward toward the 
engine (hyper-extended), consistent with the landing gear being down during the accident 
sequence since the gear was crushed in the opposite direction of the normal aft retraction 
movement.
The cockpit area had sustained severe thermal damage. The avionics were charred, with wire 
Page 19 of 28WPR12FA089
bundles exposed and partially melted. The front seat frames were partially attached to the wing 
spar and the floor section was mostly consumed by fire. The throttle lever was in the idle 
position with the gate locked. The propeller lever was full forward. The condition lever was in 
the full forward position. 
There was no evidence of pre impact mechanical malfunction or failure with the flight control 
systems.
The electric fuel pumps were consumed by fire. The pressure header tank remained attached to 
the engine mount structure. After removal, pressurized air was forced through the center tube 
while blocking the outlet tubing, and no leaks were detected. The header tank was then cut 
open to reveal the welded tube in the center; there was no evidence of any anomalies. The 
screen on the return line was clean.
1.6.2 Engine Examination
A complete teardown inspection was performed on the engine. An external examination 
revealed that the blow-off valve was in a fully open position, which was an indication that the 
turbine was below 75 percent N1. The FCU first and second stage elements had sustained 
impact damage precluding investigators from observing if air was in the system. 
The mechanical fuel pump was removed and disassembled revealing that its shaft was intact 
and bent from impact. The pump's supply line was severed, and the screen filter on the pump 
contained small dirt particles which were consistent in appearance with fire retardant entering 
the pump following the initial impact. There was no evidence of excessive wear or pre impact 
damage. 
A borescope inspection of the fuel slinger, inner combustion chamber, outer combustion 
chamber, compressor turbine nozzle, compressor turbine and power turbine revealed no 
evidence of catastrophic malfunction or failure. The borescope inspection of the first stage 
compressor revealed that it contained a layer of soot consistent with post -accident fire. The 
compressor could not be turned due to the impact damage of the case which lead to the blades 
making contact with the stators. No evidence of failure or blade damage was found. 
The main oil filter was removed and found free of debris. Removal of the 205 bearing filter 
revealed several small carbon particles that, according to a Lancair expert, were a sign of 
normal operation. There was no metal found in the oil filters. The front magnetic chip detector 
contained a fine metal sludge, which according to a Lancair expert was also normal for this 
detector. The rear chip detector contained one fine metal splinter, and the filter was clean. 
Both screen filters from the front gearbox were removed and contained no metal particles.
Visual inspection of the propeller revealed that the feathering fly weights were forward in the 
fine pitch position. The spinner had sustained aft crush damage and was wedged against the fly 
weights. Two blades remained secured in their hubs, and the third blade had broken free and 
was found in the initial impact point at the beginning of the debris field. The beta block on the 
propeller governor was attached and not damaged. The propeller governor linkage position 
was in the full fine pitch position (take off position). 
Disassembly of the engine revealed that the power turbine guide vane was intact, and there did 
not appear to be contact with the power turbine blades. The nozzle guide vane shroud showed 
light non-rotational rub marks on the surrounding case, consistent with case ride; there was no 
curling or indication of rub of the blade tip knife seals from the power turbine blades. 
Page 20 of 28WPR12FA089
The number two bearing, bearing housing, and rear shaft were intact and showed a dark 
coloration, which experts stated was consistent with normal operation. Further disassembly 
revealed that the compressor turbine (also referred to as the gas generator turbine) blades were 
intact. There were no rub marks on the shroud that surrounded the blades.
The compressor turbine guide vanes leading edges, concave surfaces and inner band all were 
clean of debris or metal splatter. The compressor turbine guide vane was intact. The inner 
combustion chamber liner shell was an orangish coloration which experts state was similar in 
color to when it is manufactured (from ceramic coating); its bracket was similar in color, in 
indication that it did not come into contact with the slinger ring (attached to the compressor 
shaft).
The accessory gearbox was removed. The aft face of the inlet air housing was intact and the 
vanes contained a film of dirt/debris. The first stage compressor blades were intact. The second 
stage compressor blades showed evidence of light rub with the slight curling of several blades 
at the trailing edge tips in the opposite direction of rotation (clockwise). The number one 
bearing was clean and intact; its outer race showed signatures no real rotational signatures. 
The impeller vanes were intact with no evidence of rub and were black in coloration. There 
were no obvious rub marks on the respective stators and casing.
The examination revealed no evidence of pre impact mechanical malfunction or failure that 
would have precluded normal operation.
1.6.3 Fuel Control Unit
The FCU was removed, and the input shaft appeared to be intact. The shaft could be rotated by 
hand and there was no binding. The condition lever and power lever on the FCU were bent and 
their positions at the time of impact could not be determined. The power linkage position of 
the beta and reverse thrust slide indicated that the throttle was about 1/3 forward into the 
power position, which according to a Lancair expert, would be about 15 degrees on the FCU 
indicator and around 70 percent N1. A complete teardown inspection of the FCU was 
conducted and the complete examination report is contained in the public docket for this 
accident. 
The cap to the governor cavity was removed, and the spring and flapper valve were noted to be 
a red/brown coloration, indicative of corrosion. The speeder spring was removed, and the fly 
weights appeared to be closed inward, which is the position at rest and also consistent of an 
under-speed condition. The entire accessory gear box spline shaft was removed, revealing that 
the balls were corroded and frozen in place. Examination of the gear teeth and shaft revealed 
no evidence of wear or failure. The area between the flapper valve and the delta p diaphragm 
was clean; the rubber was pliable. The main metering valve was removed with no anomalies 
noted.
The accelerator cavity contained a liquid consistent in odor and appearance to that of jet fuel. 
The altitude compensation cavity contained trace amounts of red/brown coloration, consistent 
with corrosion. The fuel screen (last chance filter) from the overflow fuel valve to the altitude 
compensation cavity was clean and free of debris. The teeter valve located between the screen 
and the bellows was a red/brown coloration. The electro-hydro transducer was removed with 
no anomalies noted. 
The emergency throttle lever (engine shutoff) was removed, and the spline teeth were geared 
on the emergency throttle valve. The emergency metering valve pressure regulator was in the 
Page 21 of 28WPR12FA089
closed position and took force to remove (normally a loose fit). There was a hard black 
substance on the piston that was located near the center. The emergency solenoid was removed 
and found in the non-activated position (which is the at rest position when no electricity is 
applied to the circuit). 
The FCU had red/brown coloration in numerous areas, consistent with numerous areas being 
corroded. A fuel sample from the main metering valve orifice was tested, in an effort to detect if 
any water was present in the sample; no water was present, which is consistent with exposure 
to fire retardant following the initial impact.
The main metering valve had areas of corrosion that aligned with it being in the closed 
position, which correlated with ground idle. The emergency control lever and corresponding 
valve were in the open position (over the 40-degree detent). The lack of corrosion in the 
acceleration cavity was consistent with no increase in power (or necessity for the acceleration 
circuit when the FCU was functioning). The areas with the most pervasive areas of corrosion 
were the governor and the main metering valve cavity, which were interconnected via a large 
orifice and the corrosion signatures were consistent with fire suppression fluid entering the 
FCU after impact. 
Numerous parts could not be examined due to the condition of the unit (corroded) precluding 
their removal. The examination revealed no evidence of pre impact mechanical malfunction or 
failure that would have precluded normal operation.
1.7 ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
1.7.0 Lancair
Lancair International, Inc. is based in Redmond, Oregon and founded in 1984. The Lancair 
fleet includes a wide range of aircraft from early 235, 320 and 360 two-seat models to the two-
seat Lancair Legacy, fixed-gear Lancair ES, the IV, the pressurized IV-P, the turbine IV-TP, and 
the latest model, the Evolution. Over 2,000 Lancair kits have been sold in more than 34 
countries.
The Lancair IV was a progression from the Lancair 235 and the 320. The kit manufacturer 
wanted to build a four-place retractable landing-gear airplane that had competitive 
performance to that of certified aircraft. According to Lancair, the IV is essentially a scaled-up 
version of the 320 with a 30-ft. wingspan and a turbo-charged 350-hp reciprocating engine 
equipped with a three-blade constant-speed propeller. Since its introduction in 1990, the 
Lancair IV has broken numerous speed and altitude records for its class type and at altitude 
has reached sustained speeds in excess of 340 mph (with no tailwind). The entire airframe is 
constructed of vacuum-formed, oven-cured, prepreg carbon fiber. The company estimates a 
build time of approximately 2,500 hours. 
The former Lancair engineer stated that he worked for the company from March 2002 to April 
2009 as a General and Engineering manager, with his last project consisting of helping in the 
design of the Evolution. He stated that the Lancair IV was originally designed for a 
reciprocating Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) engine (a turbocharged and non-turbo 
charged model) with a gross weight of about 3,200 pounds (with an empty weight of 1,800-
1,900 pounds). Thereafter, with the desire to increase performance, Lancair designed the 
airplane to be fitted with a TCM turbocharged and modified and pressurized the airframe, 
resulting in the Lancair IV-P. The addition of the structural enhancements to the wing 
increased the gross weight to about 3,550 lbs.
Page 22 of 28WPR12FA089
In 2001, Lancair selected the Walter/General Electric 601E as the test trial turboprop engine to 
design/retrofit the airframe for higher performance. As part of this design modification, the 
airframe structure underwent several significant changes including: the nose became about 13 
inches longer (more with the inclusion of the propeller and spinner), and the fuel tank located 
in the belly increased from 9.5 gals to 35 gals. With the heavier airframe structure and 
engine/equipment, the gross weight increased.
The engineer further stated that other aerodynamic changes occurred during this modification. 
Specifically, with the increase of nose length, the airplane's pitch and yaw axes were 
destabilized, and with the larger diameter propeller (that had greater inertia), the three axes 
were destabilized further. In effect, these changes resulted in the nose section becoming a 
destabilizing "flying nose," that, in response to an increase in pitch, would produce lift, 
generating an additional nose-up pitching moment. With the airplane's increased empty 
weight, the wing loading increased dramatically, which he estimated at upward of 40-45 
pounds per square foot. With the laminar flow wing design of the airplane and the already-
existing aggressive stall characteristics, the stall characteristics were aggravated further which 
makes the Lancair IV-TP a challenging airplane to fly, which without adequate training, makes 
it a dangerous airplane because it was not designed for such a high horsepower engine. 
1.7.1 Lancair Fleet and Accident Rate
The following breakdown was provided by the Lancair Owners and Builders Organization 
(LOBO) and gives the best estimate of the accident rate for the Lancair fleet (see figure 03 in 
the public docket for the graph): 
Lancair Model : Flying, Accidents, %Accidents, Fatal, %Fatal Accidents
Lancair 200/235 103 32 31% 16 50%
Lancair 320/360 301 76 25% 28 37%
Lancair ES 96 4 4% 3 75%
Lancair IV/IV-P 240 51 21% 27 53%
Lancair IV-TP 57 15 26% 11 73%
Legacy 121 27 22% 14 52%
Lancair Evolution 50 2 1% 0 0 
Totals 922 207 22% 99 9%
The figure shows that at the time of this report, of the 57 Lancair IV-TPs that were registered 
(and presumably flying), there is an accident rate of 26-percent and a fatal accident rate of 19-
percent. 
1.7.2 FAA and Lancair
The FAA convened two safety groups specifically to address the Lancair's "unusually high 
accident and fatality rate compared to other amateur-built aircraft." The purpose of each group 
was to "bring the issue to attention of the FAA so appropriate action may be taken." These 
internal FAA groups were initiated by the Office of Accident Investigation and Prevention 
(AVP)-100 and were conducted over the course of a six-month period in both 2008 and 2012-
Page 23 of 28WPR12FA089
2013. The end conclusion of the studies determined that the FAA has the ability and, given the 
safety findings that surfaced over the studies, "the responsibility to expose its findings and take 
the appropriate safety enhancement actions it believes would reduce the likelihood of certain 
Lancair accidents."
According to copies of the notes from the studies, there were internal FAA concerns that any 
agency requirement imposed upon Lancair would be analogous to the FAA becoming involved 
in experimental aircraft design certification or in some way intruding in an area for which it 
had no authority. There was also concern that taking action on Lancair would create a 
precedent throughout the amateur-built aircraft industry and that the FAA would then be 
forced to take action on every safety issue affecting an amateur-built aircraft. There were 
limitations concerning the FAA's role which was centered on the general airworthiness 
inspection when the aircraft is submitted for airworthiness certification (unless there is specific 
safety data available). 
The FAA did note in response to these concerns that they indeed have the "statutory and 
regulatory responsibility to issue airworthiness certificates to amateur-built aircraft and the 
existing guidance [FAA Order 8130.2F, Section 153 (a)] on this process specifically permits the 
FAA to impose operating limitations deemed necessary in the interest of safety." As of this 
publishing of this report, the current guidance is FAA Order 8130.2G, Chapter 4, Section 9, 
Paragraph 4104 (a), since FAA Order 8130.2F was cancelled April 16, 2011. Further, the 
authority of the FAA is flexible and imposing limitations is authorized in 49 USC 4704 (d)(1), 
which provides that "the Administrator may include in an airworthiness certificate terms 
required in interest of safety."
In specific reference to the Lancair IV-TP, the FAA remarked that certified and experimental 
aircraft with similar high-performance characteristics require specific training. On numerous 
occasions (e.g., Viperjet, Robinson Helicopters, Mitsubishi MU-2), the FAA has made type-
specific safety determinations when finding that the safe operation of such aircraft requires 
specific training, proficiency and/or equipment. It was noted in both the studies that many of 
the Lancairs would be classified as Technically Advanced Aircraft (TAA), with an EFIS-
equipped cockpit. 
These conclusions were derived based on accident statistics of a sample between 2004 and 
2008 that disclosed amateur-built aircraft experienced a fatal accident rate of about 5-6 
accidents per 100,000 flight hours; the overall general aviation accident rate for that period 
was about 1-2 accidents per 100,000 hours. Lancairs' fatal accident rate in the same time 
period was about 7-8 accidents per 100,000 flight hours. Specifically, in 2008 Lancair 
comprised 3.2-percent of the amateur-built aircraft fleet and 19-percent of the fatal accidents 
that occurred that year, with 78.6-percent of Lancair accidents being fatal. 
The study noted that based on the statistics, Lancairs are involved in fatal accidents at "a rate 
that is disproportionate to their fleet size."
The study found that with extensive use of laminar flow airfoils, low thickness, low surface 
velocities, gradual velocity changes and low skin friction, Lancairs' stall characteristics are 
critical (abrupt, unusual) when compared with more traditional certified aircraft. In character, 
"the stall occurs abruptly, even during a slow deceleration just above 70 kts with a 20-degree 
pitch break and a wing drop as much as 50 degrees."
As part of its 2008 safety review, the FAA remarked that there were "strong indications" that 
Page 24 of 28WPR12FA089
Lancair would be receptive to FAA directives that would result in incorporation of type-specific 
training and stall warning devices as part of its kit sales. 
As a result of the Lancair Task Force, recommendations were made to FAA management in 
November 2008. The recommendations included: publishing an article in FAA Aviation News, 
issuing a SAIB with regards to flight training and equipment recommendations on applicable 
models, drafting an InFO based on the SAIB, revising the language for the passenger warning 
placard applicable to amateur-built aircraft, initiating informal resolution in coordination with 
industry, and tracking accident data regularly in order to identify any changes in the Lancair 
accident trends.
The FAA issued InFO notice 09015 on September 25, 2009, with the subject of "Safety 
Concerns of Lancair Amateur-Built Experimental Airplanes." The notice indicated that while 
Lancairs represented a little over 3-perecnt of the amateur-built experimental aircraft fleet, 
they contributed to 16-percent of all amateur-built fatal aircraft accidents in the prior 11 
months, of which 65-percent of those were fatalities. In the four years prior, 53-percent of 
Lancair accidents were fatal, and a majority were a result of the pilot experiencing a loss of 
control of the airplane while in the traffic pattern. The notice further stated that pilots must 
take the following corrective actions for safe operation:
-review and thoroughly understand all information regarding stall characteristics and obtain 
specialized training regarding slow flight handling characteristics, stall recognition, and stall 
recovery techniques.
-install a high-quality angle of attack indicator to provide a warning of impending stall.
-have their airplane evaluated by an experienced Lancair mechanic to ensure proper rigging, 
wing alignment, and weight and balance.
The notice was recalled shortly after its release; this is the only InFO notice that has ever been 
recalled. Although the original InFO (InFO 09015) was supported by LOBO, Lancair contested 
that they were not the only manufacturer to have a high-performance amateur-built airplane. 
As a result, InFo 09015 was retracted and InFO 10001 was issued March 09, 2010, which 
expanded the InFO to include other aircraft with the same characteristics and covered 
"amateur-built experimental Lancair and other amateur built airplanes possessing high wing 
loading and stall speeds in excess of 61 knots."
1.7.3 Lancair Training
According to LOBO, experimental aircraft, almost by definition, are often equipped with novel 
systems and configurations that are not available in certified aircraft. Depending on the 
complexity of the systems installed, pilots likely will require orientation and specially-tailored 
training to operate them safely. With the Lancair, many of the airplanes are equipped with 
EFISs, autopilots, multiple radios and support systems that, although they can provide 
tremendous capabilities, significantly add to operational complexity. When transitioning into a 
Lancair, most pilots simultaneously have the task of learning new complex avionics and the 
handling characteristics of the high performance airplane, with operating manuals that vary 
widely in accuracy and completeness. 
There are three sources of Lancair training that most insurance companies accept as a 
prerequisite for coverage. The LOBO has a FAA Industry Training Standards (FITS)-accepted 
training syllabus and provides CFIs that have completed qualification training in specific 
Page 25 of 28WPR12FA089
models of Lancair aircraft and that are located throughout the US. High Performance Aircraft 
Training (HPAT) provides training in customer-owned aircraft at designated US locations on 
an annual schedule. Elite Pilot Services additionally provides training specializing in the 
Evolution. 
The training both sources offer emphasize demonstrations of the feelings and visual 
observations associated with the airplane's unique handling characteristics. This includes the 
difference in the glide ratio with coarse and fine pitch propeller settings, the nuances of 
entering the traffic pattern and maneuvering at a higher altitude (1,500 ft agl vs the normal 
1,000 ft agl) to allow ample time to make a stabilized approach, the lag in engine response 
when adding full power, how to perform a power-off landing, and execution of a go-around 
(not using full power).
1.7.4 Experimental "Second Owners"
A "second owner" is a purchaser of an experimental aircraft that was not involved in its 
construction/build and registration/certification process. There is an inherent difficulty in 
reaching and influencing second owners before they start flying their newly purchased aircraft 
due to a delay in the title transfer being published (the only way for the public to be made 
aware of a new owner). First owners normally have years learning about their aircraft during 
the building process, including critical subjects such as any unique handling or operating 
characteristics of the aircraft they are building. More importantly, the experience/knowledge 
required to complete such a project makes it much more likely the original builder has sought 
the following: information about FAA and industry standards, the assistance of the kit 
manufacturer, and interaction with aircraft type/model clubs. In contrast, second owners have 
access to a fully functional aircraft almost immediately after making their purchase. 
1.7.5 Lancair Community
The LOBO conducted a survey of its members concerning mandatory Lancair training during 
February 2012. A total of 126 complete surveys were returned for analysis. Of the 126 
respondents, 97 percent were Lancair aircraft owners and 69 percent were the builder of record 
for their aircraft. The results showed a majority supported mandatory training in regards to the 
potential for lower accident rates and lower insurance premiums. Eighty-one percent agreed or 
strongly agreed in supporting mandatory training that could lower the accident rate, while 
seventy-seven percent agreed or strongly agreed in supporting mandatory training if it could 
lower insurance premiums.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Page 26 of 28WPR12FA089
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
51
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine 
Sea; Single-engine Land; Single-
engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/01/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3600 hours (Total, all aircraft), 13 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
GARZA
Registration:
N321LC
Model/Series:
LANCAIR IV-TP 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
003
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/11/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
48 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
339 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Diemech Turbine
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
M601D
Registered Owner:
Steven Appleton
Rated Power:
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 27 of 28WPR12FA089
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BOI, 2871 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0853 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-2°C / -7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Boise, ID (BOI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Boise, ID (BOI)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0855 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Gowen Field (BOI)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2871 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
10R
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
9763 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Traffic 
Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
43.564167, -116.222778 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Zoe Keliher
Adopted Date:
09/08/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Christine Soucy; Federal Aviation Administration; Washington D.C, DC
Tom Bowen; Lancair International Inc.; Redmond, OR
Publish Date:
09/08/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82809
Page 28 of 28WPR12FA089
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
