After engine start, the pilot heard "an abnormal engine mechanical noise."  He shut down the 
engine and requested a mechanic.  During a subsequent engine start, the mechanic confirmed 
the mechanical engine noise, and the engine was again shut down.  Hand propping revealed 
that the engine would sometimes "mechanically jam," and further examination revealed the 
fracture of two crankshaft gear teeth.  Both gear teeth exhibited signatures consistent with 
overload.  Corresponding starter adapter gear teeth, that would have meshed with the 
crankshaft gear teeth during the startup, were cracked on the loaded side.  All evaluated 
metallurgical requirements were met, including core hardness, surface hardness and case 
depth.  Although a single "kick back" while cranking could cause the failure of components of 
the cranking system, there was no evidence as to why a kick back may have occurred.
An engine kick back of undetermined origin during engine start.
On September 1, 2006, about 1230 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 206F, N8411Q, operated by 
Waters Aero Marine, incurred minor damage during an engine start at Matinicus Island 
Airport (35ME), Matinicus Island, Maine.  The certificated airline transport pilot and the two 
passengers were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The on-demand air 
taxi flight was operating on a company visual flight rules flight plan to Knox County Airport 
(RKD), Owls Head, Maine, under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.
According to the pilot, as soon as the engine began idling after start, he heard "an abnormal 
engine mechanical noise."  He then shut down the engine and requested a mechanic.
During a subsequent engine start, the mechanic confirmed the mechanical engine noise, and 
the engine was again shut down.  Hand propping revealed that the engine would sometimes 
"mechanically jam," and that the alternator drive pulley would turn freely at various points 
during engine rotation.  Further examination revealed a damaged crankshaft gear with two 
teeth missing, and an "abnormal wear groove on an adjoining third tooth."
The Teledyne Continental IO-520-series engine was forwarded to the manufacturer for a 
teardown examination under National Transportation Safety Board oversight.  Aside from the 
missing crankshaft gear teeth, no other gear damage was noted.  The oil sump was removed 
and the two crankshaft gear teeth were recovered.  The oil sump did not contain any additional 
debris or foreign material.
Magneto timing was found to be 25 degrees before top dead center on the left and 23 degrees 
before top dead center on the right.  Both magnetos exhibited normal impulse coupling 
engagement when rotated in the normal direction of rotation.  Installation of the magnetos on 
a test bench revealed that the left magneto impulse coupling would disengage at 350 rpm and 
the right magneto impulse coupling would disengage at 360 rpm.
A metallurgical examination of the crankshaft gear, the starter adapter gear, and the two 
fractured crankshaft gear teeth was performed by the engine manufacturer.  According to the 
manufacturer's report, all evaluated metallurgical requirements were met, including core 
hardness, surface hardness, and case depth.  Both crankshaft gear teeth exhibited signatures 
consistent with overload.  Corresponding starter adapter gear teeth, that would have meshed 
with the crankshaft gear teeth during startup, exhibited "fine" cracking on the loaded side.
Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) Mandatory Service Bulletin MSB94-8C required that 
magneto timing be performed in accordance with manufacturer instructions every 100 hours.  
It also noted: "CAUTION: A single 'kick back' while cranking can cause failure of components 
of the cranking system.  Kick back can be caused by intermittent operation of the impulse 
couplings."  The Bulletin also noted that for the IO-520-series engine, both magnetos should be 
set at 22 degrees before top dead center.  
The engine had 167 hours since rebuild by TCM, and 10 hours since the annual/100 hour 
inspection.
No additional information was available to determine if any maintenance or pilot actions might 
have resulted in a kick back.
