The non-instrument rated private pilot was attempting a cross-country flight, when the 
airplane impacted mountainous terrain.  A witness reported that he heard the airplane circling, 
but could not see it due to fog.  The witness heard the engine continually running, and then 
heard the sound of impact.  Examination of the wreckage did not reveal any preimpact 
mechanical malfunctions.  The reported weather near the accident site, about the time of the 
accident, included an overcast ceiling at 600 feet.  There was no record of the pilot receiving a 
weather briefing from Flight Service.  The pilot's most recent FAA medical certificate was 
issued more than 15 years prior to the accident, and he did not report any medications or 
abnormal medical history on his application.  Toxicological testing indicated the pilot had 
taken pain medication, and his autopsy report noted evidence of previous coronary artery 
bypass; however, the report did not support or refute any possible impairment or 
incapacitation.
The pilot's improper decision to attempt a visual flight rules flight in instrument 
meteorological conditions, which resulted in an impact with mountainous terrain.  A factor was 
the low ceiling.
On September 2, 2006, about 1015 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 150K, N6401G, was 
destroyed during a collision with mountainous terrain and subsequent postcrash fire, while 
maneuvering near Shelby Gap, Kentucky.  The certificated, non-instrument rated, private pilot 
was fatally injured.  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that departed 
a private airstrip in Brasstown, North Carolina; destined for Big Sandy Regional Airport (K22), 
Prestonsburg, Kentucky.  No flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 
CFR Part 91.
A witness was hunting near the accident site, and heard a small airplane overhead.  The 
witness stated that he could not see the airplane due to fog, but heard the airplane circle back.  
He then heard the sound of trees breaking, followed by the sound of impact.  The witness 
further stated that he heard the engine running until the sound of impact. 
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector did not 
reveal any preimpact mechanical malfunctions.  The FAA inspector stated that the aircraft and 
pilot logbooks were not recovered.  There was also no record of the pilot receiving a weather 
briefing from Flight Service.
An autopsy was performed by the Pike County Coroner's Office, Pikeville, Kentucky.  
Toxicological testing was conducted on the pilot at the FAA Toxicology Accident Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  Review of the toxicology report revealed:
"...1.012 (ug/ml, ug/g) PROPOXYPHENE detected in Liver 
1.782 (ug/ml, ug/g) PROPOXYPHENE detected in Lung
0.739 (ug/mL, ug/g) NORPROPOXYPHENE detected in Liver
14.032 (ug/mL, ug/g) NORPROPOXYPHENE detected in Lung..."
The pilot's wife reported that he had been taking pain medication due to pain associated with a 
previous heart surgery and stent.  Evidence of previous coronary artery bypass surgery was 
noted in the autopsy report.  The pilot's wife added that he also experienced pain from both 
arms due to a car accident, and knees due to construction work.
Review of FAA medical records revealed that the pilot's most recent third class medical 
certificate was issued on August 27, 1991.  On the application for that medical certificate, he 
reported "No" for use of any medication and all medical history items.  He also reported 1,200 
hours of total flight experience.
The reported weather at an airport approximately 16 miles south of the accident site, at 1019, 
was:  wind calm; visibility 10 miles; overcast ceiling at 600 feet; temperature 63 degrees F; dew 
point 57 degrees F; altimeter 30.06 inches Hg.
