Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Somerset, KY
Accident Number:
ERA10LA103
Date & Time:
01/02/2010, 1521 EST 
Registration:
N227ML
Aircraft:
FAIRCHILD SA227
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control on ground
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
According to witness statements and tire marks on the runway, the airplane touched down 
more than halfway down the runway while landing with a slight quartering tailwind. As the 
nosewheel contacted the runway, the airplane veered to the right. The pilot applied full left 
rudder and full reverse on the left power lever, but was unsuccessful in correcting the 
alignment of the airplane. He then engaged the nosewheel steering button on the left power 
lever, and the airplane began a more aggressive turn to the right. It departed the runway, 
traveled down an embankment, and came to rest against the airport boundary fence. 
Postaccident examination of the airplane, engines, brakes, and nose landing gear steering 
actuator revealed no obvious mechanical anomalies. After the airplane was repaired and 
returned to service it again experienced an intermittent loss of steering. As a result, a series of 
troubleshooting taxi tests were performed. The airplane veered off the runway as it reached an 
airspeed of 50 knots and the brakes were applied. Further examination of the airplane revealed 
damaged wires in the nosewheel steering harness, which would have caused an intermittent 
loss of steering. Although an electrical anomaly contributed to the loss of control, the fact that 
the pilots landed long, and potentially with excess speed, resulted in less runway and time 
available to recover from the anomaly.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Damaged wiring in the nosewheel steering harness, which resulted in a loss of control during 
landing. Contributing to the accident was the pilots' improper touchdown point.
Page 2 of 9ERA10LA103
Findings
Aircraft
Land gear sys wiring - Damaged/degraded (Cause)
Directional control - Attain/maintain not possible (Cause)
Descent/approach/glide path - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Flight crew (Factor)
Page 3 of 9ERA10LA103
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 2010, about 1521 eastern standard time, a Fairchild SA227 Metro III, N227ML, 
registered to 472 LLC, ran off the side of runway 23 during landing roll at the Lake 
Cumberland Regional Airport (SME), Somerset, Kentucky. The pilot, co-pilot and passenger 
were not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight was operated by 
Locair, Inc., as flight 151, an on-demand air taxi flight, conducted under the provisions of Title 
14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135, with an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan 
filed. Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time of the accident. The flight 
originated from Baltimore/Washington International Thurgood Marshall Airport (BWI), 
Baltimore, Maryland, at 1320 the same day.
According to the pilot-in-command (pilot flying), the airplane was on a stabilized approach to 
runway 23. It touched down normally with the main landing gear contacting first, and then the 
nose landing gear. As the nose wheel contacted the runway, the airplane veered to the right. 
The pilot applied full left rudder and full reverse on the left power lever; but was unsuccessful 
in correcting the alignment of the airplane. He then engaged the nose wheel steering button on 
the left power lever, and the airplane began a more aggressive turn to the right. It departed the 
runway, traveled down an embankment and came to rest against the airport boundary fence.
The co-pilot (non-flying pilot) stated that after the airplane touched down, the pilot-in-
command brought the power levers to reverse. At that time, the airplane suddenly turned to 
the right and exited the runway. Despite the pilot-in-commands' constant efforts to correct the 
airplane's path, including full reverse on the left engine, the airplane continued to veer to the 
right. It came to a rest after sliding down the embankment and impacting the airport fence. 
A Locair customer service representative observed the airplane's approach, as she was outside 
on the tarmac waiting for it to land. She stated that the airplane touched down normally on the 
runway and began to taxi. At the point where it needed to make a turn toward the terminal, it 
began to "fishtail." It continued this movement for "a little bit," then straightened out and went 
off the runway. 
Another witness observed the airplane touchdown beyond the 3,000 feet distance remaining 
marker for runway 23. He also noted that the winds were reported on the AWOS from 330 
degrees.
 PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot flying, age 41, held an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating for airplane 
multiengine land. He also held a flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane single and 
multiengine land, and instrument airplane. His most recent first-class medical certificate was 
issued on December 6, 2009. At that time, he reported 5,350 hours of total flight experience. 
The pilot monitoring, age 33, held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single 
and multiengine land, and instrument airplane. His most recent first-class medical certificate 
was issued on August 8, 2008. At that time, he reported 350 hours of total flight experience.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was manufactured in 1982, and equipped with two Airesearch TPE331-11U 
Page 4 of 9ERA10LA103
turboprop engines. The airplane was maintained on a continuous airworthiness inspection 
program, and the most recent inspection was completed on December 3, 2009 at 25,945 total 
aircraft hours. At the time of the accident, the airplane had accumulated 25,998 hours. 
According to the Metro III Landing Distance Chart in the Airplane Flight Manual, an airplane 
with a landing weight of 11,000 pounds required approximately 2,600 feet of landing distance, 
with the wind, temperature, and elevation conditions present for the accident airplane. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather recorded at SME, at 1515, included wind from 310 degrees at 5 knots, 10 miles 
visibility with light snow, overcast clouds at 2,500 feet, temperature -7 degrees C, dew point -11 
degrees C, and altimeter setting of 30.34 inches mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Lake Cumberland Regional Airport was comprised of a single runway, oriented in a 5/23 
configuration. 
Runway 5/23 was 5,800 feet long and 100 feet wide, made of asphalt. 
After the accident, a visual inspection of the runway by the airport manager revealed no water, 
ice or snow. A friction test was also performed by airport personnel, which yielded the 
following results:
First 1/3 of the runway: 71% friction
Second 1/3 of the runway: 64 % friction
Third 1/3 of the runway: 51% friction
Overall average:62% friction
FLIGHT RECORDERS     
The airplane was equipped with a Fairchild model A-100A cockpit voice recorder (CVR). The 
CVR was retained and forwarded to the NTSB Vehicle Recorders Laboratory, Washington, 
D.C., for data download. According to the Specialist's Factual Report, none of the audio was 
pertinent to the accident investigation. The audio was consistent with a CVR which had 
malfunctioned and stopped recording some time prior to the accident. There are also 
indications that an attempt had been made to erase the tape while still installed in the CVR 
unit, but after the tape mechanism had stopped running. [Additional information regarding the 
CVR content can be found in the Vehicle Recorder Specialist's Report located in the public 
docket.]
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
Examination of the runway by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, revealed tire 
marks from all three landing gear, in the center of runway 23, beginning just past the 2,000 
feet remaining sign. The markings appeared to track straight, without skidding, for 120 feet, 
before beginning a slow curve to the right. They continued to travel in a curve an additional 
285 feet before exiting the runway onto the grass parallel to the runway. The markings 
continued through the grass, until the left propeller struck the Taxiway D intersection sign. The 
tire marks continued across Taxiway D, into the grass again, and across Taxiway A. After 
crossing Taxiway A, the markings continued down the embankment, terminating where the 
Page 5 of 9ERA10LA103
airplane struck the fence (1,131 feet from the initial observed transfer markings). 
All runway markings appeared to be "friction" transfer and not skid marks. The markings were 
indicative to rolling tires only, and there was no indication of locking of the brake assemblies.  
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed the 
right wing was substantially damaged, outboard of the landing light assembly. The wing 
section displayed impact and accordion crushing damage. Additionally, the left propeller 
displayed damage to 2 of the 4 blades, indicative of contact with the airport taxiway sign. All 
four blades were curled at their tips, indicative of striking rocks at the base of the embankment. 
The two damaged blades were locked in the low pitch setting and the other two were free 
moving in the propeller hub. The right engine propeller was observed to be in the feathered 
position with damage to all four blades.
The nose section of the airplane sustained scratching from contact with the fence, but was not 
compromised. The flaps were observed to be partially extended.
The cockpit examination revealed the nose wheel steering switch was in the "ARMED" 
position, and the engine power levers were between the ground idle and reverse positions. The 
right power lever was more difficult to move than the left lever. The flap control was between 
the ¼ and ½ positions. 
The airplane was subsequently recovered for further examination. 
Visual examination of the landing gear assemblies appeared undamaged, and the tire 
assemblies did not indicate any damage and/or scuffing. All tires were inflated and wheel 
assemblies appeared undamaged. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Engine Examination 
Examination of the engine revealed the right power lever was stiff and difficult to operate, even 
with the friction locks at a minimum. The left power lever operated smoothly and unrestricted. 
A check of the engine rigging parameters revealed the right engine led the left engine by 8-10 
degrees. One possibility for this discrepancy was that the right engine entered into reverse 
before the left engine. 
Brake Examination
The left landing gear brake was submitted for an operational bench test and teardown 
examination. No defects or discrepancies were noted during the testing or examination. 
Nose Landing Gear (NLG) Steering Actuator Examination
The NLG actuator was also submitted for an operational bench test and visual inspection. The 
results of the testing revealed the reported failure could not be duplicated. Examination of the 
hydraulic fluid retrieved from inside the unit revealed the fluid was in "like new" condition and 
contained no contamination. 
Taxi testing
After the accident, Locair maintenance advised a ﬁconnection™ had been repaired and the nose 
wheel steering appeared to operate normally. The National Transportation Safety Board 
(NTSB) Investigator-In-Charge (IIC) was notified and a request was made for the FAA to ride 
Page 6 of 9ERA10LA103
on board the aircraft for taxi testing to confirm the issue was resolved.
At the initiation of the test, the AMT taxied slowly across the ramp and onto a taxiway. The 
brakes were applied and the nose wheel steering (NWS) responded appropriately. This test was 
conducted 5 more times, with no anomalies. The AMT then proceeded to runway 23 for an 
additional taxi test. He aligned the airplane left of centerline and slowly applied power. As the 
airspeed reached 20 knots, the AMT applied both brakes, and the airplane gradually veered to 
the right. The AMT engaged the NWS, which appeared to function normally, and the airplane 
returned to center. The same test was repeated a second time, and when the airplane reached 
35 knots, the AMT engaged the NWS and the airplane returned to center. 
A third, and final, test was performed. As the airplane reached 50 knots, the AMT applied both 
brakes and the airplane veered sharply to the right. The AMT continued to apply left brake and 
engaged the NWS; however, the airplane continued to the right and exited the runway. The 
AMT continued to apply "hard left brake" and stated, "It's not responding–it's not turning–I 
can't steer it!"
The airplane continued to travel down the embankment and came to rest in the grass. 
After the second runway excursion, further examination of the nose wheel steering assembly 
was conducted. The results of the examination revealed damaged wires in the nose wheel 
steering harness. The harness was rewired, re-installed on the airplane and operationally 
tested. No further anomalies were experienced with the nose wheel steering.
History of Flight
Landing-landing roll
Loss of control on ground (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
41, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/16/2009
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/31/2009
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 5398 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model), 5220 
hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 150 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 49 hours (Last 30 
days, all aircraft)
Page 7 of 9ERA10LA103
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/08/2008
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/29/2009
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 625 hours (Total, all aircraft), 277 hours (Total, this make and model), 202 hours 
(Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 170 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 64 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
FAIRCHILD
Registration:
N227ML
Model/Series:
SA227 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
AC472
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
9
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/03/2009, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
14500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
25945 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Airesearch
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TPE331-11U
Registered Owner:
472 LLC
Rated Power:
1000 hp
Operator:
Locair, Inc
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
YLXA
Page 8 of 9ERA10LA103
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SME, 927 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1515 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
310°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.34 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-7°C / -11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Baltimore/Washi, MD (BWI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Somerset, KY (SME)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1320 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Lake Cumberland Regional (SME)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
927 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
23
IFR Approach:
Visual; VOR
Runway Length/Width:
5800 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.053611, -84.615556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Ralph L Wilson
Adopted Date:
01/15/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
John Heinlein; FAA FSDO; Louisville, KY
John W Cox; FAA FSDO; Louisville, KY
Publish Date:
01/15/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75216
Page 9 of 9ERA10LA103
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
