The airplane was performing touch-and-go landings and had just lifted off to climb on the 
runway heading when the engine abruptly lost power at 150 feet above ground level. The pilot 
attempted to execute a turn and lower the nose to maintain airspeed.  The engine was faltering 
and producing partial power, then cycling and producing no power.  The pilot did not have 
sufficient altitude to make the runway and the airplane nosed over and came to rest in a marsh 
located near the runway.  Examination of the engine found that the right magneto to engine 
timing was 17 degrees before top dead center of cylinder number one.  The Lycoming engine 
data plate specifies that the engine to magneto timing be set at 25 degrees.  The left magneto 
was inoperative and further investigation found that the primary coil circuit was internally 
shorted.  Review of the maintenance records disclosed that the last annual inspection was 
accomplished on May 5, 1998, about 40 hours prior to the accident.  No entries were found 
detailing maintenance on the magnetos after the annual. 
A loss of engine power due to an internal left magneto coil primary circuit short.  Factors were 
insufficient altitude and inadequate terrain to make an emergency landing. 
 On January 3, 1999, at 1627 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna 140, N3585V, nosed over 
and came to rest inverted in a marsh following a touch-and-go landing attempt at the Santa 
Barbara, California, airport.  The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the commercial 
pilot/owner and his passenger received minor injuries.  The flight was being flown under CFR 
Part 91 when the accident occurred.  The personal flight originated in Santa Paula, California, 
at 1550, and a flight plan was not filed for the flight.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that he was cleared for touch-and-go's on runway 15L.  He stated he had just 
lifted off and was proceeding to climb on the runway heading when the engine power "abruptly 
reduced to no power" at 150 feet agl.  He said he executed a gradual turn to the right, and 
lowered the nose to maintain forward airspeed.  He said that the engine was faltering and 
producing partial power, and then no power.  He said the airplane struck the ground with a 
slight nose low attitude.
The airplane was removed from the site and relocated to a nearby aircraft wreckage yard.  At 
the request of the Safety Board, the wreckage was examined under the supervision of a Van 
Nuys, California Flight Standards District Office aviation inspector and a Textron Lycoming 
engine representative.  According to the Textron Lycoming engine representative, the engine 
did not display any evidence of premishap catastrophic mechanical malfunction or fire.
The bottom spark plugs were removed and examined by the engine representative.  He noted 
that the spark plug electrodes were undamaged from any foreign object ingestion.  The 
crankshaft was rotated by hand utilizing the propeller, and was free and easy to rotate in both 
directions.  Thumb compression was observed in proper order on all four cylinders.  
The right magneto was found securely clamped.  The magneto to engine timing was observed at 
17 degrees before top dead center (BTDC) of cylinder number one.  The Lycoming engine data 
plate specifies the engine to magneto timing be at 25 degrees BTDC.
The left magneto, S4LN-21, 10-51360-37, s/n 0010469 was found securely clamped.  The 
impulse coupling was heard clicking during rotation of the crankshaft.  During the magneto to 
engine timing check, the timing light would not illuminate on the syncrophaser during rotation 
of the crankshaft.  The magneto to engine timing could not be ascertained.  The magneto was 
removed for further examination.  The drive was observed to be intact and properly saftied.  
The contact assembly (points) was undamaged and was observed to operate normally during 
hand rotation of the drive.  Further examination of the magneto coil revealed that the primary 
circuit was internally shorted.  A complete copy of the Textron Lycoming report is appended to 
this report.
Review of the maintenance records disclosed that the last annual inspection was accomplished 
on May 5, 1998, about 40 hours prior to the accident.  No entries were found detailing 
maintenance on the magnetos after the annual.
The wreckage was released to the registered owner at the conclusion of the engine examination 
on March 1, 1999.
