About 30 miles from the destination airport, approach control informed the pilot of lowered 
cloud ceilings and thunderstorm activity over the airport. At approximately the same time the 
pilot reported a low fuel condition and was vectored towards a second airport. A missed 
approach was performed at the second airport, and the pilot was given vectors towards a third 
airport. While descending for the third airport, the pilot reported that 'the left engine ran out of 
fuel' and the engine had quit. The pilot attempted an emergency landing on a power line right-
of-way. According to the Piper Aircraft PA-34 Information Manual, N5016T has a usable fuel 
capacity of 93 U.S. gallons and seven gallons unusable. The pilot reported that he departed 
with 100 gallons of fuel on board. While operating the airplane at a gross weight of 4000 
pounds and 65% power, fuel consumption is 18.3 gallons per hour for both engines, and 
maximum flight duration of 5.08 hours. N5016T had flown 5.72 hours when the accident 
occurred. 
Fuel exhaustion due to inadequate planning and the pilot's failure to refuel the airplane. 
Factors were the weather conditions and hilly terrain. 
 On January 2, 1999, at 1618 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-34-200, N5016T, collided with 
the ground during an emergency landing near Hogansville, Georgia. The airplane was operated 
by the registered owner/pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and instrument 
flight rules (IFR). Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the accident site and an 
IFR flight plan was filed for the personal flight. The commercial pilot received minor injuries 
and the three passengers received no injuries. The airplane sustained substantial damage. The 
flight departed Manassas, Virginia, at 1035 the same day, destined for Columbus Metropolitan 
Airport, Columbus, Georgia.
According to the pilot, he received a full weather briefing from the Leesburg, Virginia, Flight 
Service Station at 0430 on the morning of the flight. Additional weather information was 
obtained enroute via weather broadcasts over navigational radios, and from automated surface 
observations. While approximately 30 miles from Columbus Metropolitan Airport (CSG), the 
pilot was informed of a lowered ceiling and thunderstorm over the destination airport. He 
immediately notified Air Traffic Control (ATC) of his low fuel condition and was vectored to 
LaGrange Airport (LGC). Once stabilized on the ILS approach for LGC, the pilot realized he 
was on the back course and a missed approach was executed. The pilot was then given vectors 
towards Newnan-Coweta County Airport (CCO) which was reported "in the clear". According to 
the pilot, an emergency was declared to Atlanta Approach Control several times but no 
response was received. After starting a descent, the pilot reported that "the left engine ran out 
of fuel", and quit. The pilot feathered the left propeller, and he increased power on the right 
engine. Visual contact with the ground was made about 400 feet AGL. During the emergency 
landing, the airplane collided with the top of a tall pine tree. The airplane landed with the gear 
and flaps retracted on a hilly power line right-of-way.
According to the Piper Aircraft PA-34 Information Manual, N5016T has a usable fuel capacity 
of 93 U.S. gallons and seven gallons unusable. The pilot reported that he departed with 100 
gallons of fuel on board. While operating the airplane at a gross weight of 4000 pounds and 
65% power, fuel consumption is 18.3 gallons per hour for both engines, or maximum flight 
duration of 5.08 hours. N5016T had flown 5.72 hours when the accident occurred. The pilot 
did not flight plan or make a refueling stop for this flight. No mechanical problems, with the 
airplane, were reported by the pilot.
