Routine air work was performed and then touch-and-go landing practice was planned.  The 
approach and landing on runway 34 was normal.  Trim was reset for takeoff, the checklist was 
completed, and power was added.  During the takeoff roll the pilot noticed that unusual stick 
forces were required to raise the tail wheel.  The trim setting was rechecked and confirmed.  
The pilot added some additional nose down trim, but no relief of stick pressure was noticed.  
He decided to abort the takeoff and applied forward stick to prevent the airplane from leaping 
off the runway in a stalled condition.  He was drifting to the right and approaching the 
intersection of runway 30 at this time.  He saw a row of sailplanes parked on runway 30 in his 
path and elected to turn off the runway into sagebrush and grass.  The right main landing gear 
fell into a ditch and collapsed, buckling and distorting the fuselage.  FAA inspectors examined 
the airplane and did not report finding any trim or control system irregularity; however, the 
fuselage distortion precluded a complete examination. 
The pilot's failure to maintain proper runway alignment during a rejected takeoff.  A factor in 
the accident was the undetermined pitch control/trim system problem, which led to the pilot's 
rejected takeoff decision and may have distracted him during attempts to maintain aircraft 
control. 
 On January 1, 1999, about 1500 hours Pacific standard time, an Avions Max Holste MH 1521 
Broussard, N4022, sustained substantial damage when it departed the runway during a touch-
and-go landing at the Douglas County Airport, Minden, Nevada.  The airplane departed Carson 
City, Nevada, about 1420 for local air work followed by touch-and-go landing practice at 
Minden.  The commercial pilot/owner was operating the personal flight under the provisions of 
14 CFR Part 91.  The pilot and one passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and a VFR flight plan was filed.
The pilot stated that the approach and landing on runway 34 at Minden was normal.  During 
the landing roll the trim was reset and the checklist was completed.  Takeoff power was added 
and the pilot noticed that unusual stick force was required to raise the tail wheel.  The trim 
setting was rechecked and confirmed.  The pilot stated he added additional nose down trim but 
got no relief from the unusual stick pressure.  He decided to abort the takeoff and maintained 
forward stick because he was concerned about leaping off the runway into stalled flight.  He 
noted that the airplane was drifting to the right toward sailplanes that were parked on runway 
30 near the intersection of runway 34.  He elected to exit the runway to avoid the sailplanes.  
After the airplane went through sagebrush and grass, the right main gear went into a ditch.  
This collapsed the gear to the rear and turned the airplane to the right.
Federal Aviation Administration inspectors from the Reno, Nevada, Flight Standards District 
Office examined the airplane.  The propeller was bent backwards and twisted.  The right main 
landing gear was crushed aft and in toward the fuselage.  The fuselage was buckled in the 
gearbox area on both sides; and the cabin floor was displaced upward by this buckling.  Both 
sections of the windscreen cracked.  The outer portion of the right wing and the right aileron 
were buckled.  The inspectors did not report finding any trim or control system irregularity; 
however, the distortion to the fuselage precluded a complete system examination.
