The student pilot was completing the last of his touch-and-go landings at a local airport.  
During the flare he said the airplane began to drift to the right and said he noticed the left wing 
getting ready to contact the ground, as if in a ground loop condition.  The pilot applied full 
throttle in an attempt to fly away.  He stated the airplane did not want to fly so he elected to 
close the throttle and attempted to straighten out the airplane for landing.  The aircraft 
contacted the ground and subsequently nosed over.  The gascolator was compromised during 
the crash, which allowed unregulated fuel to enter the engine cowling.  The postcrash fire 
ensued which destroyed the airplane.  The pilot reported that the weather conditions at the 
time of the crash as reported on ATIS were winds 070 at 4 knots. 
The pilot-in-command's failure to maintain directional control.  A factor in this accident was 
the inadvertent ground loop swerve. 
 On January 2, 1999, at 1118 hours Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-22-108, N4556Z, nosed 
over following a loss of control during the flare/touchdown at Hayward, California.  The 
aircraft was destroyed during the impact sequence and postcrash fire.  The student pilot was 
not injured.  The flight was being conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. 
In the pilot's written statement, he reported that he had stayed in the pattern at Hayward to 
practice touch-and-go landings and completed two with no problems noted.  He stated that 
this was to be his last landing for the day and noted that his approach speed over the fence was 
normal.  He said he was drifting to the right as he began his flare, and the next thing he 
remembered was the left wing getting ready to touch the ground, as in a left sliding skid or 
ground loop condition.  He applied full throttle to try and fly the airplane so that the wing 
would not hit the ground.  The pilot said the airplane "did not want to fly," so he elected to 
close the throttle and straighten the airplane out prior to landing.  The airplane nosed over 
upon landing, which resulted in a broken front landing gear.  The pilot said he shut off the fuel, 
mixture, magnetos, and master switch and exited the airplane.  The pilot reported that at the 
time of the accident, ATIS was reporting the winds to be from 070 degrees at 04 knots.
The Federal Aviation Administration Aviation (FAA) Safety Inspector told Safety Board 
investigators that the support structure of the nose gear contacted the output side of the 
gascolator, causing it to break off the fitting which resulted in unregulated fuel pouring into the 
engine cowling.  The aircraft fuel ignited and the fabric began to catch fire, thus eventually 
destroying the airplane.
An aviation inspector from the FAA interviewed the certified flight instructor (CFI), who had 
provided training to the student pilot.  The CFI stated that in his opinion, the student pilot 
"possessed excellent flying skills."  He further stated that the student pilot had approximately 
40 hours of flying time, including 3 to 4 hours of crosswind landings at Palo Alto Airport, an 
airport known for it's stiff crosswinds.  He also said that he felt that the student pilot was "a 
very cautious and attentive student."
The Safety Board did not take custody of the wreckage.
