After departure, on a right downwind leg, the passenger noticed that the engine 'began to stall.'  
The engine lost all power and the pilot was unable to restart it.  The pilot established a glide for 
Runway 32, but the aircraft impacted the ground in a cemetery, approximately 1,800 feet short 
of Runway 32.  According to the pilot's written statement, '[the] engine quit due to ice and 
water in [the] fuel.'  During the preflight, the passenger did not observe the pilot drain fuel 
from either of the fuel tanks or the main airplane sump drain.  A Federal Aviation 
Administration inspector found that the main fuel bowl of the fuel strainer was contaminated 
with water, dirt, rust, paint, and sand. 
The pilot's inadequate preflight examination of the airplane, which resulted in a power loss due 
to fuel contamination. 
 On January 2, 1999, about 0930 Eastern Standard Time, a Beech C24R, N1857G, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing in Farmingdale, New York.  The certificated 
private pilot and passenger sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight that originated from Republic Airport (FRG), Farmingdale, New York.  
No flight plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot's written statement, he had a complete memory loss of the entire day of 
the accident.  He wrote "[The] engine quit due to ice and water in [the] fuel."  
The passenger reported that he observed the pilot perform a preflight examination of the 
airplane, which included removing the fuel caps and looking into the tanks.  He did not observe 
the pilot drain fuel from either the fuel tanks or the main airplane sump drain.  After engine 
start, the pilot taxied to the run-up area, and reported that the engine was running rough.  He 
also reported that he was going to taxi back to the ramp and speak with the owner of the 
airplane about the engine condition.  Upon reaching the ramp, the pilot and passenger 
remained in the airplane with the engine running, while they visually scanned the area for the 
owner.  Unable to see the owner, the pilot stated the engine was running normal now, and 
initiated taxi to the run-up area again.  Upon completion of a successful run-up, the pilot 
radioed the tower and requested permission to takeoff.  The airplane departed on Runway 32.
After departure, on a right downwind, the passenger noticed that the engine, "began to stall." 
The passenger further reported that the engine lost all power, but the pilot was able to restart 
it. The pilot advised the tower of the power loss.  The engine lost power again, and the pilot was 
unable to restart the engine.  The pilot established a glide for Runway 32.  The aircraft 
impacted the ground in a cemetery, approximately 1,800 feet short of Runway 32.  The right 
aileron and nose gear were separated from the airplane.  Both wings were partially separated 
from the airplane.  
The pilot was interviewed by an inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).  
The Inspector reported that the pilot had struck his head during the forced landing and had no 
recollection of the flight.  The Inspector's examination of the airplane revealed the main fuel 
bowl of the fuel strainer was contaminated with water, dirt, rust, paint, and sand.  In addition, 
rust was found on the inlet screen to the fuel injection unit and on the fittings to the fuel 
injection manifold.  The Inspector stated that there were no reports of fuel contamination to 
the other airplanes based at Republic Airport.
