Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Fresno, CA
Accident Number:
WPR15LA175
Date & Time:
06/02/2015, 1955 PDT 
Registration:
N3567H
Aircraft:
MOONEY AIRCRAFT CORP. M20K
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot was conducting a personal cross-country flight. During cruise, the engine 
experienced a catastrophic failure and a total loss of power. The pilot performed a forced 
landing to an airport, landed long, and collided with an airport fence. Postaccident 
examination of the engine revealed internal damage consistent with the initial failure of the 
No. 1 piston and connecting rod assembly, most likely at the piston end, which caused a 
cascading failure of the adjacent piston and rod assemblies. Damage to the engine components 
precluded an accurate assessment of the specific initiating event, and evidence suggested that 
the engine contained oil at the time of the failure.
The engine had been involved in a propeller strike accident about 310 flight hours prior, which 
required an engine teardown, examination, and replacement of two connecting rods and one 
piston pin. Maintenance records did not disclose which rods were replaced. Following the 
repair, the engine went through a 10-year period of inactivity, during which time internal 
corrosion occurred. No precautionary steps were taken to monitor the effects of the corrosion, 
such as oil filter examination or oil analysis. The extent to which the corrosion contributed to 
the failure of the No. 1 piston and connecting rod assembly could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power during cruise flight due to a failure of the No. 1 piston and 
connecting rod assembly.
Page 2 of 7WPR15LA175
Findings
Aircraft
Recip eng cyl section - Failure (Cause)
Page 3 of 7WPR15LA175
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Landing area overshoot
On June 2, 2015, about 1955 Pacific daylight time, a Mooney M20K, N3567H, landed long 
following a total loss of engine power and subsequent forced landing at Fresno Chandler 
Executive Airport, Fresno, California. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The private pilot, who was the 
sole occupant, was not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings 
and the forward fuselage during the landing. The cross-country personal flight departed 
Shafter Airport-Minter Field, Shafter, California, about 1915, with a planned destination of Mc 
Clellan Airfield, Sacramento, California. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a 
visual flight rules flight plan had been filed.
The pilot reported that the preflight inspection did not reveal any anomalies, and he added one 
quart of oil to the engine. About 30 minutes after takeoff, while cruising at an altitude of 8,500 
ft mean sea level, he heard an explosion, and smoke and oil billowed from the cowl. The engine 
lost all power, and he initiated a descent into Fresno. He reached the airport environment with 
about 2,500 feet of altitude remaining, and attempted a landing on Runway 30R, which at that 
time was closed. The airplane landed on the overrun area and came to rest on a dirt verge after 
striking the perimeter fence.
Post accident examination revealed multiple perforations in the engine crankcase, with oil 
streaks along the underside of the airplane's fuselage.
Page 4 of 7WPR15LA175
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
68, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/29/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/13/2013
Flight Time:
1570 hours (Total, all aircraft), 313 hours (Total, this make and model), 1570 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 38 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MOONEY AIRCRAFT CORP.
Registration:
N3567H
Model/Series:
M20K 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1980
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
25-0423
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/01/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
47 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1340 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-360-GB1
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The airplane was manufactured in 1980, and equipped with its original Continental Motors, 
six-cylinder, turbocharged engine, model number TSIO-360-GB(1), serial number 309443.
At the time of the accident, the engine had accrued about 1,340 flight hours since new. The last 
oil change occurred 19.6 hours prior, on April 13, 2015, with the last inspection being an 
annual, which was completed on December 1, 2014, 46.6 hours prior to accident. Maintenance 
records indicated that the engine had been disassembled and inspected in 1991, about 310 
hours prior to the accident, after the airplane was involved in a ground collision while taxing 
Page 5 of 7WPR15LA175
(See NTSB Accident Report: LAX91LA063B). A series of engine components were replaced 
following the inspection, including two connecting rods, twelve lifters, and one piston pin. The 
records did not specify for which cylinders the connecting rods and piston pin were replaced.
The airplane appeared to have gone through a period of inactivity from 1998 through to 2008. 
The first entry following that period stated, "Borescoped cylinders and portions of the 
crankcase, found surface corrosion on portions of the cylinders and hardware." The 
maintenance records did not document any subsequent repair in response to the corrosion, nor 
was there any evidence to suggest the engine had ever undergone a subsequent oil analysis or 
oil filter examination.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KFAT, 279 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0153 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
60째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 6000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
13 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
310째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.87 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28째C / 8째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
SHAFTER, CA (MIT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
SACRAMENTO, CA (MCC)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
1915 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
FRESNO CHANDLER EXECUTIVE 
(FCH)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt; Gravel
Airport Elevation:
279 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
30R
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3627 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Straight-in
Page 6 of 7WPR15LA175
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
36.735556, -119.823611
Tests And Research
The engine was removed from the airframe and examined at the facilities of Continental 
Motors in Mobile, Alabama under the oversight of the FAA and NTSB.
Inspection revealed puncture holes in the crankcase above the number two, and below the 
number three cylinders. No measurable oil remained in the engine. All spark plugs appeared 
undamaged, with the exception of both plugs for cylinder number one, which sustained 
mechanical damage displacing their electrodes.
The engine was disassembled, and cylinder head assemblies one, four, five, and six were 
removed. Skirt damage prevented the removal of cylinders two and three. The most significant 
internal damage was to the number one piston, which had separated from the connecting rod, 
was loose within the cylinder, and appeared to have been pulverized and fragmented to about 
1/4 of its normal size. The connecting rod had fragmented into multiple pieces, and although 
the rod remained attached to the piston pin, it had been displaced to the pin's outer edge where 
it had seized. The piston-end of the rod had bent and separated at the beam, about 1 inch from 
the boss. All piston and rod assembly separation surfaces had been obliterated.
The connecting rods for cylinders two and three remained attached to their respective pistons, 
but their caps had both detached, resulting in separation from the crankshaft. The number four 
connecting rod was still attached to the crankshaft, but exhibited heat distress around the 
connecting rod cap. The remaining connecting rods for cylinder five and six appeared 
undamaged, with their caps intact at the crankshaft. The caps were removed, and the bearing 
and corresponding crankpin journal surfaces appeared undamaged and coated in oil.
The crankshaft number one, two, and four main journal's exhibited normal operating 
appearance; with the number three journal displaying rotational scores and bluing.
The oil sump contained remnants of connecting rod, bearing, rod bolt, and aluminum material. 
The oil pump was disassembled, and scoring was observed on its rotational surfaces and the 
impellor gear tips. The oil filter was opened, and contained a sludge/metal mixture inside the 
canister, with fine sand-sized metal debris in the filter's paper element.
Page 7 of 7WPR15LA175
Continental Critical Service Bulletin CSB916-13, provides connecting rod inspection and 
replacement instructions for IO-360 series engines, manufactured around the period of the 
accident engine. The service bulletin addressed replacement of connecting rods which were 
manufactured with a beam width of less than 0.625 inches. It required inspection and/or 
replacement of the affected rods at the next annual or 100-hour inspection, "Due to the 
potential for overstressed connecting rods associated with abnormal conditions or incidents". 
The engine did not fall within the serial number range applicable to the bulletin, and 
examination of the undamaged rods for cylinders four, five and six, revealed that all beam 
widths were 0.655, 0.658, and 0.657 inches respectively, and therefore greater than the 
minimum required. Furthermore, the maintenance records for the connecting rod replacement 
in 1991 indicated that the part numbers of the two replaced rods were of the correct type 
required by the service bulletin.
A complete engine report is contained within the public docket.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Eliott Simpson
Adopted Date:
03/06/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael Coberly; Federal Aviation Administration FSDO; Fresno, CA
Kurt Gibson; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Jack E Clark; Federal Aviation Administration FSDO; Vestavia Hills, AL
Publish Date:
03/06/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91298
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
