Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Dewey, AZ
Accident Number:
WPR15LA177
Date & Time:
06/01/2015, 1948 MST 
Registration:
N73AW
Aircraft:
BELL 206 L4
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
Analysis 
The commercial pilot was conducting a cross-country ferry flight. He reported that the engine 
chip detector caution light briefly illuminated while the helicopter was in cruise flight about 
750 ft above ground level. The pilot chose to make a precautionary landing and initiated a 
descent. During the descent, the detector light illuminated again, followed shortly thereafter by 
a "loud bang" and the engine losing power. The pilot initiated an autorotation emergency 
landing. During the landing sequence, the main rotor blades struck the tailboom.
Examination of the engine revealed that the No. 2 bearing separator had fractured through 
both rails at the forward and aft sides of the bearing. The ball bearings were retained in the 
separator; however, half of them exhibited damage consistent with smearing and material 
transfer between the raceway and balls, which resulted in the failure of the No. 2 bearing and 
the subsequent engine power loss.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power due to the failure of the No. 2 bearing, which resulted from a 
fractured separator.
Findings
Aircraft
Turbine section - Failure (Cause)
Page 2 of 6WPR15LA177
Factual Information
On June 1, 2015, about 1948 mountain standard time, a Bell 206 L-4, N73AW, sustained 
substantial damage during an emergency landing following a loss of engine power, near Dewey, 
Arizona. The commercial pilot, the sole occupant of the helicopter, was not injured. The 
helicopter was registered to Air Medical Services LLC and operated by Airwest Helicopters as a 
Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91 ferry flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and a company visual flight rules, company flight plan, was filed. The cross country 
flight, departed Valle Airport (40G), Grand Canyon, Arizona about 1905 with a planned 
destination of Glendale Municipal Airport (GEU), Glendale, Arizona.
The operator reported that several weeks prior to the accident, the helicopter's engine chip 
detector caution light momentary illuminated during a routine maintenance engine run. The 
engine was shut down and the magnetic chip detectors (MCDs) were examined. A small 
amount of debris, that was determined to be within the manufacturer's limits, was observed. 
The MCDs were cleaned and re-installed and then a 30-minute engine run was conducted. 
Afterward, no further debris was found and the helicopter was returned to service. During a 
subsequent flight, a couple of weeks later, the engine chip detector caution light momentary 
illuminated. The helicopter landed and the MCDs were once again inspected, and a small flake 
and metallic paste on the lower MCD was observed. The oil system was drained, flushed, 
changed, and a new filter was installed. A 30-minute ground engine run was accomplished, and 
the MCDs were inspected afterwards and free of debris. The helicopter was then flown about 
30 minutes, to a location where an oil sample could be drawn from the original oil removed. 
The oil sample was sent out for analysis and the helicopter was not operated for about 2 weeks, 
while awaiting results. The oil analysis was received, and the operator was satisfied with the 
result of no metal detected, and attempted to ferry the helicopter back to its home base. 
During the flight, the pilot reported observing a momentary illumination of a caution light that 
he could not identify, prior to it extinguishing. About 10 minutes later, the engine chip detector 
caution light briefly illuminated, while the helicopter was in cruise flight, about 750 ft above 
ground level. The pilot elected to make a precautionary landing and initiated a descent. During 
the descent, the engine chip detector light illuminated again and shortly thereafter, was 
followed by a loud bang. Immediately, the engine lost power and an emergency autorotation 
landing was accomplished. During the landing sequence, the main rotor blades struck the tail 
boom and resulted in substantial damage.
Postaccident examination of the helicopter, revealed control continuity with the cockpit 
controls to the engine and flight controls. Besides the tail boom damage, the remainder of the 
fuselage was relatively intact. Initial visual examination of the engine revealed no obvious 
damage. The inlet, exhaust section, and turbine blades, were clear of obstructions and observed 
to be undamaged. The engine was removed to facilitate an examination. The compressor could 
not be rotated by hand but the power turbine could be rotated by hand, with resistance. The 
magnetic chip detectors were removed and observed to have accumulated ferrous debris. The 
engine was shipped to Rolls-Royce for further examination. 
Page 3 of 6WPR15LA177
The engine was examined and disassembled under the supervision of the National 
Transportation Safety Board, investigator-in-charge, at the Rolls-Royce facility near 
Indianapolis, Indiana. The compressor module was separated from the accessory gearbox by 
removing the compressor discharge tubes and the Compressor Turbine Drive Shaft (CT shaft). 
Thermal damage and cooked oil was observed on the CT shaft. The turbine module was 
removed for examination. On the first and second stages of the turbine, thermal and blade tip 
damage was observed. All the bearings were examined and were unremarkable, except for the 
No. 2 bearing.
The aft end of the compressor module revealed damage to the No. 2 bearing. The No. 2 bearing 
was fractured and exhibited thermal damage. Examination of the No. 2 bearing oil delivery 
tube revealed it was properly installed with no obvious blockage of the oil jets. The tube was 
removed and x-rayed for internal contamination of the oil passages with negative results. 
Further, the tube was flow checked and verified to flow oil at the specified rate.
The accessory gearbox was disassembled and observed to be intact and functional. Metal debris 
was observed throughout the gearbox. The oil pump screen, oil delivery tubes and engine 
mounted oil filter had minor contamination but no obstructions to flow.
A detailed examination of the No. 2 bearing revealed that its composition was consistent with 
the manufacture material types required. The bearing separator was fractured completely 
through both rails, at the forward and aft sides, of the bearing. All 10 of the ball bearings were 
retained in the separator, however half of them exhibited damage consistent with smearing and 
material transfer between the raceway and balls. 
The No. 2 bearing is the primary means of support of the compressor impellor. Failure of the 
No. 2 bearing will allow the impellor to migrate forward, where it will eventually contact the 
compressor shroud. According to the manufacturer, only minor contact between the impeller 
and shroud is acceptable, however, examination of the compressor impellor revealed that the 
shroud and its vanes had considerable rubbing damage.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing-flare/touchdown
Mast bumping
Page 4 of 6WPR15LA177
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
31, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/15/2014
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/28/2015
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 6405 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3460 hours (Total, this make and model), 6190 
hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 1170 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 60.5 hours (Last 
30 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N73AW
Model/Series:
206 L4 L4
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
1995
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
52115
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid;
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/04/2015, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
4091.8 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison/Rolls Royce
ELT:
C91A installed, activated, 
did not aid in locating 
accident
Engine Model/Series:
250-C30P
Registered Owner:
AIR MEDICAL SERVICES LLC
Rated Power:
650 hp
Operator:
AIRWEST HELICOPTERS
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Agricultural Aircraft (137); 
Rotorcraft External Load 
(133); On-demand Air Taxi 
(135)
Page 5 of 6WPR15LA177
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PRC, 5044 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1953 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
285째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
210째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24째C / -6째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
GRAND CANYON, AZ (40G)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
GLENDALE, AZ (GEU)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1905 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
34.310000, -112.120000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Albert P Nixon
Adopted Date:
10/17/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Yasmin Duran; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Mark Stuntzner; Bell Helicopter; Fort Worth, TX
Jack Johnson; Rolls Royce Corporation; Indianapolis, IN
Jeff Boatman; Airwest Helicopters; Glendale, AZ
Publish Date:
10/17/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91304
Page 6 of 6WPR15LA177
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
