National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PACIFIC OCEAN, PO
Accident Number: LAX96LA149
Date & Time: 11/02/1995, 1000
Registration: N99138
Aircraft: Bell 47G-4A
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
 Analysis The helicopter was being flown from a fishing vessel during a fish spotting operation.
The pilot reported that shortly after liftoff from the ship, he experienced a hydraulic failure.
The seas were reported as high, and the pilot did not feel he could safely return to the pitching and rolling ship deck without hydraulic assist.
He decided to land the float equipped helicopter in the water next to the ship.
While hovering just above the water, the spotter unexpectedly jumped out of the helicopter without permission from the pilot.
This resulted in a sudden imbalance, and the pilot lost control of the helicopter.
The helicopter then rolled over, collided with the water, and sank.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to maintain lateral control of the helicopter, while hovering in preparation for a precautionary landing next to a ship at sea.
Factors relating to the accident were: the passenger's premature evacuation from the helicopter, and the resultant lateral imbalance of the helicopter as the passenger jumped.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: HOVER - IN GROUND EFFECT Findings 1.
(F) ROTORCRAFT FLIGHT CONTROL SYSTEM,PRIMARY SERVO - FAILURE 2.
PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) EVACUATION - PREMATURE - PASSENGER 4.
(C) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - EXCESSIVE 5.
The aircraft was operated by Z Fishing Company of Pita, Guam, MP, and was engaged in fish spotting operations.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
The helicopter was destroyed.
Neither the certificated commercial pilot nor the spotter was injured.
The flight originated from the ship about 5 minutes prior to the accident.
The pilot reported to his insurance company adjuster that shortly after liftoff he experienced a hydraulic failure.
The seas were reported as high, and the pilot did not feel he could safely return to the pitching and rolling ship deck without hydraulic assist.
He decided to land in the water next to the ship.
While hovering just above the water, the spotter jumped out of the helicopter without permission from the pilot.
The sudden imbalance caused the pilot to lose control of the helicopter and it rolled over, collided with the water and sank.
The pilot did not report the accident to either the Safety Board or to the FAA.
The accident was reported by the insurance company adjuster on March 16, 1996.
To date, the pilot has not responded to repeated written requests to complete a Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 32, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
