National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TOKSOOK BAY, AK
Accident Number: ANC96LA012
Date & Time: 11/03/1995, 1647 AST
Registration: N88BC
Aircraft: CESSNA 207
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 7 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
 Analysis The certificated commercial pilot and six passengers were departing a remote airstrip on a scheduled commuter flight.
Snow showers were present in the area.
The pilot loaded the passengers and waited on the ground for conditions to improve.
Prior to departure, the pilot removed snow from the windshield and the leading edge of the wing.
After a ground time of about 40 minutes, the pilot began a takeoff on a runway that sloped uphill about 2 percent.
The airplane did not become airborne until the pilot added full flaps.
The airplane lifted off but could not climb out of ground effect.
A small hill was ahead of the pilot and she began to retract the flaps.
The airplane collided with rising terrain about 1/4 mile north of the departure end of the runway.
A pilot/witness indicated that after the accident, he walked to the accident site and observed snow on the upper surface of the wings.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate planning/decision, improper use of the flaps, and inadequate removal of snow/frost from the wings of the airplane.
An upsloping runway and snow conditions were factors in the accident.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - UPHILL 2.
(C) PLANNING/DECISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) FLAPS - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - SNOW 5.
(C) ICE/FROST REMOVAL FROM AIRCRAFT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On November 3, 1995, about 1647 Alaska standard time, a wheel equipped Cessna 207, N88BC, collided with terrain during takeoff at Toksook Bay, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as flight number 1216 on a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country scheduled passenger flight under Title 14 CFR Part 135 when the accident occurred.
The airplane, operated by Mark Air Express, Anchorage, Alaska, sustained substantial damage.
The certificated commercial pilot and 6 passengers, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The operator reported that the pilot was departing runway 33 for a flight to Bethel, Alaska.
The pilot and other pilot witnesses reported that snow showers were present in the area.
The pilot arrived at Toksook Bay about 1609.
She loaded the passengers and waited on the ground for conditions to improve.
The pilot indicated that prior to departure, she removed snow from the windshield and the leading edge of the wing.
During the takeoff roll, the airplane did not become airborne until the pilot added full flaps.
The airplane lifted off but could not climb out of ground effect.
A small hill was ahead of the pilot and she began to retract the flaps.
The airplane collided with rising terrain about 1/4 mile north of the departure end of the runway.
The airplane received damage to the left main landing gear, left wing, nose gear and propeller.
A pilot/witness indicated that after the accident, he walked to the accident site and observed snow on the upper surface of the wings.
The Alaska airport/facility directory supplement indicates in part:..."Runway uneven grade, deep dip 800 feet from threshold of runway 33.
Runway 15-33 slopes down 2 percent to the south end"...
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 27, Female Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
