National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PACIFIC OCEAN, PO
Accident Number: LAX96LA035
Date & Time: 11/01/1995, 1515 GMT
Registration: N4714U
Aircraft: BOEING 747-122
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 300 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis As the flight approached an area in which preceding flights had reported moderate turbulence, the flight crew turned on the fasten seatbelt sign, announced the impending turbulence to the cabin, and instructed the flight attendants to be seated.
While the fasten seatbelt sign was on, a female, English-speaking passenger, left her seat and went to the lavatory despite a verbal warning from a flight attendant about the eminent turbulence.
As the passenger was exiting the lavatory the flight encountered moderate turbulence and the passenger fell to the floor.
The passenger complained of pain in her right leg.
Cabin and flight crew personnel stabilized her leg and helped her to a nearby seat.
Post-flight medical examination revealed that the passenger had suffered multiple fractures of the right leg and foot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the failure of the passenger to comply with the fasten seatbelt signs and the verbal directives of the flight and cabin crew.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
WEATHER CONDITION - TURBULENCE 2.
(C) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - PASSENGER Factual Information On November 1, 1995, at 1515 UTC, one passenger was seriously injured onboard United Airlines flight 830, during a moderate turbulence encounter over the Pacific Ocean.
The aircraft, a Boeing 747-122, N4714U, was operated by United Airlines, Inc., as a regularly scheduled non-stop international passenger flight from Tokyo, Japan, to Honolulu, Hawaii.
The accident occurred in international airspace between latitudes 28 - 33 degrees north and at longitude 173 degrees west, while the aircraft was in cruise at flight level 350.
The aircraft was not damaged.
The remaining 279 passengers, 18 flight attendants, and flight deck crew of three were not injured.
The flight originated from Narita Airport, Tokyo, Japan, at 1037 UTC and subsequently landed at Honolulu, Hawaii, at 1721 UTC.
Reports provided by the flight crew to the United Airlines Flight Safety Department stated that at the time of the accident the aircraft was in clear air.
Convective activity associated with a front was visible in the distance ahead and on radar.
The flight crew characterized the radar return as a solid yellow band across their flight course with an area of green return to the south.
The flight crew elected to alter course to the south and follow a preceding Japan Airlines flight through the area of lighter returns.
In response to a report of moderate turbulence from the preceding aircraft, the flight crew turned on the fasten seat belt sign about 1500 hours.
Ten minutes later, because of turbulence, the cabin attendants were instructed to take their seats.
During the period that the flight attendants were seated and the flight was encountering light turbulence, a female passenger in the upper deck lounge left her seat to go to the lavatory.
According to reports by the flight attendants and other passenger witnesses, the flight attendants called to the English-speaking, American passenger to remain seated, but she declined and continued to the lavatory.
While returning to her seat, moderate turbulence was encountered and the passenger fell in the aisle.
The passenger complained of pain in her right leg and flight attendants, assisted by the second officer, immobilized her leg prior to helping her to a nearby seat.
Two medical doctors aboard the flight talked with the passenger and paramedic personnel met the flight in Honolulu.
Subsequent examination revealed multiple fractures of the passenger's right leg.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 56, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 750000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 2404 Hours Engines: 4 Turbo Fan Airframe Total Time: 14672 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: JT9D-7AH Registered Owner: UNITED AIRLINES, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
