National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: COLLEGE PARK, MD
Accident Number: BFO96LA017
Date & Time: 11/02/1995, 1000 EST
Registration: N2132Q
Aircraft: CESSNA 177RG
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that he activated the gear extension switch and visually confirmed that the main landing gear was extended.
During the landing roll the main gear collapsed and the airplane veered off the runway and collided with a ditch.
According to the pilot the touchdown was smooth and soft, but as he applied the brakes, he felt the nose rising and his seat getting lower to the ground.
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction; the landing gear cycled normally.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the main landing gear retracted for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: GEAR RETRACTION ON GROUND Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On November 2, 1995, at 1000 eastern standard time, N2132Q, a Cessna 177RG, sustained substantial damage when the main landing gear collapsed during landing on runway 15 at College Park Airport, College Park, Maryland.
The certificated commercial pilot and the passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed.
The local personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR 91.
The pilot stated: "[The] Gear down switch was actuated and cycle appeared normal.
Visual gear down on both sides, right side was witnessed...smooth and soft flare, smooth main contact with ground.
Nice roll on all three gear, then upon application of brakes, felt a bump as if hitting a log on runway, then a sense of the nose rising, which was actually the seat getting lower and lower towards the ground.
Aircraft doing approx.
30 mph left runway...came to stop leaning to the left."
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector, when the landing gear collapsed, the aircraft veered off the runway and collided with a ditch.
The aircraft was removed and sent to a repair facility for further examination.
The examination included cycling the gear.
The gear operated satisfactorily during the examination.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
