National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: OKLAHOMA CITY, OK
Accident Number: FTW96LA033
Date & Time: 11/02/1995, 1733 CST
Registration: N6364E
Aircraft: Cessna 172
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot took off, with full fuel in the left tank and 1/4 fuel in the right tank, to practice touch-and-go landings at a nearby airport.
He was returning to Will Rogers World Airport approximately 1 hour later when the engine 'quit' approximately 5 miles west of the destination.
He reports that he flew the whole flight with the fuel selector on the left fuel tank.
He restarted the engine, but it 'quit' again about 1 mile west of runway 35L.
The pilot further stated that he never used carburetor heat.
During the landing roll in a field, the airplane hit a 'small gully,' nosed over, and came to rest in the inverted position.
According to the carburetor icing probability chart the weather conditions at the time of the accident were conducive to the formation of carburetor ice.
Additionally, the engine was test run and found to have no mechanical anomalies.
Repeated attempts to obtain a completed Pilot/Operator Report of the accident from the student pilot were unsuccessful.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's failure to use carburetor heat resulting in loss of engine power due to carburetor icing.
A factor was the lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 2.
(C) CARBURETOR HEAT - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - ICE ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On November 2, 1995, at 1733 central standard time, a Cessna 172, N6364E, registered to and operated by a private owner under Title 14 CFR Part 91 was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a power loss near Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
The student pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight that originated from Will Rogers World Airport approximately 1 hour before the accident.
No flight plan was filed.
During a personal interview, conducted by an FAA inspector, the pilot reported that he left Will Rogers World Airport with a fully fueled left tank and a 1/4 fueled right tank and flew to Clarence E. Page Municipal Airport to practice touch-and-go landings.
He was returning to Will Rogers World Airport when the engine "quit" approximately 5 miles west of the destination.
He stated that he flew the entire flight with the fuel selector on the left tank.
He restarted the engine, but it "quit" again about 1 mile west of runway 35L at Will Rogers World Airport.
The pilot further stated that he never used carburetor heat.
During the landing roll in a field, the airplane hit a "small gully," nosed over, and came to rest in the inverted position.
Evaluation of the weather, at the time of the accident, revealed a temperature of 39 degrees and dew point of 27 degrees.
The enclosed icing probability curve chart indicates that this float type carbureted engine was being operated in a region of serious carburetor icing conditions.
Additionally, on November 8, 1995, the airplane's engine was test run and found to have no mechanical anomalies.
See attached manufacture's report.
Repeated attempts to obtain a completed Pilot/Operator Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, from the student pilot were unsuccessful.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 35, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
