The flight was uneventful until the approach to land at the destination airport. When the pilot 
reduced engine power for the approach, the engine lost power and the throttle would not 
respond.  The pilot informed the control tower that he had a loss of power and proceeded to set 
up for an emergency landing.  The airplane clipped a tree top and went through a power line 
before touching down on the ground.  The airplane landed hard, the nose gear collapsed, and 
the left wing collided with a light pole.  Examination of the airplane found the left and right 
wings had spar and wing skin damage. Examination of the engine found the throttle cable 
separated from the throttle body arm.  The throttle cable attaching bolt was still attached to the 
throttle body arm, the nut was missing and the bolt was not drilled for a cotter key. Further 
review disclosed that Airworthiness Directive 86-24-07 and Cessna Information Letter SE79-6 
had not been complied with when the engine assembly was recently installed during the annual 
inspection.
A loss of engine power due to the throttle/power lever cable becoming disconnected in-flight, 
as a result of maintenance personnel failure to comply with Airworthiness Directive (AD) 86-
24-07 and Cessna information letter SE79-6.
On December 2, 2003, at 1950 central standard time, a Cessna 182-K, N3056Q, registered to 
Cowarts Construction Company, and operated by the private pilot, collided with a power line 
and subsequently the ground while on approach to Birmingham International Airport, 
Birmingham, Alabama. The flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, 
and instrument flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument 
flight plan was filed. The pilot and two passengers received minor injuries and the airplane 
sustained substantial damage. The flight originated from Salem Airport, Salem, Arkansas, on 
December 2, 2003, at 1700.
The pilot stated that the flight was uneventful until the approach to land in Birmingham.  The 
pilot pulled the manifold pressure to 12.5 inches to descend and added power to align with the 
glide slope, but the engine did not respond.  He then added full power, but still nothing 
happened.  The pilot informed the control tower that he had a loss of power and proceeded to 
set up for an emergency landing.  He stated the airplane clipped a tree top and went through a 
power line before touching down on the ground.  The pilot stated the airplane "landed hard," 
the nose gear collapsed, and the left wing collided with a light pole.
Examination of the airplane found the left and right wings had spar and wing skin damage, the 
right stabilizer and the bottom of the airframe sustained crush damage. The nose gear was 
folded aft. Examination of the engine found the throttle cable separated from the throttle body 
arm.  The throttle cable attaching bolt was still attached to the throttle body arm, the nut was 
missing and the bolt was not drilled for a cotter key. Additionally, the examination of the 
throttle cable assembly revealed that Airworthiness Directive 86-24-07 and Cessna 
Information Letter SE79-6 had not been complied with when the engine assembly was recently 
installed during the annual inspection.
