The accident involved 2 Swearingen airplanes. The pilot of the first airplane reported that he 
had taxied north for departure. There were several company aircraft in front of him in line for 
departure so he came to a complete stop. The pilot of the second airplane reported that he was 
also taxiing north for departure. He had seen the lights from an aircraft holding short of 
runway 17R; however, he did not see the lights of the first airplane until it was too late. The 
pilot of the second airplane reported he applied full brakes and used reverse thrust but was 
unable to avoid hitting the first airplane. Both airplanes were substantially damaged.
the failure of the pilot of the taxiing aircraft to maintain clearance and adequate visual lookout 
for the stopped aircraft.
On December 3, 2003, at approximately 0555 mountain standard time, a Swearingen SA227-
AC, N340AE, and a Swearingen SA226-TC, N60U, both operated by Key Lime, Inc., were 
substantially damaged when they collided during night taxi at Denver International Airport, 
Denver, Colorado. Neither the airline transport pilot in N60U, nor the commercial pilot in 
N340AE, were injured. Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed. Instrument flight 
rules (IFR) flight plans had been filed for the non-scheduled domestic cargo flights being 
operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 135. Both flights were originating at the 
time of the accident.  
The pilot of N340AE reported that he had taxied north on taxiway Mike (M) to the "M10" 
intersection. There were several company aircraft in front of him in line for runway 17R. He 
came to a complete stop behind a Cessna 404, remaining partially on the M taxiway.
The pilot of N60U reported that he was taxiing north on the M taxiway, en route to runway 8 
for departure. He had seen the lights from an aircraft holding short of runway 17R; however, he 
did not see the lights of N340AE until it was too late. The pilot of N60U reported he applied 
full brakes and used reverse thrust but was unable to avoid hitting N340AE.
Both airplanes were examined at the scene. N340AE, was turned to the right during the 
collision, entangling its empennage with N60U's empennage. The outer 8 feet of N60U's right 
wing was severed. The outboard 2 feet of the right propeller's blades showed chordwise 
scratches, torsional bends, and leading edge gouges and chips. The airplane's empennage was 
crushed and bent.
The bottom empennage of N340AE was scraped and torn. The airplane's left wing tip was bent 
upward, and showed skin wrinkles. An 8-foot long, 2-foot wide section of the left outboard 
wing's trailing edge was torn out. The airplane's empennage was crushed and bent. 
