The 1,800-hour pilot stated that he turned final to Runway 17 and was at an altitude of 2,500 
MSL, when the left engine lost power.  Approximately ten seconds later, the right engine lost 
power.  The pilot landed the airplane in a field with the landing gear up, approximately two 
miles north of his destination.  The main fuel tanks were visually inspected and found to be 
one-third to one-half full of fuel.  The auxiliary tanks were found to be empty.  The fuel selector 
valves were in the auxiliary position for both engines.  The pilot reported that he was distracted 
by weather and communications with Oklahoma City Approach Control, and forgot to switch 
tanks.
The pilot's mismanagement of the fuel by which he failed to position the fuel selector on the 
appropriate fuel tanks resulting in fuel starvation.  A contributing factor was the pilot's 
diverted attention.
On December 2, 2003, approximately 1430 central standard time, a Cessna 310-H twin-engine 
airplane, N815M, registered to and operated by a private individual, was substantially damaged 
during a forced landing following a loss of engine power to both engines while on final 
approach to Sundance Airpark (HSD), near Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The private pilot and 
his passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan 
was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The cross-country 
flight originated from Mount Vernon Airport (MVN), near Mount Vernon, Illinois, at 1015.
The 1,800-hour pilot reported to a FAA inspector that he departed Springfield, Missouri, after 
making a fuel stop, at which time he filled all fuel tanks.  The pilot received visual flight rules 
(VFR) flight following enroute to HSD.  He flew for approximately one hour, while using fuel 
from the main tanks.  The pilot then switched to the auxiliary fuel tanks, and flew for another 
forty-five minutes and arrived in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  Oklahoma City Approach Control 
terminated radar services when the pilot reported the airport in sight.  The pilot turned final to 
Runway 17, approximately three miles north of the airport and lowered the flaps to fifteen 
degrees.  The pilot stated he was at an altitude of 2,500 MSL, when the left engine lost power.  
Approximately ten seconds later, the right engine lost power.  The pilot landed the airplane in a 
field with the landing gear up, approximately two miles north of HSD.  
Examination of the aircraft by an FAA inspector revealed wrinkling of the upper surfaces of 
both wings.  The main fuel tanks were visually inspected and found to be one-third to one-half 
full of fuel.  The auxiliary tanks were found to be empty.  The fuel selector valves were found in 
the auxiliary position for both engines.  The pilot reported that he was distracted by weather 
and communications with Oklahoma City Approach Control, and forgot to switch tanks.
At Will Rogers World Airport, near Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, located 17 miles southwest of 
the accident site, the Automated Surface Observing Station (OKC) at 1414 reported winds from 
140 degrees at 21 knots, gusting to 26 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, with a broken ceiling at 
2,200, and overcast skies at 6,000.  The temperature was reported as 10 degrees Celsius, 
dewpoint as minus 4 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.12 inches of Mercury.
Despite several attempts, the pilot failed to return the completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft 
Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2).
