The airplane impacted trees and terrain during a forced landing following a loss of engine 
power while on final approach.  The certified flight instructor (CFI) reported that the airplane 
did not have enough altitude at the time of the loss of engine power to land on the runway and 
he performed a forced landing to a small field.  No pre-impact anomalies were found with the 
airplane's fuel system, including the fuel tanks, lines, and selector valve during a post-accident 
examination.  The gascolator and carburetor were void of fuel when examined at the accident 
site.  No fuel was recovered from the ruptured left fuel tank or the apparently undamaged right 
fuel tank.  There was no noticeable fuel smell or evidence of a fuel spill at the accident site.  The 
vegetation around the main wreckage was not blighted when examined a day after the accident.  
No anomalies were found with the engine that would have prevented its operation.  The CFI 
reported that prior to the flight he and his student both visually ascertained the airplane's fuel 
quantity.  He reported that both fuel tanks were half full (13 total gallons), which correlated 
with the indications displayed on the cockpit fuel quantity gauges.  The CFI provided 
documentation that substantiated the fuel quantity aboard the airplane prior to its last 
departure.  The CFI stated that after the accident his dual-student was partially trapped under 
the left side of the airplane and "a steady stream of fuel was pouring on his left side."  
Emergency room documentation confirmed that the dual-student had suffered chemical burns 
on his left shoulder, chest and back.  In the event the airplane departed with 13 gallons of fuel, 
there should have been sufficient fuel for the approximately 1/2 hour accident flight.  The 
airport temperature and dew point would produce the likelihood of light carburetor icing 
accumulation during cruise and/or descent engine power settings.
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.  A factor to the accident was the tree line 
and the unsuitable terrain.
On December 3, 2003, at 1033 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N65455, piloted by a 
certified flight instructor (CFI), sustained substantial damage during an in-flight collision with 
trees and terrain while performing a forced landing near Pontiac, Michigan.  The CFI reported 
a loss of engine power while on a 3 mile final for runway 27L at Oakland Pontiac International 
Airport (PTK).  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 
instructional flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.  
The CFI was not injured and his dual-student was seriously injured.  The flight departed 
Macomb Airport (57D), New Haven, Michigan, at 1018.
According to an interview with the CFI and his written statement, the purpose of the flight was 
to practice takeoffs and landings at a tower-controlled airport.  The CFI reported that prior to 
the flight he and his student both visually ascertained the airplane's fuel quantity.  He reported 
that both fuel tanks were half full (13 total gallons or 11.5 usable gallons), which correlated with 
the indications displayed on the cockpit fuel quantity gauges.  He stated that the engine run-up 
and systems checks were normal prior to the takeoff from 57D.  The CFI reported they climbed 
to 3,000 feet mean sea level (msl) prior to setting cruise engine power and leaning the fuel 
mixture.  He stated they contacted PTK tower approximately 8 miles from the airport and the 
tower controller instructed them to report a 3 mile final for runway 27R.  Approximately 5 
miles from the airport, the student enriched the mixture to full rich and reduced engine power 
to initiate a descent to 2,000 feet msl.  The CFI stated that while they were on a 3 1/2 mile final 
for the runway the tower controller issued new approach instructions for runway 27L.  The CFI 
acknowledged the runway change and he was subsequently cleared to land.
The CFI reported that shortly after he received the landing clearance, at approximately 1,100 
feet above ground level (agl), the airplane experienced a loss of engine power.  He immediately 
took aircraft control from his student and advanced the throttle.  The CFI reported the engine 
"appeared to surge and lose power from 2,000 to 1,000 rpm."  He informed the tower 
controller of the engine power loss and continued for the runway.  The CFI established best 
glide airspeed and verified the fuel selector position.  He additionally verified the mixture 
control was full rich, the throttle control was full forward, the magneto switch was on both, and 
the primer was secured.  The engine did not respond to the completed emergency checklist 
items.  The CFI stated that the airplane was approximately 800 feet agl after he completed the 
checklist items and that he did not have sufficient altitude to land on the runway.  He elected to 
perform an off-airport landing in a small field positioned approximately 1/2 mile east of the 
airport.  The CFI stated that prior to the landing he moved the mixture control to idle cut-off 
position.  The airplane impacted a tree line that bordered the field in which the forced landing 
was made.  The airplane came to rest inverted, resting on its left side.
The CFI stated he unbuckled his safety belt/harness and extracted himself from the wreckage.  
His student was partially trapped under the left side of the airplane and "a steady stream of fuel 
was pouring on his left side."  The CFI stated that the local police and fire departments were 
on-site within a couple of minutes and performed the extraction of the student pilot.
Inspectors from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and an investigator from Cessna 
Aircraft Company performed an on-site investigation.  According to the inspectors, there was 
no noticeable fuel smell or evidence of a fuel spill at the accident site.  The vegetation around 
the main wreckage was not blighted when examined a day after the accident.
The left fuel tank was found ruptured and no fuel was recovered and/or quantified.  The right 
fuel tank had no apparent damage and no fuel was recovered and/or quantified.  The fuel 
system was examined. The fuel lines were not contaminated and no obstructions were noted 
when air was blown throughout the system.  Both fuel tanks had vented filler caps.  The right 
cap was loose when in the locked position.  No anomalies were noted with the left cap.  The 
gascolator and carburetor were void of fuel when examined at the accident site.
The engine remained attached to the airframe and the propeller remained attached to the 
engine.   Engine crankshaft and valve train continuity was established by rotating the propeller 
by hand.  Air was drawn into and expelled out of all cylinders as the crankshaft was rotated.  
Both magnetos produced a spark on the upper spark plug lead wires while the engine 
crankshaft was rotated.  There was evidence of a fuel leak on the number one cylinder 
induction tube.  There was fuel staining noted on the exterior of the carburetor, the engine oil 
sump, and nose landing gear.  The electrode and insulator of the upper sparkplug from the 
number one cylinder was stained a blue color.  The remaining upper spark plug electrodes and 
insulators were light gray/brown in color.
The CFI provided flight logbook entries, fuelling records, and aircraft utilization records that 
substantiated the fuel quantity aboard the airplane prior to its last departure.
Emergency room documentation confirmed the dual-student had suffered chemical burns on 
his left shoulder, chest and back.
The airport temperature (-01 degrees Celsius) and dew point (-08 degrees Celsius) would 
produce the likelihood of light carburetor icing accumulation during cruise and/or descent 
engine power settings, according to a carburetor icing probability chart developed by Transport 
Canada.
According to the 1978 Cessna 152 pilot operating handbook (POH), the average fuel burn at 
cruise engine power is 5-6 gallons/hour at 3,000 feet pressure altitude.
