National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MARSHALL, MI
Accident Number: CHI96LA124
Date & Time: 04/02/1996, 2130 EST
Registration: N2586S
Aircraft: Cessna 210
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that as the airplane was taking off, a deer hit the left side of the empennage, causing a violent yaw to the left, but the airplane continued to fly.
Passengers in the rear seat used a flashlight to inspect the damage.
They discovered that the left horizontal stabilizer, elevator and empennage were damaged.
The pilot was concerned about tail flutter and possible stalling of the airplane.
He determined that he would maintain 100 knots and continue in the same direction to the nearest airport, where he could make a straight-in landing, and emergency services were available.
An uneventful landing was made.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A deer that wandered onto the runway.
Darkness was a related factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT 2.
(C) OBJECT - ANIMAL(S) 3.
FLIGHT CONTROL,ELEVATOR - FOREIGN OBJECT DAMAGE 4.
FLIGHT CONTROL,STABILATOR - FOREIGN OBJECT DAMAGE 5.
FUSELAGE - FOREIGN OBJECT DAMAGE Factual Information On April 2, 1996, at 2130 eastern standard time, a Cessna 210 sustained substantial damage after gaining 10 to 15 feet of altitude during takeoff when it was struck by a deer.
The private pilot and the three passengers were not injured.
The pilot elected to continue the flight to Pontiac, Michigan, where he performed an emergency landing.
The 14 CFR 91 flight was departing Brooks Field Airport, Marshall, Michigan, en route to New Hudson, Michigan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that during takeoff a deer hit the airplane on the left side of the empennage, causing a violent yaw to the left.
He thought at first that the deer had hit the left landing gear.
The passengers in the rear seat used a flashlight to inspect the damage to the aircraft.
It was discovered that the left horizontal stabilizer, elevator and empennage were damaged.
The pilot reported that he was concerned about tail flutter and stalling the airplane.
He determined that he would maintain 100 knots per hour and continue in the same direction to the nearest airport where he could make a straight in landing, and where there were emergency services at the field.
He continued on to Pontiac, Michigan, and maintained 100 knots during landing and made an uneventful landing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
