National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BUNNELL, FL
Accident Number: ATL96LA075
Date & Time: 04/02/1996, 1550 EST
Registration: N7355S
Aircraft: Cessna 182P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The flight was returning to the departure airport when the airplane experienced a loss of engine power .
According to the pilot, he attempted to restart the engine several times, but was unable to.
The pilot reported that the carburetor heat was applied during the restart attempts, but there was no report by the pilot of the application of carburetor heat prior to the loss of engine power.
The airplane collided with trees one mile east of the airport.
The examination of the engine assembly, after the accident, failed to disclose a mechanical problem.
A review of weather data at the approximate time of the accident disclosed that conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor icing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to obtain a preflight weather briefing and his failure to apply carburetor heat that resulted in a loss of engine power.
A factor was weather conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor icing at cruise flight.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT BRIEFING SERVICE - NOT OBTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) CARBURETOR HEAT - NOT USED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On April 2, 1996, at 1550 eastern standard time, a Cessna 182P, N7355S, collided with trees during an attempted emergency landing to Flagler County Airport in Bunnell, Florida.
The personal flight operated under the provisions of  Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The pilot received serious injuries, and the passenger received minor injuries.
The flight departed Bunnell, Florida, at 1530 hours.
Reportedly, the flight was returning to Flagler County Airport when the pilot experienced a loss of engine power.
According to the pilot, he attempted to restart the engine several times, but failed.
The pilot reported that the carburetor heat was applied during the restart attempts, but there was no report by the pilot of the application of carburetor heat prior to the loss of engine power.
The airplane collided with trees one mile east of the Flagler County Airport.
The examination of the engine assembly, after the accident, failed to disclose a mechanical problem.
A review of weather data at the approximate time of the accident disclosed that conditions were favorable formation of carburetor icing (see attached icing probability curves).
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 65, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
