National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BELUGA, AK
Accident Number: ANC96LA042
Date & Time: 04/01/1996, 1100 AST
Registration: N861TA
Aircraft: Douglas DC-6-B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation -
 Analysis After landing the Captain was taxiing the airplane to the parking area to off load his cargo of fuel.
While the Captain was maneuvering the airplane in the parking area the left wingtip struck a vertical steel building support.
The Captain attempted to back up the airplane through the use of reverse thrust.
While backing up, the left elevator, stabilizer, and vertical fin struck a steel fuel tank being stored near the parking area.
The Captain stated that the parking area is tight for a DC-6 airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The Pilot-in-Command's selection of an unsuitable terrain area for taxi/parking and his misjudgment of the clearance required.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The business flight, operating under 14 CFR Part 91, departed Palmer and the destination was Beluga, Alaska.
A company flight plan was in effect and visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The certificated airline transport pilot- in-command, the first officer, and the flight engineer were not injured and the airplane received substantial damage.
During a telephone interview with the crew on April 4, 1996, they stated that the Captain was taxiing the airplane because he had control of the nose gear steering wheel.
They were making a right turn in the parking area attempting to position the airplane close to the ground fuel tanks in order to off load their fuel cargo.
The Captain stated in the NTSB Form 6120.1/2 that the area is very tight for a DC-6 airplane.
During the right turn, the left wing tip struck a steel upright support for an open building.
The Captain stopped the airplane and called for reverse.
As the Captain backed up the airplane, the left elevator, left stabilizer, and vertical fin struck a steel fuel tank being stored near the parking area.
The Captain stated that the airplane did not back up along the same ground track made during the forward taxi.
He stated that when operating in reverse, the weight on the nose wheel is reduced.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 103800 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 92 Hours Engines: 4 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 45384 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: R-2800-CB16 Registered Owner: WOODS AIR FUEL, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
