National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RALEIGH, NC
Accident Number: ATL96LA073
Date & Time: 04/01/1996, 1004 EST
Registration: N999TF
Aircraft: Canadair CL-600S
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 9 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis During an instrument landing system (ILS) approach the airline transport pilot noticed a discrepancy in the landing gear indicators.
He raised the landing gear and lowered it again.
The main landing gear indicator lights were illuminated, indicating that the main gear was extended and locked, but the nose gear light was extinguished.
The light in the gear handle was off, indicating that the system was functioning properly.
The pilot did not use the emergency landing gear extension system.
The aircraft was landed, and the nose gear collapsed.
Subsequent examination revealed an intermittently operating extend solenoid in the nose gear selector valve.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the flight crew's inadequate emergency procedure in that they did not manually extend the landing gear, as specified in the airplane flight manual.
A factor relating to the accident was: the intermittent operation of the extend solenoid in the nose gear selector valve.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(F) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL RETRACTION/EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - MALFUNCTION 2.
LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - NOT ENGAGED 3.
(C) GEAR DOWN AND LOCKED - NOT ATTAINED - FLIGHTCREW 4.
(C) EMERGENCY PROCEDURE - NOT FOLLOWED - FLIGHTCREW ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Factual Information On April 1, 1996, about 1004 eastern standard time, Canadair CL-600-1A11, N999TF, nose landing gear collapsed on landing at the Raleigh-Durham Airport, Raleigh, North Carolina.
The aircraft was being operated by Pal-Waukee Aviation under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 135 and instrument flight rules.
Instrument meteorological conditions existed at the time of the accident, and an instrument flight rules flight plan was in effect.
The airline transport pilot, his co-pilot, the cabin attendant, and the six passengers were not injured; the aircraft was substantially damaged.
The flight departed Milwaukee, Wisconsin at 0830 the same day.
The pilot stated that when the landing gear was extended, the landing gear position indicating system presented conflicting information regarding the position of the nose landing gear.
The landing gear was then raised, and the indicator lights were all extinguished.
The gear was again extended.
The main gear indicator lights were illuminated, indicating that the main gear was down, but the nose gear light was extinguished.
The light in the gear handle was off, indicating that the system was functioning properly.
The pilot did not use the emergency landing gear extension system.
The aircraft was landed and the nose gear collapsed.
The pilot stated that the clouds and visibility precluded any observation of the landing gear by airport tower personnel.
Post accident examination of the nose gear selector valve revealed an intermittently inoperative extend solenoid valve.
According to the failure analysis report, the solenoid valve most likely experienced moisture entry.
The manufacturer reported that the selector valve was repaired with an upgraded solenoid to preclude recurrence of the failure.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 37, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 41250 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 46 Hours Engines: 2 Turbo Fan Airframe Total Time: 3395 Hours Engine Manufacturer: ALLIED SIGNAL ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: ALF502L2C Registered Owner: U.S. BANCORP LEASING & FINANC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
