National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GRAND HAVEN, MI
Accident Number: CHI96LA126
Date & Time: 04/01/1996, 1030 EST
Registration: N454Q
Aircraft: Piper PA-18A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis After touchdown from a left wing low landing, the student pilot, who was flying the airplane from the front seat, allowed the airplane to veer left.
The instructor pilot, who was in the back seat, took control of the airplane, added full power, and pulled back on the stick in an attempt to avoid a runway light.
The airplane cleared the light at a slow airspeed; however, its right wing immediately dipped and struck the terrain.
The airplane then spun around and came to a stop.
Examination of the airplane revealed no anomalies which could have contributed to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the dual student to maintain directional control of the airplane during the landing, and inadequate supervision by the flight instructor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 2.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT 3.
(C) SUPERVISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 4.
OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT 5.
MANEUVER TO AVOID OBSTRUCTIONS - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) Factual Information On April 1, 1996, at 1030 eastern standard time (est), a Piper, PA-18A, N454Q, operated by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when during landing, the airplane impacted the terrain.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The instructional flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
No flight plan was on file.
The instructor pilot and dual student reported no injuries.
The flight originated at Grand Haven, Michigan, at 1025 est.
The pilot stated that after touchdown from a left wing low landing, the student pilot, flying the airplane from the front seat, relaxed the controls, so as to dissipate enough speed to allow the tailwheel to touch down on the runway.
The dual student said the airplane weathervaned and veered left.
The instructor pilot, in the rear seat, took control of the airplane, added full power, and pulled back on the stick in an attempt to avoid a runway light.
The airplane cleared the light at a slow airspeed.
The airplane's right wing immediately dipped and struck the terrain.
The airplane looped around and came to a stop near the runway.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector who examined the wreckage found the airplane resting upright.
The right wing frame was bent and the fabric was torn at the tip.
The rear right wing spar was bent aft.
The left wing tip showed scraping damage to the fabric and frame.
The left main gear was bent outward and the left wheel was bent.
The fuselage frame exhibited minor bending and fabric wrinkling throughout.
The frame tubing over the cockpit had bent inward and the plexiglass overhead window was cracked.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
No anomalies were found in the engine, engine controls or other airplane systems.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
