National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LONGMONT, CO
Accident Number: FTW96LA158
Date & Time: 04/01/1996, 1449 MST
Registration: N84PS
Aircraft: STAFFORD RV-4
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Upon arriving at the destination airport from a local cross country flight, the pilot performed three touch and go landings.
While on the crosswind leg of the fourth pattern circuit, which was to culminate in a full stop landing, the engine lost power and the pilot made an emergency landing in a plowed field.
During the landing roll, one main landing gear collapsed and the airplane nosed over.
The flight originated with 11 gallons of fuel on board, and the duration of the flight was 54 minutes.
According to the pertinent Lycoming engine chart, the fuel consumption at 75 percent power (2,450 rpm) is 10.5 gallons per hour.
A review of the pilot's aero/medical data revealed him to be non-current in flight proficiency and medical certification.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inadequate preflight planning and preparation in that he failed to ensure the aircraft had sufficient fuel to complete the flight.
A factor was the soft terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - BASE LEG/BASE TO FINAL Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
LACK OF CERTIFICATION - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 5.
TERRAIN CONDITION - OPEN FIELD 6.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 7.
The two pilots aboard received minor injuries, and the aircraft sustained substantial damage.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area personal flight operating under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
No flight plan was filed.
The flight originated from Greeley, Colorado, (GXY) approximately 54 minutes prior to the accident.
The pilot said that at the time of the flight's departure, the airplane had 11 gallons of fuel on board.
According to the pilot, after arriving in the Longmont area they conducted three touch-and-go landings and were on a cross wind leg for a full stop when the engine "abruptly" quit.
The pilot said three restarts of the engine were attempted without success, and he conducted a forced landing to a plowed field.
During landing roll, the right main landing gear collapsed and the aircraft nosed over.
Following the accident, two FAA inspectors examined the aircraft on two occasions.
The first examination took place the day of the accident.
According to the attached statement provided by the FAA inspectors, they found no evidence of fuel in or around the aircraft.
In addition, in a statement made to the FAA inspectors, the pilot stated he should have had approximately 12 gallons of fuel on board at the time of the accident.
The same inspectors returned the following day, April 2nd, and at that time found fuel in the left tank.
In addition, the right magneto was inoperative.
This was attributed to impact damage by the inspectors.
No other evidence was found to prevent the engine from operating.
A review of the O-360-A1D engine performance information was conducted.
According to the Lycoming  manual (page attached) the engine at 75 percent power (2450 rpm) burns approximately 10.5 gallons per hour.
A review of pilot information produced evidence that the pilot's medical certificate and his biennial flight review were not current.
Attached is information provided by the pilot to document a current biennial flight review and medical certificate.
Both were executed after the accident date.
Also, according to the information provided in the Pilot Operator Report, the pilot had not flown in the previous 90 days prior to this flight.
The pilot/passenger in the rear seat owned the airplane.
He was a certified flight instructor (CFI), and was current in all respects.
The flying pilot said that he was the pilot in command and that the CFI was a "passenger."
The rear cockpit in this aircraft was equipped with aileron and elevator controls only.
There are no rudders, throttle, mixture control, flap control or instruments.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
