The commercial pilot was maneuvering around weather, destined for his home airport, when 
the engine lost power due to exhaustion of the right fuel tank.  While attempting to change 
from the right tank to the left tank the fuel selector became impeded by a loose screw on the 
fuel placard.  The pilot attempted to switch tanks several times before committing to a forced 
landing.  The pilot successfully landed the airplane in a wheat field.  During the landing roll 
out, the nose gear contacted a rut resulting in damage to the nose gear and subsequently 
allowed the airplane to nose over coming to rest in the inverted position.
Loss of engine power due to starvation of the right fuel tank and the inability to select the left 
fuel tank.  Contributing to airplane damage was the hidden obstruction in the field selected for 
the forced landing.
On May 2, 2008, at approximately 1900 central daylight time, a single-engine Piper PA-22-108 
airplane, experienced a total loss of engine power and was substantially damaged during the 
forced landing roll out.  The commerical pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, sustained 
minor injuries.  The newly acquired airplane was owned and operated by the pilot.  No flight 
plan was filed for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The 92 
nautical mile cross country flight originated from the Mc Comb Airport (MCB), Mc Comb, 
Mississippi, and was destined for the St. Landry Parish Airport (OPL), Opelousas, Louisiana.
In a telephone interview with the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the pilot reported that he had 
purchased the airplane the day prior and was flying back to his home airport.  On the final leg 
to his destination, the airplane's engine experienced a total loss of power after the pilot 
depleted fuel in the right fuel tank.  The pilot attempted to switch from the right fuel tank to 
the left tank.  The pilot stated that the fuel selector would not engage the left tank detent.  After 
several attempts to seat the fuel selector in the left tank position the pilot elected to perform a 
forced landing to a wheat field. During landing roll, the nose gear impacted a rut which 
damaged the nose gear and resulted in the airplane coming to rest in the inverted position.  
The pilot was able to egress the airplane without assistance.  The pilot walked several hours 
before reaching a road and receiving assistance from a passing motorist.
The airplane was examined by the NTSB with the assistance of a technical representative from 
Piper Aircraft.  All position detents could be identified from the fuel selector and the positions 
were verified from both wing tanks to the engine fuel line.  Movement from the right tank to 
the left tank required a clockwise rotation which was impeded by a round head screw that was 
found slightly raised from the flush position.  The screw secured the fuel selector placard to the 
side of the cockpit and when properly seated allowed for unrestricted movement of the fuel 
selector to all positions.
