The pilot and owner of the airplane reported that during cruise flight, the engine partially lost 
power followed by several backfires.  The pilot was unable to maintain altitude at the reduced 
power setting, and initiated a forced landing to a gravel road.  During the landing roll on the 
gravel road, the left and right wings struck trees located on the edge of the road, resulting in 
structural damage to both wings.  The owner of the airplane reported that during disassembly 
of the engine, the number four cylinder exhibited "signs of detonation."  The number four 
piston head was "eaten away" to the top ring land.  No additional anomalies were noted with 
the engine.  The underlying reason for the detonation was undetermined.
The partial loss of engine power due to detonation.  Contributing to the accident was trees in 
the landing area.
On May 2, 2008, about 1215 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 175A single-engine airplane, 
N7059E, made a forced landing following a partial loss of engine power near Rio Linda, 
California.  The airplane was registered to, and operated by, the pilot under the provisions of 
Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The private pilot and passenger/owner of the 
airplane were not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight.  The cross-
country flight originated from Rio Linda about 35 minutes prior to the accident with an 
intended destination of Medford, Oregon.  
The owner of the airplane reported that he had recently purchased the airplane, and was 
moving the airplane to his home field.  The pilot and owner departed from Rio Linda and 
climbed to an altitude of 1,500 feet mean sea level (msl).  About 20 to 30 minutes after 
departure, the engine began losing power followed by several backfires.  The pilot reported that 
he observed blue smoke originating from the engine cowling, and noted that the engine 
revolutions per minute (rpm) was reduced to about 1,500 to 2,000 rpm.  The pilot stated that 
he was unable to maintain altitude at the reduced power setting, and initiated a forced landing 
to a gravel road.  During the landing roll, the left and right wings struck trees located on the 
edge of the gravel road. 
Examination of the airplane by the pilot revealed that the left and right wings were structurally 
damaged.  During a telephone conversation, the owner of the airplane reported that during 
disassembly of the engine, the number four cylinder exhibited "signs of detonation."  The 
number four piston head was "eaten away" to the top ring land.  No additional anomalies were 
noted with the engine.  The reason for the detonation was undetermined.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Powerplant sys/comp malf/fail (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (partial)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
