Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sterling, MA
Accident Number:
NYC02LA046
Date & Time:
01/01/2002, 1458 EDT 
Registration:
N117BB
Aircraft:
LET L-23
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
As the glider neared the airport, the student pilot entered the downwind leg further out from 
the runway than she normally would.  As the glider was turned on to the base leg, the student 
realized that she would not make the runway and elected to perform a forced landing to a two-
lane highway.  The glider touched down on the southbound lane of the elevated roadway, 
impacted a metal guardrail, and came to rest upright.  The student had accumulated about 13 
hours of dual instruction in gliders, with 7 or 8 different flight instructors, and about 1.4 hours 
of solo time.  The student added that previous to the accident flight, she had no plans to fly solo 
due to the wind conditions.  After her flight instructor reassured her that the pervious dual 
flight had been good, and student climbed into the glider alone.  The recorded weather at a 
nearby airport, about the time of the accident, included winds from 250 degrees at 13 knots, 
gusts to 22 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The student pilots inadequate compensation for wind conditions which resulted in an off-field 
landing, and the CFI's improper decision to allow the student to fly solo.  Factors related to the 
accident were the gusting wind conditions, and the students lack of total experience in gliders.
Page 2 of 6NYC02LA046
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
1. OBJECT - FENCE
2. (C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN KIND OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS
5. (C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR(ON GROUND)
Page 3 of 6NYC02LA046
Factual Information
On January 1, 2002, about 1458 eastern standard time, a LET L-23 glider, N117BB, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing near the Sterling Airport, Sterling, 
Massachusetts.  The student pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, 
and no flight plan was filed for the instructional flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the student pilot, the accident flight was the second flight of the day, which was 
conducted solo.
The first flight was about 3-1/2 hours earlier, and was conducted with an instructor.  The 
student added that it was windy on the flight, and she had no plans to solo due to the wind 
conditions.  When the flight instructor asked her if she wanted to fly again, she said yes, 
assuming the flight would be conducted as dual instruction.  When the student realized that the 
flight would be conducted solo, she replied that she did not want to go solo, and that it was still 
too rough.  After the flight instructor reassured her that the pervious dual flight had been good, 
the student climbed into the glider alone.
On the solo flight, as the glider was towed behind a tow plane, the student observed that the 
wind was blowing down the favored runway, runway 34.  During the tow to altitude, the 
conditions were rough, with the towline going slack, and then tight, requiring the student to 
make corrections more often then she had done in the past.  As the glider approached 2,500 
feet, the towline was released and the student began to practice maneuvers.  During the 
maneuvers, the student stated that she hit her head twice on the canopy due to the turbulent 
conditions.  About 12 minutes into the flight, the student decided to return to the airport.  She 
entered the traffic pattern, on the downwind leg, at 1,500 feet, but further out from the runway 
than she normally would have flown.  While on the downwind leg, the student checked the 
operation of the airbrake and kept her hand on it as she had been taught.  As the glider was 
turned on to the base leg, the student realized that she would not make the runway and elected 
to perform a forced landing to a two-lane highway.  The glider touched down on the 
southbound lane of the elevated roadway and impacted a metal guardrail, coming to rest 
upright on the highway.
The student additionally stated that she might have been moving the speed brake handle 
inadvertently during the approach due to the turbulence.
The student reported she had accumulated about 13 hours of dual instruction, with 7 or 8 
different flight instructors, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Soaring Club.  She also 
accumulated about 1.4 hours of solo time.  All of her previous flights had been conducted on 
days with light or calm wind conditions, with some crosswind landings. 
The recorded weather at a nearby airport, about the time of the accident, included winds from 
250 degrees at 13 knots, gusts to 22 knots.
Page 4 of 6NYC02LA046
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
36, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
None 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
17 hours (Total, all aircraft), 17 hours (Total, this make and model), 2 hours (Pilot In Command, 
all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours 
(Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
LET
Registration:
N117BB
Model/Series:
L-23 
Aircraft Category:
Glider
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
917815
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/27/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1124 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
25 Hours
Engines:
0 
Airframe Total Time:
911 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
M.I.T. Soaring Association
Rated Power:
Operator:
M.I.T. Soaring Association
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6NYC02LA046
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FIT, 348 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1452 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
20°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 4900 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
18 knots / 22 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
250°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-1°C / -13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Sterling, MA (3B3)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1430 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Sterling Airport (3B3)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
459 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3010 ft / 40 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
42.454722, -71.733333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Stephen M Demko
Adopted Date:
06/25/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven Racicot; FAA; Windsor Locks, CT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6NYC02LA046
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
