Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
CHICAGO, IL
Incident Number:
CHI95IA142
Date & Time:
05/01/1995, 1120 CDT 
Registration:
N1811U
Aircraft:
MCDONNELL DOUGLAS DC10-10
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries:
192 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
The flightcrew reported that during the application of takeoff power, when the throttles were in 
approximately the vertical position, the numbers 1 and 3 engines were indicating 
approximately 70% N1. The number 2 engine was indicating about 48% N1 and not 
accelerating. They heard a 'crack' and aborted the takeoff. Examination of the engine revealed 
that the low pressure turbine (LPT) stage one disk had separated from the LPT rotor at the 
stage one to two flange joint. Seven intact toroid bolts and sets of associated hardware were 
recovered. No evidence of fatigue cracking or corrosion (pitting) was noted on any of the bolt 
pieces recovered from the engine. The shank of one of the toroid bolts exhibited significant 
damage. The lug arm, used for safetying the bolt, exhibited relatively minor damage. 
Examination of several of the lug arms revealed 'noticeable wear patterns' and 'crack arrest 
positions indicative of fatigue cracking.' Statements by UAL maintenance personnel indicate 
failures of the toroid bolt safeties are occasionally discovered when the engines are 
disassembled for major overhaul. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
failure of the safety wire and/or safety wire lug arm on one of the stage one to two disk flange 
bolts due to an inadequate safetying method. 
Page 2 of 6CHI95IA142
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED
Findings
1. 1 ENGINE
2. (C) TURBINE ASSEMBLY,AIR SEAL - DISCONNECTED
3. (C) PROCEDURE INADEQUATE - MANUFACTURER
Page 3 of 6CHI95IA142
Factual Information
 On May 1, 1995, about 1120 central standard time, a McDonnell Douglas DC10-10, N1811U, 
operated by United Airlines (UAL) as United Airlines Flight 492, sustained minor damage 
following the uncontained failure of the number two engine during takeoff roll.
The flight crew aborted the takeoff, returned to the gate, and deplaned the passengers without 
further incident.  There were no injuries to the crew of 12, or the 180 passengers aboard the 
airplane.  The scheduled domestic passenger flight, operated under 14 CFR Part 121, originated 
at the Chicago O'Hare International Airport with a planned destination of the Washington 
Dulles International Airport, Washington, D. C.  An IFR flight plan was filed, and visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed in Chicago.
The flight crew reported that during the application of takeoff power, when the throttles were 
in approximately the vertical position, the number one and three engines were indicating 
approximately 70 percent N1.  The number two engine was indicating about 48 percent N1 and 
not accelerating.  They heard a "crack".  They aborted the takeoff, pulled the number two 
engine fire handle and discharged the fire bottle.
The airplane was transported to the UAL maintenance hanger at O'Hare International airport 
where it was subsequently examined.  Fragments of the turbine blades, shroud material, bolts, 
and the engine case were recovered from the runway, and from within the engine cowl and the 
engine.  A gap was located in the thrust reverser latch seam which spanned approximately 
three inches at the trailing edge and .25 inches at the leading edge.  The left cowling had a six 
inch by 21 inch puncture at the ten o'clock position and the right side cowling had a four inch 
by eighteen inch puncture at the four o'clock position.
The engine was removed from the airframe revealing a circumferential penetration of the 
engine case, about one inch wide, extending around about 270 degrees of the circumference 
from the three o'clock position to the twelve o'clock position, in the vicinity of the first low 
pressure turbine.  One oil line on the left side of the engine was fractured and the upper surface 
of the left stabilizer was oil covered.
The engine was transported to the UAL engine overhaul facility, San Francisco, California, 
where it was examined in the presence of the Powerplants Group Chairman.  In his factual 
report of the examination, he reported "the LPT stage one disk was separated from the LPT 
rotor at the stage one to two flange joint.  The bore, web and rim portion of the disk were 
intact...Several stage one to two disk flange bolts were recovered in the debris.  The fracture 
surfaces on the majority of the recovered bolt fragments were smoothed and rounded.  Six 
stage one to stage two flange bolts were fractured in the shank, adjacent to the threads, in 
which two bolts had coarse looking fracture surfaces with varying degrees of discoloration."
The LPT components were examined by a National Resource Specialist at the NTSB laboratory, 
Washington, D. C.  In his factual report he stated that "the internal surfaces of the engine 
hardware in the low pressure turbine section contained multiple small-object impact marks".  
Seven intact toroid bolts and sets of associated hardware were recovered.  X-ray energy 
dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) examination of the discolored areas of the bolts revealed 
substantial peaks for oxygen, aluminum, sulfur, and silver.  "No evidence of fatigue cracking or 
corrosion (pitting) was noted on any of the bolt pieces recovered from the engine."  A portion 
of the missing bolt, identified as an unthreaded portion of the shank, designated as bolt 
Page 4 of 6CHI95IA142
number six, was located with the fragments recovered from within the engine.  The shank of 
the bolt exhibited significant damage.  The lug arm, used for safetying the number six bolt, 
exhibited relatively minor damage.  Examination of several of the lug arms revealed "noticeable 
wear patterns" and "crack arrest positions indicative of fatigue cracking."
Statements by UAL maintenance personnel indicate failures of the toroid bolt safeties are 
occasionally discovered when the engines are disassembled for major overhaul.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Flight Engineer
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/02/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
19011 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2909 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MCDONNELL DOUGLAS
Registration:
N1811U
Model/Series:
DC10-10 DC10-10
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
46610
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
302
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/23/1994, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
433000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1903 Hours
Engines:
3 Turbo Jet
Airframe Total Time:
63749 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
CFM
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
CF6-6
Registered Owner:
UNITED AIRLINES
Rated Power:
39000 lbs
Operator:
UNITED AIRLINES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
UALA
Page 5 of 6CHI95IA142
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ORD, 668 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1015 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4000 ft agl
Visibility
15 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 24 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
70°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
, IL (ORD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
WASHINGTON, DC (IAD)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1120 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
O'HARE INTERNATIONAL (ORD)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
668 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
9L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
7967 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
12 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
180 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
192 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
WESLEY     M ROBBINS,
Adopted Date:
04/18/1996
Additional Participating Persons:
JEFFREY S BARNETT; SCHILLER PARK, IL
JEFF   PLANTZ; CHICAGO, IL
ROBERT A RECCHIUTI; CINCINNATI, OH
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI95IA142
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
