National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: THIBODAUX, LA
Accident Number: FTW00LA162
Date & Time: 06/01/2000, 0820 CDT
Registration: N5028Q
Aircraft: Air Tractor AT-401B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot flew the agricultural airplane around the target area (crawfish pond) to be sprayed, 'looking for obstacles and wind direction.'
The pilot made the first spray run from the north to the south, and the second pass from the south to north.
After completing the second run, the pilot passed over power lines and executed a turn to the right and into the direction of the sun.
According to the pilot, the sunlight and glare on the windscreen 'blocked my vision' temporarily.
While still in the turn, the pilot regained 'forward vision' and realized the airplane was flying 'into the power lines.'
After striking the power lines, the airplane came to rest upright in the crawfish pond.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the power lines while maneuvering during an aerial application flight.
A factor was the sunglare on the windscreen.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION 2.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - SUNGLARE Factual Information On June 1, 2000, at 0820 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-401B agricultural airplane, N5028Q, struck a power line during an aerial application flight near Thibodaux, Louisiana.
The airplane was owned and operated by Golden Ranch Aviation, Inc., of Schriever, Louisiana, under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant, received serious injuries, and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.
The flight originated approximately 0800 from the Golden Ranch Aviation, Inc., private airstrip.
According to the pilot's statement, the pilot circled the target area (a crawfish pond, located approximately 10-12 miles northwest of the airstrip) to be sprayed, "looking for obstacles and wind direction."
The pilot made the first spray run from the north to the south, and the second pass from the south to north.
After completing the second run, the pilot passed over power lines and executed a turn to the right and into the direction of the sun.
According to the pilot, the sunlight and glare on the windscreen "blocked [his] vision" temporarily.
While still in the turn, the pilot regained "forward vision" and realized the airplane was flying "into the power lines."
After striking the power lines, the airplane came to rest upright in the crawfish pond.
According to the U.S.
Naval Observatory Astronomical Applications Department, the official sunrise on June 1, 2000, occurred at 0603.
According to the FAA inspector, who examined the wreckage, the wings sustained spar damage, and the propeller was damaged.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 7800 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 5 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 535 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Engine Model/Series: R1340-AN Registered Owner: GOLDEN RANCH AVIATION, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
