National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NATCHITOCHES, LA
Accident Number: FTW00LA167
Date & Time: 06/01/2000, 1500 CDT
Registration: N48723
Aircraft: Grumman-Schweizer G164B
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot stated that he had been on an aerial application flight, spraying fertilizer on local fields.
He had applied 18 loads and was returning to pick up his 19th load of fertilizer.
During the landing roll on the grass airstrip, 'the aircraft started turning right and ground looped before [he] corrected directional control.'
The main landing gear collapsed, the fuel tank ruptured, and a fire erupted, which consumed the airplane.
The pilot reported that the airstrip was oriented north-south, and there was a 10-12 mph crosswind from the east at the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the pilot to maintain directional control during the landing roll, which resulted in a ground loop.
A factor was the crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On June 1, 2000, at 1500 central daylight time, a Grumman-Schweizer G164B agricultural airplane, N48723, was destroyed when it ground looped during landing roll on a private grass airstrip near Natchitoches, Louisiana.
The airplane was owned and operated by Valley Air, Inc., of Natchitoches, Louisiana.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.
The 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight originated approximately 1445.
The pilot stated that he had been on an aerial application flight, spraying fertilizer on local fields.
He had applied 18 loads and was returning to pick up his 19th load of fertilizer.
The pilot stated that during the landing roll, "the aircraft started turning right and ground looped before [he] corrected directional control."
The main landing gear collapsed, the fuel tank ruptured, and a fire erupted.
The pilot reported the airstrip was oriented north-south, and there was a 10-12 mph crosswind from the east at the time of the accident.
The cockpit, fuselage, horizontal stabilizer, and vertical stabilizer were consumed by the fire.
The cabane struts were structurally damaged, which resulted in the top wing collapsing and coming to rest on the forward part of the fuselage.
The three-bladed propeller and radial engine remained attached to the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 48, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 5200 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 6 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 7394 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: R-1340-59 Registered Owner: VALLEY AIR INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
