National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PIONEER, LA
Accident Number: FTW00LA166
Date & Time: 06/01/2000, 0700 CDT
Registration: N70114
Aircraft: Cessna A188B
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The airplane departed with full fuel and 150 gallons of herbicide for a local aerial application flight.
The airplane made three north-south spray runs, and during the third turn from the south to the north, the airplane contacted trees, the left wing separated, and subsequently, the airplane impacted the ground.
A witness stated that during the third turn he could hear, but could 'barely see the aircraft over the tree tops, unlike the previous two times.'
The accident pilot had also reported that 'he had the power lines licked, but seemed to have a problem clearing the tree tops.'
The pilot had successfully completed a professional agricultural pilot training course on May 5, 2000, and the accident flight was the pilot's second revenue spray flight.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with trees while maneuvering during an aerial application flight.
A factor was the pilot's lack in experience with aerial application flight operations.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On June 1, 2000, at 0700 central daylight time, a Cessna A188B agricultural airplane, N70114, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain while maneuvering near Pioneer, Louisiana.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained fatal injuries.
The airplane was registered to and operated by Pioneer Flying Service Inc., of Pioneer.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight.
The flight originated from the operator's private grass airstrip, at 0635.
According to the operator and his personnel, the airplane's fuel tanks were topped off and the airplane departed with 150 gallons of Trefend (herbicide) on board to spray a nearby field.
Witnesses reported that prior to the accident, they observed the airplane making north-south passes over a field.
One witness stated that from his view, he saw the airplane make two 180 degree turns from the south to the north, one following each of the first two southbound spray runs.
He stated that during the airplane's third turn he could hear, but could "barely see the aircraft over the trees tops, unlike the previous two times."
Another witness stated that he was working in the area when he heard a "loud pop," looked, and observed the airplane pointed straight up over the trees.
Subsequently, the airplane passed out of the witnesses' view behind trees.
According to an FAA inspector and a representative from Cessna Aircraft Company, who examined the accident site and airplane, the airplane was heading approximately 190 degrees when it initially contacted trees that were approximately 50 feet tall.
The airplane traveled an additional 200 feet before the airplane's left wing contacted a second area of trees that were approximately 70 feet tall.
Subsequently, the left wing separated from the airframe and the airplane descended to the ground.
The engine separated from the airframe, and the propeller blades, which remained attached to the propeller hub, were loose and exhibited "S" type bending.
Flight control continuity was established from the rudder and elevator to the forward cockpit.
Aileron flight control continuity was established between the right wing's aileron and the cabin area; the left wing's aileron cable was separated at the wing's mid-span.
The throttle, mixture, and propeller controls were found in the full forward position.
A friend of the accident pilot, who is also a pilot for Pioneer Flying Service, was interviewed following the accident.
He stated that on the evening of May 31, 2000, the accident pilot mentioned that he had "hit some trees on that day and had to pull the leaves out of the boom of the airplane."
The accident pilot added that "he had the power lines licked, but seemed to have a problem clearing the tree tops."
A review of the pilot's flight logbook and flight training records revealed that he received his commercial certificate on April 25, 2000, and successfully completed a professional agricultural pilot training course administered by Ag-Flight, Inc., of Bainbridge, Georgia, on May 5, 2000.
He had accumulated a total of 586 flight hours during the nine month period preceding the accident.
Two hundred fourteen of his total flight hours were in the make and model of the accident airplane, and had been accumulated during a one month period preceding the accident.
The operator reported that the accident flight was the pilot's second revenue spray flight.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 21, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 4000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Engine Model/Series: IO-520-D Registered Owner: PIONEER FLYING SERVICE INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
