National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: STEENS, MS
Accident Number: MIA00LA182
Date & Time: 06/01/2000, 1215 CDT
Registration: N9423T
Aircraft: Piper PA-38-112
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane was seen high and fast on the approach to runway 36, which was 1,400 feet long.
A witness said the airplane landed about halfway down the runway, departed the end of the runway, and impacted with trees.
The flight instructor (CFI) stated, that the student was at the controls and had turned base leg.
The CFI stated, '...I assisted him to final leg he was fast and high.
I took over the control [and landed [on the] first 1/3 [of the runway] but I was fast [and] ran out the runway length.'
The FAA reported, that the pilot 'landed long' on a short grass field and 'failed to stop' the aircraft before impacting trees.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the flight instructor failed to maintain control of the airplane after landing, which resulted in an on ground collision with a tree.
Factors in this accident were the flight instructor allowed the student to get too fast and high on the approach.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) PLANNED APPROACH - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 2.
(F) AIRSPEED(VREF) - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 3.
(F) ALTITUDE - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 4.
PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT OBTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 5.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 6.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On June 1, 2000, about 1215 central daylight time, a Piper PA-38-112, N9423T, registered to a private individual impacted with trees after landing at Hopper Field near Steens, Mississippi.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight.
The airplane received substantial damage.
The commercial-rated pilot/certified flight instructor (CFI) reported serious injuries.
The student pilot reported no injuries.
The flight departed from Fayette, Alabama, at 1100 en route to Steen, Mississippi.
According to the airport manager, who witnessed the accident, the airplane was high and fast on the approach to runway 36, which was 1,400 feet long.
The witness said the airplane landed about halfway down the runway, departed the end of the runway, and impacted with trees.
The CFI stated, "...student... turned base leg I assisted him to final leg he was fast and high.
I took over the control [and] landed [on the] first 1/3 [of the runway] but I was fast [and] ran out the runway length."
The approach seemed a little high, and a slight wind out of the south could have been a factor.
Our speed on final seemed a little high.
Initial touchdown was about 100-150 feet from the end of the runway...the airplane developed lift and flew another 100 feet before touchdown.
At this point [the CFI] applied the brakes with full pressure, then completely locked a few seconds later.
Speed was still excessive at this point with only 300 feet of runway left...our speed seemed to be about 50-60 mph."
The FAA inspector stated on his report, "...pilot landed long on a short grass field and failed to stop the aircraft before impacting trees."
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 38, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine; Instrument Airplane Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
