The helicopter had landed on an off-shore oil platform and was refueled. It then took off with 
one passenger. Shortly after lifting off, the pilot "heard a loud pop as the nose of the aircraft 
passed over the edge of the helideck. The noise was simultaneously accompanied by 
illumination of the engine out warning light and a needle split indication was observed on the 
engine and rotor tachometer gauge. As the aircraft yawed and lost climb performance, the pilot 
lowered the collective pitch full down and activated the floats. Upon landing on the water, the 
aircraft rolled left until inverted. The helicopter was later recovered and the engine 
disassembled and examined. The only anomaly noted was a loose Pc line, which would cause a 
loss of fuel flow and subsequent loss of engine power down to or below idle. It was determined 
that the torque required to realign the B-nut would be between hand-tight and 27 inch-pounds. 
The required torque is 80 to 120 inch-pounds. Torque values on the other air line fittings 
between the power turbine governor and the fuel control were found to range from 55 to 85 
inch-pounds. A review of the engine maintenance records revealed that 36.7 hours prior to the 
accident, the turbine module was completely disassembled and overhauled. This would have 
required the removal and re-installation of the Pc line.
A total loss of engine power due to maintenance personnel's failure to correctly torque the Pc 
line following removal and reinstallation of the turbine module.
On November 1, 2009, approximately 1040 central standard time, a Bell 206L-1, N272M, 
registered to and operated by Rotorcraft Leasing Company LLC, was substantially damaged 
when it impacted water following a loss of engine power shortly after lifting off from an oil 
drilling platform. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The 
non-scheduled domestic passenger flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135. The pilot was seriously injured and the passenger 
received minor injuries. The flight had just originated from platform High Island A442A, and 
was en route to platform High Island A515, both in the Gulf of Mexico.
According to the company accident report, the helicopter had landed on the platform and was 
refueled. It then took off with one passenger. Shortly after lifting off, the pilot "heard a loud 
pop as the nose of the aircraft passed over the edge of the helideck. The noise was 
simultaneously accompanied by illumination of the engine out warning light and a needle split 
indication was observed on the engine and rotor tachometer gauge. As the aircraft yawed and 
lost climb performance, the pilot lowered the collective pitch full down and activated the floats. 
Upon landing on the water, the aircraft rolled left until inverted. The pilot and the only 
passenger exited the aircraft and inflated their life vests and crawled onto the belly of the 
aircraft and inflated the life rafts. The pilot and the passenger hung on to the side of one of the 
inflated life rafts until a nearby crew boat arrived and pulled them out of the water."
The helicopter was later recovered and taken to the operator's base in Broussard, Louisiana, 
where, on November 19, 2009, the engine was disassembled and examined under the 
supervision of an FAA inspector. The only anomaly noted was a loose Pc line. According to 
Rolls Royce, a loose Pc line would cause a loss of fuel flow and subsequent loss of engine power 
down to or below idle.
Using a picture taken during the on-site engine examination, the position of the B-nut on the 
fuel control when torque paint was last applied was approximated. Re-connecting the B-nut to 
the fuel control fitting, the torque required to realign the B-nut was between hand-tight and 27 
inch-pounds. The required torque is 80 to 120 inch-pounds. Torque values on the other air line 
fittings between the power turbine governor and the fuel control were found to range from 55 
to 85 inch-pounds. The turbine wheels and nozzles exhibited signs of corrosion from salt water 
immersion. The engine controls were intact with no apparent damage.
A review of the engine maintenance records revealed that 36.7 hours prior to the accident, the 
turbine module had been completely disassembled and overhauled. This work would have 
required removal and re-installation of the Pc line.
