The glider pilot, who was a certificated flight instructor (CFI), reported that he was following 
the student pilot on the controls during the takeoff climb. He observed the tow plane rock its 
wings indicating to the glider to ﬁwave offﬂ. The CFI took control of the glider and stated, ﬁIt™s 
my airplane.ﬂ  He released the tow line, turned 180 degrees to return to the airport, and 
lowered the nose to increase aircraft energy.  The student felt they were too low to the ground 
and panicked. The student pilot grabbed the controls and pulled back on the stick. The CFI 
could not overpower the student on the controls and the airplane started to spin left. He picked 
up the left wing by applying opposite rudder.  The glider impacted a tractor dealer™s parking 
lot. The inspection of the glider revealed that it sustained substantial damage to the fuselage 
and wings. No pre-impact anomalies were noted.
The student pilot's improper control inputs which resulted in the inadvertent stall of the glider.
On November 1, 2009, at 1610 eastern standard time, an experimental L-13 Blanik glider, 
N1142, sustained substantial damage when it impacted terrain after it released the tow line 
about 200 feet above ground level during takeoff climb from the Geauga County Airport (7G8), 
Middlefield, Ohio. The certified flight instructor (CFI) and student pilot received serious 
injuries. The 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight was departing 7G8 on a 
local flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.   
The CFI reported that he was following the student pilot on the controls during the takeoff 
climb. He observed the tow plane rock its wings indicating to the glider to ﬁwave offﬂ. The CFI 
took control of the glider and stated, ﬁIt™s my airplane.ﬂ  He released the tow line and turned 
180 degrees to return to the airport. The CFI lowered the nose to increase aircraft energy.  He 
reported that the student pilot grabbed the controls and pulled back on the stick. He could not 
overpower the student on the controls and the airplane started to spin left. He picked up the 
left wing by applying opposite rudder.  The glider impacted a tractor dealer™s parking lot. 
Meanwhile, the tow airplane returned to the airport without incident. 
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector interviewed the student pilot. The student pilot 
stated that she observed several puffs of black smoke coming from the tow airplane. The CFI 
told her that he had the controls and started a turn back to the airport. She stated that she felt 
they were too low to the ground and she panicked, grabbed the controls, and pulled back on the 
stick. She heard the CFI shout, ﬁDon™t stall, don™t stall,ﬂ but it was too late and the airplane 
impacted the ground.   
The inspection of the glider revealed that it sustained substantial damage to the fuselage and 
wings. No pre-impact anomalies were noted.
