National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Madison, WI
Accident Number: CEN09LA093
Date & Time: 12/03/2008, 1315 CST
Registration: N782NC
Aircraft: MCDONNELL DOUGLAS DC-9-50
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Ground handling event
Injuries: 57 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis The airplane landed on a snow covered runway and was unable to maneuver while taxiing.
The pilot requested that a tug be dispatched to tow the airplane to the gate.
After the tug was connected, the airplane and tug slid on the snow and the tug jackknifed and impacted the left side of the airplane causing substantial damage.
The tug was subsequently re-connected and the airplane was towed to the gate.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The collision between the tug and the airplane during towing as a result of sliding on the snow covered runway.
The aircraft had just landed on runway 36 at the Dane County Regional Airport-Truax Field (MSN), Madison, Wisconsin, and the flight crew requested a tug to tow the airplane to the gate due to taxiway conditions.
The Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121 flight was operated in instrument meteorological conditions and was on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan.
No injuries were reported.
The flight originated from the Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport (DTW), Detroit, Michigan, at 1117.
MSN was the intended destination.
According to a report filed by the operator, the airplane landed on runway 36 at MSN about 1236.
The pilot was directed by air traffic control (ATC), to exit the runway at taxiway A1.
The aircraft slowed to a safe taxi speed and attempted to exit at the taxiway, but missed the taxiway and stopped about 6 feet onto the runway overrun area.
The pilot contacted ATC, and requested permission to execute a 180-degree turn on the overrun.
During the turn, the airplane began sliding on the snow and the flight crew stopped the airplane about 90-degrees into the turn.
The airplane was facing west and was still on the paved overrun area at this time.
At this point, the pilot contacted ATC and requested a tug to pull the airplane to the gate.
A NWA tug was dispatched and an airport snow removal truck spread sand on the area between the nose of the airplane and its left wing.
After the tug was attached to the airplane and had started to move, the airplane/tug jackknifed and slid on the snow covered runway.
The tug impacted the left side of the airplane's fuselage causing a puncture to the skin and damage to internal structural members.
The tug was subsequently re-connected and the airplane was towed to the gate where the passengers de-planed normally.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
