National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Auxvasse, MO
Accident Number: CEN09CA092
Date & Time: 12/05/2008, 1400 CST
Registration: N1521Q
Aircraft: CESSNA 150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilot departed the local airport with intent of practicing traffic pattern work and basic flight maneuvers.
After 3 touch and go maneuvers, the pilot departed the traffic pattern and flew the airplane to the designated practice area.
After performing a couple 360-degrees turns and slow flight, the pilot attempted a power-off stall.
In order to prepare for the power-off stall, the pilot retarded the throttle and applied the carburetor heat.
During the recovery of the power-off stall, the pilot "rapidly" applied engine power, closed the carburetor heat, and the engine lost power.
The pilot attempted to restart the engine, however, the restart was unsuccessful.
The pilot elected to perform an emergency off-airport landing.
During the forced landing to a field, the pilot landed the airplane in a downwind direction and was high on the final approach.
The pilot stated that he should have slipped the airplane during the approach which would have allowed for "use of more of the chosen field...a longer flare and a lighter touchdown at a lower airspeed."
The airplane impact crops and terrain and came to rest on its nose.
Examination of the airplane revealed the firewall was buckled.
According to a designated pilot examiner, the rapid throttle application can result in engine flooding and subsequent engine failure.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's improper engine recovery procedures after a power-off stall which resulted in a loss of engine power.
Contributing factors were the pilot's improper off-field landing procedures, and the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
: 1600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 9262 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: CONTINENTAL ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: O200 Registered Owner: Fulton Flying Service, Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
