National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Kemmerer, WY
Accident Number: DEN01LA154
Date & Time: 09/02/2001, 1150 MDT
Registration: N440TJ
Aircraft: McDonnell Douglas 369E
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
 Analysis The pilot was transporting bags of seismic equipment by long line to a remote site.
While he hovered into the wind waiting for a flagger, the helicopter was struck by a wind gust and started turning right.
The pilot applied left pedal, but was unable to stop the rotation.
The helicopter struck terrain, breaking off both skid legs, tail rotor blades, and tail rotor gearbox.
FAA's Advisory Circular 90-95 defines the loss of tail rotor effectiveness as "a critical, low- speed aerodynamic flight characteristic that can result in an uncommanded rapid yaw rate which does not subside of its own accord and, if not corrected, can result in the loss of aircraft control."
Some of the conditions conducive to LTE include (1) a high power setting, (2) low airspeed, and (3) a tailwind or left crosswind.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: loss of tail rotor effectiveness while hovering.
A contributing factor was the wind gust.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: HOVER Findings 1.
(C) LOSS OF TAIL ROTOR EFFECTIVENESS - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant aboard, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for this work use flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 133.
The helicopter departed a nearby landing zone approximately 1145.
According to the pilot, he was transporting bags of seismic equipment by long line to a remote site.
He said while he hovered into the wind and waited for a flagger, "a [wind] gust caused the helicopter to start to turn right."
He applied "more left pedal," but was unable to stop the rotation.
He jettisoned the external load, lowered the collective control, and attempted to fly out of the condition.
He was able to stop most of the rotation but not before the helicopter struck the terrain.
Both skid legs, tail rotor blades, and tail rotor gearbox broke off.
The left horizontal stabilizer was struck by one of the blades, and the tail boom buckled when it struck the ground.
The pilot said the winds were "generally light and variable, with [an] occasional gust."
According to FAA's Advisory Circular (AC) 90-95, loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE) "is a critical, low-speed aerodynamic flight characteristic that can result in an uncommanded rapid yaw rate which does not subside of its own accord and, if not corrected, can result in the loss of aircraft control.
: 3000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 67 Hours Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft Airframe Total Time: 8234 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Allison ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: 250-C20B Registered Owner: Textron Financial Corp.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
