National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Winston, OR
Accident Number: SEA01LA164
Date & Time: 09/01/2001, 1830 PDT
Registration: N95223
Aircraft: Taylorcraft BC12-D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was repositioning the aircraft from one field to the next in order for the aircraft to be closer to his residence for "major rework."
The aircraft had not undergone an annual inspection for about three years.
The pilot reported that the short field takeoff was to the north.
The aircraft lifted off and attained an altitude of about 10 feet, about 150 feet before the fence line, when the aircraft started to steadily loose altitude.
The aircraft's main landing gear caught on the fence.
The aircraft continued airborne over the next field, but "mushed" along.
The aircraft subsequently collided with another fence on the north end of the field, collapsing the main landing gear and damaging the wings.
The pilot reported no mechanical failures or malfunctions with the aircraft at the time.
The wind was reported as "swirling" by the pilot and a light breeze from the south from two witnesses.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from a fence during the initial takeoff.
A fence was a factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - FENCE 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft was substantially damaged and the private pilot, the sole occupant, received minor injuries.
During a telephone interview with the NTSB IIC, and subsequent statements to the Federal Aviation Administration inspector from the Portland, Oregon, Flight Standards District Office, the pilot reported that the flight began from Roseburg, Oregon, and was flown to a farm near Winston.
The pilot reported that the aircraft had not undergone an annual inspection for about three years and he was repositioning the aircraft to this area so that "major rework" could be accomplished.
The pilot over flew the farm several times to determine the wind direction then proceeded to land.
While on the ground, the pilot noted that the wind was "swirling," but appeared to be blowing from the north to southwest.
In order for the aircraft to be closer to his residence, the pilot got back in the aircraft to move it to another field.
The pilot stated that he applied full throttle with the brakes on in preparation for a short field takeoff to the north.
The pilot thought that the aircraft attained an altitude of about ten feet, about 150 feet before the fence line, when the aircraft started to steadily loose altitude.
One of the main landing gear wheels caught on the fence.
The aircraft continued flying but "mushed" along before colliding with another fence on the north end of the field, substantially damaging both wings and collapsing the landing gear.
The pilot reported no mechanical failures or malfunctions with the aircraft at the time of the accident.
Two witnesses reported that the aircraft pulled up just before colliding with the three to four foot high fence.
The aircraft continued on over the next field, subsequently colliding with the fence on the north end of the field.
One witness reported that the takeoff was "going with the wind," while the other reported that the breeze was light from the south.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
