National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Sheldon, IA
Accident Number: CHI01LA303
Date & Time: 09/01/2001, 1825 CDT
Registration: N5593E
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane experienced a rough running engine 1/4 mile from the approach end of runway 33 (4,199 feet by 75 feet, concrete) at an altitude of 1,581 feet above the airport.
The pilot reported being too high and fast while landing on runway 33 with 20 degrees of flaps, so he executed a go around which was then followed by a total loss of engine power.
The airplane landed in a dry corn field and came to rest inverted.
The private pilot had a total flight time of 119 hours.
The Flight Training Handbook cites techniques for performing an emergency landing and also states that the eagerness to get down is one of the most common faults of inexperienced pilots during simulated forced landings resulting in excessive speed to permit a safe landing.
Examination of the engine revealed an ingested exhaust valve from the number two cylinder.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the in-flight planning/decision and proper touchdown point not attained by the pilot.
Contributing factors were the ingested exhaust valve and lack of experience of the pilot.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: APPROACH ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 1.
(F) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,VALVE,EXHAUST - INGESTED 2.
(C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
The pilot reported a rough running engine while on approach to runway 33 (4,199 feet by 75 feet, concrete).
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating on a visual flight rules flight plan.
The private pilot received no injuries and passenger received minor injuries.
The flight departed from the Des Moines International Airport, Des Moines, Iowa, at 1705, en route to SHL.
The pilot reported the following in a written statement, "...I was coming back from a cross- country trip originated from Des Moines, IA.
Where we refueled full tanks.
I believe I opened my VFR flight plan about 5:05 CST.
...
I tried to get AWOS for altimeter setting, wind direction and velocity information when about 10 miles of the airport but I didn't work for some reason.
So I decided to cross the field at higher altitude than pattern altitude as recommended to find out the wind direction from the windsock.
(Refer to figure attached, #1).
The wind was from about 180 degrees.
I needed then to land on runway 15.
So I went on heading 150 degrees close to the runway (#4), at point #5 the engine started to shake real bad, I decided to proceed with an emergency landing downwind.
But I was too close to the runway, high and too fast to make it on runway 33.
But still I tried (#6).
At point #7, I decided to go-around realizing for sure that I wouldn't have enough runway to land safely.
At point #8, at less than 400' AGL, the engine quit while I started a climb for a go-around.
At that point all I could do was to put the plane in gliding attitude with appropriate angle of attack, correct airspeed and find a suitable field to land.
The cornfield was my best choice (#9).
He added that the engine began to run rough approximately 1/4 mile from the approach end of runway 33 and at an altitude of approximately 3,000 feet msl.
He selected a flap setting of 20 degrees for a landing flap setting on runway 33.
During the go around, the engine quit and the pilot landed on a reportedly dry corn field with approximately 6 foot tall corn stalks.
The airplane nosed over and came to rest.
SHL elevation is 1,419 feet msl.
Advisory Circular 61-21A, Flight Training Handbook, "Emergency Approaches (Simulated)", states, "...Slipping the airplane, using flaps, varying the position of the base leg, and varying the turn onto final approach should be stressed as ways of correcting for misjudgment of altitude and glide angle.
Eagerness to get down is one of the most common faults of inexperienced pilots during simulated forced landings.
In giving way to this, they forget about speed and arrive at the edge of the field with too much speed to permit a safe landing.
Too much speed may be just as dangerous as too little; it results in excessive floating and overshooting the desired landing spot..." The pilot reported a total flight time of 119 hours all of which were in the make and model of the accident airplane.
Examination of the engine by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) revealed a missing exhaust valve from the number two cylinder.
The valve was not found in the exhaust system or elsewhere in the engine.
The piston dome was damaged but not punctured.
The Lycoming O-320-H2AD, serial number RL-1767-76T, engine accumulated a total time of 1,595.6 hours since overhaul.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 2300 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 55.9 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 6879.9 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, activated, aided in locating accident Engine Model/Series: O-320-H2AD Registered Owner: Midwest Flying Service Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
