National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Gerlach, NV
Accident Number: LAX01LA298
Date & Time: 09/01/2001, 1830 PDT
Registration: N301CS
Aircraft: Sparke Air Command 582 Dual
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis After turning downwind following takeoff, the gyrocopter lost forward speed and began to descend.
It touched down on the left tire, rolled over, and the main rotor blades contacted the ground.
The pilot reported there was no mechanical malfunction.
He stated the engine and propeller combination was not providing sufficient performance to operate the gyrocopter safely, and he had been modifying it since it was built 2 years previously.
This was the second flight of the day after he had shifted the occupant seats to provide better airflow to the propeller.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inability to maintain altitude because of the gyrocopter's inadequatly designed performance capability.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT PERFORMANCE - INADEQUATE 2.
(C) ALTITUDE - NOT OBTAINED/MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) ACFT/EQUIP,INADEQUATE HANDLING/PERF CAPABILITIES - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On September 1, 2001, at 1830 hours Pacific daylight time, a Sparke Air Command 582 Dual, N301CS, descended to the ground during the takeoff initial climb from a dry lake bed, 10 miles north of Gerlach, Nevada.
The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was uninjured, and the gyrocopter was substantially damaged.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight conducted by the pilot under 14 CFR Part 91.
The experimental gyrocopter's flight was originating at the time, and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot stated that the gyrocopter was still in the testing phase of the certification process.
He had built it about 2 years ago and had been modifying it in order to reach an acceptable performance level.
It had been flown approximately 10 times since construction, but the pilot stated that the engine and propeller combination was not giving him the performance needed to operate the gyrocopter safely.
He had recently moved the pilot and passenger seats closer together to improve the airflow to the propeller, and was testing this latest modification at a dry lake bed near Gerlach.
The gyrocopter was taken to the lake bed by trailer and assembled on site.
The pilot made one test flight and returned to readjust the propeller pitch setting.
On the second flight, the pilot departed upwind and climbed to 30 feet.
When he turned to a downwind heading, he lost forward speed and the gyrocopter began to descend.
The gyrocopter contacted the ground on the left tire, which resulted in a rollover.
The rotor blades then contacted the ground and were destroyed.
The pilot did not note any mechanical malfunction prior to or after the accident.
A report of the accident on NTSB Form 6120.1/2 was not provided.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 42, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Unknown Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
