National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Colo. Springs, CO
Accident Number: DEN01LA158
Date & Time: 09/02/2001, 0815 MDT
Registration: N2575P
Aircraft: Balloon Works Firefly 8B-15
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot and his passenger took off in the balloon, leveled off at 1,000 feet, and flew south.
The wind velocity increased to about 15 mph and the pilot decided to land.
He chose a field in which two balloons had already landed.
He briefed his passenger on the position to assume for a high wind landing.
The pilot made a "stand up" landing, but a thermal caused the balloon to ascend about 30 to 40 feet.
It touched down a second time and the pilot vented the envelope.
According to the pilot, the "passenger's foot was out of position and twisted on impact."
X-rays taken later indicated the ankle was fractured.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the passenger's failure to follow instructions given to brace for a high wind landing, and the pilot's failure to adequately monitor the passenger's actions.
A contributing factor was the thermal lift.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
PASSENGER BRIEFING - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - THERMAL LIFT 3.
(C) INSTRUCTIONS,WRITTEN/VERBAL - NOT FOLLOWED - PASSENGER 4.
(C) SUPERVISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On September 2, 2001, approximately 0815 mountain daylight time, a Balloon Works Firefly 8B-15, N2575P, sustained minor damage during a hard landing near Colorado Springs, Colorado.
The private pilot was not injured, but his passenger received a serious injury.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated in Colorado Springs approximately 0745.
The following is based on a telephone interview with the pilot and the accident report he submitted.
The pilot said he and his passenger were participating in the Colorado Springs Balloon Classic.
They took off, leveled off at 1,000 feet, and flew south.
The wind velocity increased to about 15 mph and the pilot decided to land.
He chose a field in which two balloons had already landed.
He briefed his passenger on the position to assume for a high wind landing.
The pilot made a "stand up" landing, but a thermal caused the balloon to ascend about 30 to 40 feet.
It touched down a second time and the pilot vented the envelope.
According to the pilot, the "passenger's foot was out of position and twisted on impact."
X-rays taken later indicated the ankle was fractured.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
