Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SONOMA, CA
Accident Number:
LAX02LA100
Date & Time:
03/03/2002, 1500 PST 
Registration:
N17438
Aircraft:
Aeronca C-3
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During the takeoff climb out, the airplane veered to the right and nose dived into a junkyard.  A 
passenger who held a student pilot certificate, was invited by the owner to fly the airplane.  The 
owner placed the student in the left seat, which was the side that had the flight control stick, 
rudder pedals, and brakes.  The owner sat in the right seat, which did not have a flight control 
stick but did have rudder pedals.  The student said there were no problems encountered during 
takeoff.  Once they had climbed over the tress, the left wing dropped abruptly.  A couple of 
seconds after she corrected the wings to a straight and level attitude, the pilot-in-command 
reached over to her side and took over the flight controls.  The airplane banked and fell off to 
the right and struck the ground in a nose-down, left wing low attitude.  Initial and follow-up 
examinations of the airplane and powerplant did not expose any preimpact mechanical 
discrepancies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's excessive remedial control inputs in response to a passenger's control inputs, which 
led to a failure to maintain an adequate airspeed and an inadvertent stall/mush.  The pilot's 
inadequate preflight decision to allow a student pilot to occupy the only seat with full flight 
controls was a factor in the accident.
Page 2 of 6LAX02LA100
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) FLIGHT CONTROLS - USED - PILOT PASSENGER
3. (C) REMEDIAL ACTION - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. STALL/MUSH - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - CONGESTED/CONFINED AREA
Page 3 of 6LAX02LA100
Factual Information
On March 3, 2002, at 1500 Pacific standard time, an Aeronca C-3, N17438, impacted terrain in 
a junkyard while in an uncontrolled descent shortly after takeoff from the Sonoma Skypark 
Airport, Sonoma, California.  The airplane was owned and operated by the private pilot under 
the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The airplane sustained substantial damage.  The pilot 
received minor injuries, and a passenger who held a student pilot certificate was seriously 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area flight, and no flight plan 
had been filed.
The pilot informed emergency medical services (EMS) personnel that during the takeoff climb 
he felt something "snap" on the control stick.  The airplane veered sharply to the left.  He 
attempted to correct back to the right, but was unable to do so.  The airplane nose dived to the 
ground with the left wing low.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board, the student pilot indicated 
that she had been at the airport that morning to do some flying in her airplane.  Later in the 
day she went down to the hangar that housed the accident airplane.  The owner and another 
person were getting the airplane ready to fly.  The other person was going to fly it around the 
area.  While the airplane was out flying, the owner asked her if she would "like to solo the C3 
next;" she replied with a negative response.  The owner asked her a couple of more times if she 
wanted to fly the airplane.  He also told her that it flew just like her own airplane, and she 
wouldn't have a problem flying it.  She stated that she said she would fly it as long as he went 
up with her first.  When the airplane returned, the owner had her get in the airplane and taxi 
around to get used to the rudder pedals.  After she was done taxiing the airplane, she took it 
over to the fuel pit to refuel it.  She then called her dad and asked if she could solo the C-3; she 
told him that she was going to fly with the owner first.  After she fueled the airplane, they got 
into the airplane and started to taxi to the runway.
The student pilot reported that the pilot had her sit in the left seat, the side that had a control 
stick, rudder pedals, and brakes.  The right side, where the owner was seated, had only rudder 
pedals.  She was unsure whether there were brakes on his side.
Once on the runway, she advanced the throttle with her right hand and held the control stick 
with her left hand.  She indicated that she didn't know the airplane, so if she had been doing 
something wrong she figured the owner would have said something.  She encountered no 
difficulties during the takeoff.  Once they had climbed over the trees, she stated that the "left 
wing dropped abruptly."  She corrected it "and got the plane back straight [and] level. Or the 
wings level [at least]."  She stated that the owner reached over and grabbed the controls.  The 
student pilot let go of the flight controls, and recalled losing altitude and seeing a house go by.
A witness to the accident stated that he saw the airplane veer to the left and then "went right 
and nose [dived] into the ground."
Another witness traveling on Highway 37 reported that the engine was not "sputtering."  She 
was unfamiliar with airplanes, but stated that the engine did not sound like anything was 
wrong with it.  She did note that the airplane was "very low."
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane.  He established 
flight control continuity, and the control linkages appeared attached and intact.  He examined 
the engine.  The spark plugs appeared normal.  The inspector manually rotated the propeller; 
Page 4 of 6LAX02LA100
he observed valve train movement, and obtained thumb compression on the two cylinders.  
The magneto remained attached to the engine and produced spark on one lead.  He removed 
the magneto, manually rotated it, and it produced spark at all of the terminals.  He observed no 
mechanical discrepancies.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine 
Sea; Single-engine Land; Single-
engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/26/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/31/2000
Flight Time:
6000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 50 hours (Total, this make and model), 6000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 27 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 16 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
17, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Unknown Unknown
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Page 5 of 6LAX02LA100
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Aeronca
Registration:
N17438
Model/Series:
C-3 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
A-747
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/15/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1401 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Aeronca
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
E-113
Registered Owner:
WILLIAM FIELD
Rated Power:
37 hp
Operator:
WILLIAM FIELD
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
APC, 33 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1454 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
75°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
100°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.31 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
SONOMA, CA (0Q9)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
SONOMA, CA (0Q9)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
SONOMA SKYPARK AIRPORT (0Q9)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
20 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
26
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2480 ft / 40 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 6 of 6LAX02LA100
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
38.257778, -122.434444
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TEALEYE C CORNEJO
Adopted Date:
06/02/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
MIKE BECKER; FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION; OAKLAND, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
