The airplane was substantially damaged when it departed the runway surface and impacted a 
snowbank. The student pilot, on a solo flight, reported that he had completed one takeoff and 
landing, and was attempting to takeoff again when the accident occurred. He stated that he had 
applied full power, when the airplane "started veering to the left." The pilot noted that he was 
afraid of overcontrolling and did not apply brakes. "When I realized I was headed off of [the] 
runway, I pulled power and hit 15" high snow bank," the pilot reported. He also stated that the 
ATIS received prior to taxi reported braking action as "poor" on runway 35. The pilot noted 
that there were no failures or malfunctions associated with the airplane, either prior to, or at 
the time of, the accident.
Failure of the pilot-in-command to maintain directional control during the takeoff roll. 
Contributing factors were the wet, icy runway conditions and the presence of the snowbank.
On January 3, 2003, approximately 1200 cst, a Cessna 182S (Skylane), N2724R, piloted by a 
student pilot, was substantially damaged when it departed the runway surface and impacted a 
snowbank at the St. Louis Regional Airport (ALN), Alton, Illinois.  The pilot was practicing 
takeoffs and landings on runway 35 (6,500 feet x 100 feet, asphalt) and was attempting a 
takeoff when the accident occurred. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of 
the accident. The solo-instructional flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 
91 and was not on a flight plan. The pilot reported no injuries.
In his written statement, the pilot noted that he was practicing takeoffs and landings in the 
local traffic pattern. He reported completing one takeoff and landing, and was attempting to 
takeoff again when the accident occurred. The pilot stated: "...after landing I straightened up 
and applied full power for takeoff .... Started veering to left and could not bring plane back to 
center. When I realized I was headed off of [the] runway, I pulled power and hit 15" high snow 
bank."  He noted that he was afraid of overcontrolling and did not apply brakes. He estimated 
that the airplane's speed was 60 knots when it impacted the snowbank.
The pilot noted that the ALN automatic terminal information service (ATIS) received prior to 
requesting a taxi clearance reported the braking action on runway 35 as "poor". In his 
statement, the pilot reported the runway conditions as "ice, wet".
He reported no failures or malfunctions associated with the aircraft, either prior to, or at the 
time of the accident.
