The flight departed with full fuel tanks from the Waycross-Ware County Airport, en route to 
the Peachtree City Airport.  About 1 hour into the flight the pilot noticed a slight rpm drop, he 
applied throttle to compensate for the rpm decrease.  The pilot started the pre-descent 
procedures; he turned the auxiliary fuel pump on, applied carburetor heat, then reduced 
power, at this time the engine quit completely.  The pilot repositioned the fuel selector, 
switched the auxiliary fuel pump off and on, turned carburetor heat on and off, all actions were 
unsuccessful in restoring engine power.  The pilot established best glide airspeed, lowered full 
flaps, and while descending, the airplane contacted a raised sewer access.  The airplane then 
impacted the ground and came to rest inverted.  A witness reported observing black smoke 
trailing the airplane and heard the engine running rough.  Examination of the airplane 
following recovery by an FAA inspector revealed the fuel tank vent lines were clear of 
obstructions.  There was fuel found in the left wing and the right fuel tank was leaking fuel, the 
fuel boost pump operated electrically post accident.  Fuel samples from the right wing and 
gascolator showed no fuel contamination.  All spark plugs and inside ends of both exhaust 
pipes were found sooted.  The carburetor heat system which consists of a 5 inches long by 2 
inches in diameter pipe secured to the exhaust crossover pipe, a "Carb Heat Connector" which 
is secured to the filtered air box forward of the air filter, and a scat hose that connects the two.  
Additionally, a control in the cockpit activates an alternate air door located on the filtered air 
box forward of the carb heat muff inlet  The carburetor heat was able to function post accident 
and the engine was run to idle power setting; damage precluded operation at a higher rpm 
setting.  Bench testing of the carburetor by the manufacturer with FAA oversight revealed the 
carburetor was not within service limits, at comparable to idle power settings the fuel flow in 
terms of pounds-per-hour (pph) was 0.6 pph below service limits.  At the remaining four test 
points the fuel flow in pph was greater than the established rich limits.  At the last test point 
which equated to full throttle, the fuel flow was 18.5 pph above the established rich service 
limit.  The pilot reported verbally that approximately 50 flight hours earlier, when he was 
taxiing to takeoff, the engine quit just like it did during the accident flight.  The carburetor and 
engine driven fuel pump were replaced.  The engine quit again in a similar fashion, and the 
auxiliary fuel pump and all fuel lines were replaced.  Additionally, the fuel selector valve was 
disassembled and rebuilt.  The overhauled carburetor had been operated 54.5 hours since 
Page 2 of 8MIA03LA035
installation at the time of the accident.  The temperature and dew point at Peachtree city, two 
hours past the time of the accident, indicates serious carburetor icing at any power setting.  
Flight testing of a RV6A airplane equipped with the same carburetor heat system, same model 
engine, and same model carburetor as the accident airplane but with a temperature probe 
revealed that with the engine operating at 75 percent power and carburetor heat applied, the 
temperature rise was 1/2 degree Fahrenheit above the temperature with carburetor heat off.  
According to the general manager of Van's Aircraft, they offer 2 different types of carburetor 
heat systems, and they have not done any heat rise testing on any of the various carburetor 
heat systems that can be installed on RV type airplanes.  With respect to carburetor heat muffs, 
a section of the builders manual states that each builder is responsible for evaluating his/her 
own installation based on the liklihood of carburetor ice in his/her intended operating 
environment.
The failure of the pilot to activate carburetor heat control during cruise flight after 
experiencing a loss of engine rpm, inadequate carburetor heat system by the builder, and the 
unsuitable terrain encountered by the pilot-in-command during the forced landing following 
the total loss of engine power.  A factor in the accident was the weather conditions ( 
temperature and dew point) which were susceptible to carburetor icing during cruise flight and 
descent.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2003, about 1655 eastern standard time, a homebuilt RV6A, N559LJ, registered 
to a private individual, crashed approximately 715 feet south-southeast of the approach end of 
runway 31 at the Peachtree City Airport-Falcon Field, Peachtree City, Georgia.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 
91 personal flight from the Waycross-Ware County Airport, Waycross, Georgia, to the 
Peachtree City Airport-Falcon Field, Peachtree City, Georgia.  The airplane was substantially 
damaged and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, sustained minor injuries.  The flight 
originated about 1540 from the Waycross-Ware County Airport.
The pilot stated the fuel tanks were filled before departure; no fuel contamination was noted 
during the preflight.  The flight departed and approximately 45 minutes into the flight, he 
repositioned the fuel selector to the right tank.  The flight continued and approximately 15 
minutes later, he noticed a slight rpm drop.  He applied throttle input to compensate for the 
rpm decrease and switched to the UNICOM frequency.  He elected to perform a practice 
localizer approach to runway 31 and after crossing the localizer, he turned on the auxiliary fuel 
pump, applied carburetor heat, then reduced power.  At that time, the engine quit completely 
like a normal shutdown using the mixture control.  He repositioned the fuel selector to the left 
tank which was unsuccessful in restoring engine power.  He also turned off the auxiliary fuel 
pump, and turned it back on after engine power was not restored.  Additionally, he removed 
and reapplied carburetor heat which was also unsuccessful in restoring engine power.  
Thereafter the propeller stopped and he established best glide airspeed of 75-80 miles-per-
hour.  After clearing a railroad embankment he turned left to avoid approach lights, and 
recognizing that he was unable to land on the runway, he lowered full flaps, and slowed to just 
above stall speed.  The wheel pants of both main landing gears made contact with an elevated 
concrete sewer access, followed by ground contact approximately 20 feet later.  The airplane 
came to rest inverted; the pilot evacuated the airplane by cutting a portion of the canopy with a 
survival tool.
A witness reported hearing the engine running rough and observed black smoke trailing the 
airplane.  The same witness reported that the engine stopped, ran for 5 seconds, then quit 
again.  A second witness also heard the engine running rough, it then ran fine for a while, 
before it finally quit.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was equipped with a Lycoming O-320-E2D engine, and a fixed pitch propeller.  
The airplane was not equipped with a primer, nor was it equipped with a carburetor 
temperature probe and/or gauge.  The installed carburetor heat system consists of an 
approximate 5-inches long by two-inches diameter pipe listed in the Van's 2003 Accessory 
Catalog as "Carb Heat Muff" P/N "EA Carb Heat Muff", which is secured to the exhaust 
crossover pipe, a "Carb Heat Connector" P/N "Vent DL-07" which is attached forward of the air 
filter on the filtered air box, and a scat hose that connects the two.  A control in the cockpit 
activates an alternate air door located on the filtered air box forward of the Carb Heat Muff 
inlet.  With carburetor heat applied, air flows through the Carb Heat Muff into the filtered air 
box, through the air filter,  then into the venturi of the carburetor.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The temperature and dew point at 2,420 feet mean sea level for the Peachtree City Airport-
Falcon Field area taken approximately 2 hours after the accident were each recorded to be 7 
degrees Celsius, which equates to 44.6 degrees Fahrenheit.
Review of an icing probability chart revealed that at the above listed temperature and dew 
point, the conditions were favorable for serious icing at any power setting.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the airplane by the FAA inspector revealed damage to the vertical and left 
horizontal stabilizer, rudder, nose gear, and bottom portion of the firewall.  The fuel tank vent 
lines were checked and found to be clear of obstructions.  Fuel was found in both wings; fuel 
was leaking from the right wing.  Fuel samples taken from the right wing and the gascolator 
showed no contaminants.  The fuel boost pump operated postaccident.  The spark plugs and 
inside ends of both exhaust pipes were found sooted.  The carburetor heat system was found 
operable post accident.  The engine was started and operated only to idle power setting; 
vibration prevented operation at a higher power setting.  The carburetor was removed for 
further examination.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Bench testing of the carburetor at the manufacturer's facility with FAA oversight revealed the 
fuel flow rate at idle was .6 pounds-per-hour (pph) less than the specified amount, and at the 
four remaining test points, was flowing greater than the rich limit at all points.  At the last test 
point which equates to full throttle, the carburetor was flowing 18.5 pph above the rich service 
limit.  Disassembly of the carburetor revealed a curved sliver of material adhering to the 
exterior surface of the fuel inlet screen.  Additionally, the main metering nozzle was flow tested 
and found to be approximately 7 percent above the rich limit.
The pilot reported verbally that approximately 50 flight hours earlier, when he was taxiing to 
takeoff, the engine quit just like it did during the accident flight.  The carburetor and engine 
driven fuel pump were replaced.  The engine quit again in a similar fashion, and the auxiliary 
fuel pump and all fuel lines were replaced.  Additionally, the fuel selector valve was 
disassembled and rebuilt.
Review of the engine logbook revealed that on September 8, 2002, an overhauled carburetor 
and a new engine driven fuel pump were installed.  The engine had accumulated 54.5 hours 
since then at the time of the accident.
According to the General Manager of Van's Aircraft, Inc., "I checked with our engineering staff 
and we have never done any heat rise testing through any of the various [carburetor] heat 
systems that can be installed on an RV."  He additionally stated "We currently offer an 8" 
sealed heat exchanger that can be used to supply heated intake air to the [carburetor].  We also 
offer a shorter [carburetor] heat exchanger that  mounts on the crossover pipe directly above 
the alternate air door...It is about 5" in length."
Review of Section 11 of the builders manual titled, "Engine and Propeller Selection and 
Installation" revealed a subsection titled, "[Carburetor] and Cabin Heat Muffs."  Review of that 
subsection revealed that each builder will have to evaluate his/her own installation based on 
the likelihood of carburetor ice in his/her intended operating environment.
Flight testing was performed with a RV6A airplane equipped with the same type of carburetor 
heat system as the accident airplane (approximate 5-inches long by 2-inches diameter pipe 
attached to the exhaust crossover pipe), same model carburetor as the accident airplane but 
with an installed temperature probe, and same model engine with slightly higher horsepower 
as the accident airplane.  The testing revealed that at the flight test altitude of 5,500 feet with 
the engine operating at an estimated 75 percent power and carburetor heat applied, the 
temperature rose 1/2 degree Fahrenheit above the temperature with carburetor heat off.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane minus the retained carburetor was released to the airplane owner on November 
13, 2003.  The retained carburetor was released to the airplane owner on February 23, 2004.
