According to the pilot, 20 minutes into the flight the engine flammed out while the airplane 
was in a left bank. As the pilot maneuvered for an emergency landing, the airplane's left 
wingtip struck trees, and the airplane collided with the ground. According to the pilot, in his 
preflight planning he did not compute the fuel consumption or reference the pilot operating 
handbook for the intended trip. The pilot stated he did not refuel the airplane after the initial 
load bearing trip. The pilot stated that this accident could have been prevented if he refueled 
the airplane before the initial load. According to the pilot this  airplane is "notorious for poor 
fuel feeding when low on fuel".    
The pilot's inadequate in-flight planning/decision by his improper fuel management which 
resulted in fuel starvation.  Also causal was the pilot's inadequate preflight planning which 
resulted in his failure to perform fuel consumption calculations and refueling of the aircraft.
On January 3, 2003, at 1210 eastern standard time a Mielec PZL-M-18, N45051, registered to 
and operated by Airwork Enterprises of Florida, Inc., collided with trees following a loss of 
engine power at the Zipper Farms Airstrip in the vicinity of Immokalee, Florida. The 
agricultural flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137, and visual flight 
rules. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The pilot was not 
injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight originated from the 
Immokalee Airport in Immokalee, Florida, at 1145.
The agricultural flight was circular in nature and lasted approximately 20 minutes.The pilot 
attempted to return to Immokalee Airport when a loss of engine power occurred. According to 
the pilot, the engine flammed out while the airplane was in a left bank. As the pilot maneuvered 
for an emergency landing, the left wingtip struck trees, and the airplane collided with the 
ground. The airplane slid backward and, rotated 180 degrees. According to the pilot, in his 
preflight planning he did not compute the fuel consumption or reference the pilot operating 
handbook for the intended flight. The pilot stated he did not refuel the airplane after the initial 
load bearing trip. 
Initial examination of the accident site revealed the airplane came to rest upright on its gear 
and slightly tilted to the left. No fuel was recovered from the right wing tank, 41 gallons of fuel 
was recovered from the left fuel tank. The wings and fuselage displayed impact damage. 
Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assemblies and accessories rervealed no 
anomalies prior to impact. The pilot stated that this accident could have been prevented if he 
refueled the airplane before the initial load. According to the pilot this  airplane is "notorious 
for poor fuel feeding when low on fuel".    
