The airplane veered and rolled to the right after liftoff, and then went nose first into the 
ground.  As the airplane took off, witnesses on the airport heard an engine "pop", which 
sounded to them like a backfire.  The right wing dropped and then the airplane's nose went 
down and into the ground.  Controllers in the Air Traffic Control Tower observed the airplane 
liftoff and begin a turn to the right at midfield, though they thought that the altitude, which 
they estimated at 60 to 80 feet, was very low.  The airplane also appeared to be going slow as 
the airplane kept turning to the right and the nose pitched continuously up.  The controllers 
then saw the right wing drop followed by the nose as the airplane went straight down.  The 
landing gear was in the down and locked position, and the flaps were in the up position.  The 
rudder trim was in the neutral position.  Examination of the left engine and propeller found 
signatures consistent with engine rotation, and the left propeller was not feathered.  Internal 
evidence in the right propeller revealed that it was operating at a high blade angle consistent 
with operation at low speed.  The right engine spark plugs for cylinders 1, 2, and 4 were sooty 
and black, while the plugs in cylinder 3 were gray.  The starting primer system is plumbed to 
cylinders 1, 2, and 4; the cockpit control for the right engine primer system was unlocked and 
extended about 1/4-inch.  The pilot obtained his multiengine rating 3 weeks prior to the 
accident. and had a total of 20 hours in multiengine airplanes, which were all in this make and 
model.  The owner's manual noted that liftoff airspeed was 85 while the safe single engine 
speed was 100 miles per hour (mph) indicated airspeed (IAS), which is still below best single 
engine rate of climb airspeed.  The manual specified that at 100 mph or greater, the pilot could 
follow normal single engine procedures.  Below this airspeed, the pilot had to attain it either 
through altitude loss or by making a landing.  The manual instructed the pilot to land straight 
ahead and stop with loss of power in one engine below 90 mph at 100 feet, or below 100 mph 
at 50 feet.
a loss power in the right engine due to an excessively rich mixture that was the result of the 
pilot's failure to secure the priming control prior to takeoff.  Also causal was the pilot's failure 
to follow the single engine procedures specified in the operating manual for this aircraft, and, 
his failure to attain and maintain the correct airspeeds for single engine operation, and to 
maintain directional control.  A factor was the pilot's lack of total experience in multiengine 
aircraft.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2003, at 1212 mountain standard time, a Beech 95, N8212D, collided with 
terrain during departure from runway 6R at Ryan Airfield, Tucson, Arizona.  The private 
pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The pilot and 
two passengers sustained serious injuries and one passenger sustained fatal injuries.  The 
airplane was destroyed.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had 
been filed.  The primary wreckage was at 32 degrees 08.48 minutes north latitude and 111 
degrees 10.16 minutes west longitude.
The flight was the first of two local sightseeing flights for relatives of the pilot.  Family 
members who observed the accident provided statements to the Pima County Sheriff's 
Department.  The pilot had completed an uneventful 2-hour flight the previous day.  As they 
watched the airplane takeoff, one family member heard a pop, which sounded like a backfire.  
The right wing dipped; then the airplane's nose went down and into the ground.
The local controller (LC) and ground controller (GC) in the air traffic control tower (ATCT), 
which was down approximately 1/4 the length of the runway, observed the takeoff.  Other 
witnesses were also in the tower.
The LC said that the pilot of N8212D called in ready for departure.  He cleared the pilot for 
departure on runway 6 right with a right turn on departure.  Everything looked good until the 
airplane began to turn.  He thought that it didn't look right.  The airplane was low and at 
midfield.  It was a normal turn except that is was way low.  The airplane was past the windsock 
and about 60 to 80 feet above ground level (agl).  The airplane kept turning and had a 
continuous pitch up.  The right wing dipped and then looked like it went straight down.  He 
was now looking at the top of the cabin.  He then saw a big dust cloud.  He immediately started 
making notifications.  The airplane still looked fairly normal at the taxiway.
The GC reported that the LC asked what the pilot was doing as the airplane was between 
taxiways 3 and 4.  The airplane was veering off the runway and wasn't very high.  The airplane 
was rolling to the right.  It stayed in a rolled position and climbed a little more.  After crossing 
the taxiway, it appeared to go straight up, and then the nose went down.  It hit and the back 
end came back down.  It went from very nose high to very nose low.
Other witnesses in the ATCT stated that the airplane appeared to be going slow as it lifted off.  
It banked right, but continued straight.  It then turned hard right, pitched up, and then the 
nose pitched down.  After the airplane hit the ground, it bounced back and pivoted.
First responders reported that the pilot had opened his window and secured the master switch.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman records revealed that the pilot held 
a private pilot certificate with airplane single and multiengine land ratings.  The pilot held a 
third-class medical certificate issued on November 15, 2002.  It had the limitations that the 
pilot shall wear corrective lenses.
The pilot obtained his multiengine certificate on December 7, 2002.  The FAA indicated that 
the pilot had a total time of 630 hours.  He had 20 hours in multiengine airplanes, which were 
all dual instruction in make and model.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a Beech 95, serial number TD-8.  A repair station at Marana Air Park 
provided records, which indicated that they completed an annual inspection on May 24, 2002.  
On the airworthiness directive compliance record, they noted a total airframe time of 3,726.9 
hours, and a Hobbs hour meter reading of 501.7.  The Hobbs meter read 532.5 at the accident 
scene.
The airplane had a Textron Lycoming O-360-A1A engine, serial number L-120-36, installed on 
the left side.  Total time on the engine at the last annual inspection was 2,804.9 hours with 64 
hours since major overhaul.
The airplane had a Textron Lycoming O-360-A1A engine, serial number L-117-36, installed on 
the right side.  Total time on the engine at the last annual inspection was 2,634.1 hours with 
22.8 hours since major overhaul.
Fueling records at Tucson Airport Authority established that the airplane was last fueled on 
December 30, 2002, with the addition of 46 gallons of 100 LL octane aviation fuel.  The fuel 
tanks contained a placard, which indicated that the main tanks held 19 gallons each, and the 
auxiliary tanks held 31 gallons each.
The fuel selector valves were in the left and right main positions.  Recovery personnel drained 
19 gallons of fuel from the right main tank, and 5 ounces of fuel from the right auxiliary tank.  
They drained 5 gallons from the left main tank, and 6 ounces from the left auxiliary tank.  Fuel 
leaked from the left wing lines during recovery.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The closest official weather observation station was Tucson (TUS), Arizona, which was 12 
nautical miles east of the accident site.  The elevation of the weather observation station was 
2,643 feet mean sea level (msl).  A routine aviation weather report (METAR) for TUS was 
issued at 1155.  It stated: skies clear; visibility 10 miles; winds calm; temperature 54 degrees 
Fahrenheit; dew point 31 degrees Fahrenheit; altimeter 30.14 inches of mercury.
COMMUNICATIONS
The airplane was in contact with Ryan ATCT Center on frequency 125.8.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The Airport/ Facility Directory, Southwest U. S., indicated Tucson Ryan runway 6R was 5,500 
feet long and 75 feet wide; the runway surface was asphalt.  The field elevation was 2,417.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge (IIC) and investigators from 
the FAA and Beech examined the wreckage at the accident scene.  An investigator from Textron 
Lycoming joined them for examination of the wreckage in the owner's hangar.  An investigator 
from Hartzell Propellers examined the propellers at Air Transport, Phoenix, Arizona, on 
January 29, 2003, under the supervision of a Safety Board investigator.
The IIC estimated that the airplane came to rest about 200 feet beyond the 4,000-foot marker 
and southeast of Taxiway B.  The terrain surface surrounding the runways and taxiways was 
hard dirt with patches of grass.  The area between the runway and taxiway had a slight dip.
The first identified point of contact (FIPC) was a ground scar, which contained green lens 
fragments.  The debris field from the FIPC to the main wreckage was along a magnetic bearing 
of approximately 140 degrees.  The main wreckage pointed on a magnetic bearing of 050 
degrees, and was about 77 feet from the FIPC.
About 15 feet from the FIPC along the debris path was a slash mark with blue paint along its 
smooth edge.  About 5 feet further was the separated right propeller.  About 10 feet further into 
the debris field was the separated left propeller, which was buried to the back of the flange.  
The propellers' tips had blue stripes that were approximately 2-inches wide with adjacent white 
and then red stripes of similar dimensions.
The nose of the airplane crushed up and aft.
The engines separated from the airframe except for some hoses and cables.  The IIC supervised 
severance of the lines and placement of the inverted engines onto pallets.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Pima County Sheriff's Department reported that all of the victims had their seat belts 
fastened.  The pilot sustained facial lacerations.  The victim in the front right seat, who 
sustained fatal injuries, had the lap belt appropriately fastened; there was no shoulder harness.  
They observed severe head trauma during the autopsy that they attributed to contact with the 
instrument panel.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The landing gear was in the down and locked position.  The airframe representative 
determined that the flaps were in the up position.  The rudder trim actuator measured 
approximately 3 3/8 inches, which he said was the neutral position.  The left elevator trim 
actuator measured approximately 1.5 inches, and he said that this equated to approximately 8 
degrees tab down.
Investigators noted that the primer for the left engine was stowed and locked.  The right primer 
was out of the detent.  Investigators manually operated the primer and were able to move it to 
the stowed and locked position.
Rudder Pedals
The left rudder pedal fractured and separated along an angular plane with a grainy fracture 
surface.  A follow-up examination by a Safety Board investigator determined that the pedal's 
adjusting pin was out of its hole.  Beech engineers reported that by placing the pin in one of 
two holes, pilots could adjust the rudder pedal arm for their comfort.  They noted stops on each 
end of the pedal bracket that captured the rudder lever if the pin was not engaged.  Thus, even 
with the pin dislodged from the adjusting hole, the pilot would have full rudder and braking 
authority.  They opined that the fractured pedal arm allowed the adjusting pin to disengage 
from the adjusting hole.
LEFT PROPELLER
The engine crankshaft fractured circumferentially at the front of the case.  The fracture surface 
was about 45° to the longitudinal axis of the engine.  The spinner dome was crushed and 
several pieces separated.  The spinner bulkhead was dented and deformed.
One blade bent forward about 20° with a large radius at mid-blade.  There was rotational 
scoring on both sides of the leading edge along the entire length.  The other blade bent aft 
about 90° and twisted toward low pitch.  There was rotational scoring on the leading edge 
along the entire length.
The Hartzell representative noted that the left propeller's pistons and blades were in the 
feather position.  He noted that the piston exhibited severe frontal impact damage, which 
would drive the piston and pitch change mechanism toward feather.  The piston fractured into 
multiple pieces, which would release the piston's oil pressure.  This would allow the feathering 
spring to actuate the mechanism toward feather.
The Hartzell representative also noted that a blade counterweight in the feather position 
punctured the spinner dome, and the spinner material was crushed beneath the counterweight.  
He indicated that movement of this counterweight towards feather had to have occurred after 
the spinner dome crushed inward.  This indicated that the blade could not have been feathered 
prior to impact.
The representative did not detect any discrepancies that would have precluded normal 
operation.  He determined that the left propeller was spinning at the time of impact, and was 
not feathered.  He could not determine the amount of power that the engine was developing.
RIGHT PROPELLER
The Hartzell representative examined the right propeller.  The propeller mounting flange 
sustained mechanical damage, and the propeller separated.  One blade was not bent or twisted; 
it had lengthwise scoring in the paint on the cambered side.  The outer 3/4 of the second blade 
bent aft about 20°, and twisted slightly toward low pitch.  It had rotational scoring in the 
leading edge with scratches and missing paint on the cambered side.
The blades did not rotate in their clamps, and their feather stops did not have any impact 
marks.  The piston had a witness mark that was 1 18/32 inches from the aft end of the piston.  
The representative equated this to an approximate 21° blade angle.  He reported that this blade 
angle would be consistent with operation at high power and low speed.  Neither link arm was 
bent.  However, both link arms had light score marks caused by contact with a blade 
counterweight.  This occurred when the counterweights were at a low blade angle.
The representative did not detect any discrepancies that would have precluded normal 
operation.  He determined that the right propeller was spinning at the time of impact, and was 
not feathered.  He could not determine the amount of power that the engine was developing.
LEFT ENGINE
Investigators examined the left engine on a pallet.  They removed the bottom spark plugs.  The 
gaps were similar, and there was no mechanical damage on the electrodes.  The electrodes were 
oval and gray, which corresponded to normal operation according to the Champion Aviation 
Check-A-Plug AV-27 Chart.
Investigators manually rotated the crankshaft with a tool in the propeller governor drive pad.  
All valves moved in sequence and approximately the same amount of lift.  The accessory gears 
turned freely, and they obtained thumb compression on all cylinders in firing order.
A borescope inspection revealed no mechanical deformation on the valves, cylinder walls, or 
internal cylinder head.
Investigators manually rotated the magnetos, and both magnetos produced spark at all posts.  
The ignition harness sustained mechanical damage.
The left carburetor sustained mechanical damage.  The mounting flange remained attached to 
the engine, but the bowl separated into pieces.  There was no contamination in the inlet screen.  
The float assembly was secure in its mounting, and was not damaged.  The float bowl was not 
contaminated.
The fuel pump remained attached to its mounting pad.  Its operating arm moved, and it 
contained a blue fluid that smelled like aviation gasoline.  The diaphragm did not exhibit 
mechanical damage.
The oil suction screen was clean.  The oil filter separated and sustained mechanical damage.
RIGHT ENGINE
Investigators examined the right engine.  The engine had a fuel primer system to assist with 
engine starting, which had primer lines connected to cylinders 1, 2, and 4.  The cockpit 
mounted manual primer was in the unlocked position, and extended about 1/4 inch.
Investigators removed the bottom spark plugs.  The electrode for cylinder number 3 was gray, 
which corresponded to normal operation according to the Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug 
AV-27 Chart.  The electrodes for cylinders 1, 2, and 4 were sooty and black, which 
corresponded to rich operation according to the chart.
Investigators manually rotated the engine.  All valves moved in sequence and approximately 
the same amount of lift.  The accessory gears turned freely, and they obtained thumb 
compression on all cylinders in firing order.
A borescope inspection revealed no mechanical deformation on the valves, cylinder walls, or 
internal cylinder head.
Investigators manually rotated the magnetos, and both magnetos produced spark at all posts.  
The ignition harness sustained mechanical damage.
The carburetor remained attached to the engine.  The throttle and mixture control rods 
remained attached to their respective control arms.  However, the mixture control arm 
fractured and separated along an angular plane with an irregular fracture surface.  Blue fluid 
that smelled like aviation gasoline was in the carburetor, fuel pump, and their attached fuel 
lines.  The carburetor discharged a steady stream of fluid at the accelerator discharge tube 
upon activation of the throttle lever.
The fuel pump did not exhibit any mechanical damage.  It remained attached to the engine at 
its mounting pad.
The oil suction screen was clean.  The oil filter remained attached.
PRECISION AIRMOTIVE
Precision Airmotive examined the carburetor under the supervision of a Safety Board 
investigator.
Technicians observed that the mixture lever was stuck beyond the idle cutoff stop, and the 
attachment end of the lever fractured and separated.  One air box mounting hole and part of a 
flange had broken off and were missing.  They used clay to seal the broken flange when they 
attached it to the flow bench.  All readings were within established limits.
Owner's Manual
The owner's manual provided information on the airplane, its systems, and procedures.
One section described a normal takeoff.  It indicated that the pilot should apply a gentle but 
steady back pressure when the airplane reached approximately 70 miles per hour (mph).  At 
the approximate liftoff speed of 85 mph, it noted that normal back pressure should cause the 
airplane to fly off the ground.  It pointed out that at 6,000 feet elevation, the ground speed 
would be higher, and the amount of runway required to attain liftoff airspeed would almost 
double.
The emergency procedures section discussed single engine operation.  It noted that 84 mph 
was the minimum indicated airspeed (IAS) at which the pilot could maintain directional 
control in the takeoff configuration, with one engine inoperative, and full takeoff power on the 
operating engine.  It pointed out that this was the minimum speed for control, and was below 
the speed at which the airplane would climb.
The emergency procedures section indicated that the best single engine rate of climb speed at 
sea level was 100 mph IAS (the blue line on the airspeed indicator).  It also noted that the safe 
single engine speed, also 100 mph IAS, was probably the most important airspeed during 
emergencies.  With this airspeed, the pilot could follow normal single engine procedures.  
Below this airspeed, it stated that the pilot must attain it through altitude loss or by making a 
landing.
The owner's manual contained a pictorial chart (attached in the public docket) with 
recommended airspeeds for average piloting techniques.  The chart instructed the pilot to 
decelerate and stop with loss of power below 90 mph at 100 feet or below 100 mph at 50 feet.  
It then depicted the gear retracting and propeller feathering period with the airplane 
maintaining 50 feet and 95 mph followed by climb out.
The manual further discussed engine failure during takeoff.  It noted that a major factor in a 
takeoff emergency was the airspeed at the time the pilot decided to abort the takeoff.  It 
pointed out variable factors such as remaining runway, obstructions in the takeoff path, and 
the type of takeoff.  It stated that if an engine lost power at an IAS less than safe single engine 
speed (100 mph) with the gear extended, the pilot should cut the power, get the wheels on the 
runway, and apply brakes.  If the pilot could not stop the airplane within the field boundaries, 
and ground looping was not feasible, the pilot should prepare to stop straight ahead, turning 
no more than necessary to avoid obstacles.  If the loss of power occurred after attaining safe 
single engine airspeed, the pilot should retract the gear immediately and follow normal single 
engine procedures.  If it occurred after becoming airborne, but before attaining safe single 
engine speed, it said to reduce power and land straight ahead.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The IIC released the wreckage to the owner's representative.
