The personal flight originated as a flight of two airplanes.  The father of the passenger flying in 
the trail position was flying the lead airplane on a local formation flight.  The pilot of a Cessna 
120 departed first and kept looking back to observe the position of the trailing aircraft.   During 
the climb out, the pilot of the lead airplane observed an airplane below and behind him 
entering a spin to the right.  The lead pilot failed to recognize the spinning airplane as his 
trailing aircraft.  After being unable to contact the trail airplane, the pilot contacted the tower 
and reported that the airplane may have gone down.  The wreckage of the airplane was found 
in an open meadow  within 4 miles of the departure end of the runway.  Signatures of the 
damage sustained by the airplane were consistent with a flat spin to the right.  The non-
instrument rated private pilot had accumulated a total of 125 hours of flight, with 
approximately 50 hours in the accident airplane.  The local fire department was alerted as to 
the possibility of an aircraft accident at 1359; however the aircraft was not located from the air 
until 1427, approximately 41 minutes after the accident.  The airplane ELT was found in the off 
position with an expired battery.  Flight control continuity was established to all flight control 
surfaces.  The engine was satisfactorily ran for over 12 minutes following the recovery of the 
airplane.   No anomalies were found with the engine or airplane that would have prevented 
normal operation.  No evidence of an in-flight fire was found either on the airframe on the 
pilot.  There was no evidence of an in-flight fire was found.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed resulting in a stall.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 2003, at 1346 central standard time, a Grumman American AA-1A single-engine 
airplane, N9226L, was destroyed upon impact with terrain following a lost of control during 
initial takeoff climb near Shreveport, Louisiana.  The non-instrument rated private pilot and 
his passenger were fatally injured.  The airplane was owned and operated by the pilot.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed throughout the area for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 personal flight.  No flight plan was filed for the local flight that originated as a flight of 
two airplanes, from the Shreveport Downtown Airport (DTN) at 1342.
According to the air traffic control tower personnel at the DTN airport, the airplane was cleared 
for takeoff at 1342, as a flight of two airplanes, in which N2481N, a Cessna 120 airplane, was 
the lead aircraft, and N9226L, was the trail airplane.  The pilot of the lead airplane maintained 
radio contact with the trail airplane, and he observed the trail airplane during his takeoff roll.  
Shortly after takeoff, the pilot of the trail airplane reported the he was in trail about a mile 
behind the lead airplane.  About 10 to 15 seconds later, the pilot of the lead airplane reported 
that he looked back to determined the location of the trail airplane.  He observed an airplane, 
which he did not immediately recognize, entering a spin to the right; however, he did not 
observe the airplane impact the terrain.  
A few seconds later, the lead pilot reported to the DTN tower that "N9226L may have gone 
down."  Two additional airplanes circled the area looking for the missing airplane.  The 
wreckage of N9226L was located at 1427.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot received his private pilot certificate with an airplane single engine land rating on 
August 19, 1977.  According to the pilot's logbook, he accumulated a total of 50.5 flight hours 
prior to discontinuing his flying, and on March 5, 2000, the pilot started flying again in a 
Cessna 152.  On April 19, 2001, the pilot purchased N9226L.  According to his logbook, the 
pilot had accumulated a total of 125.1flight hours as of his last entry on the logbook on 
November 30, 2002.  The pilot was estimated to have accumulated a total of 49.6 hours in the 
accident airplane.  The pilot completed his most recent biennial flight review (BFR) on August 
4, 2002, in the accident aircraft.  The pilot's most current FAA medical examination was 
completed on April 9, 2002.  He was issued an FAA Third Class medical certificate, with a 
restriction to wearing corrected lenses for near and intermediate vision.   
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The 1971-model airplane, serial number AA1A-0126, was manufactured by Grumman 
American Aircraft.  The normal category airplane was registered to the owner on June 7, 2001.  
The most recent annual inspection was completed on July 22, 2002, at 823.2 aircraft hours 
(tachometer time), approximately 16.22 hours prior to the accident.       
The airplane was powered with a 4-cylinder Lycoming O-235-C2C engine, serial number L-
10526-15, rated at 115 horsepower.  The engine was driving a fixed pitch, all metal, 2-bladed 
McCauley propeller, model number SCM 71575, serial number G16035.   A review of the 
maintenance records revealed, the engine accumulated a total of 2,894.72 hours, with 159.32 
hours since its last engine overhaul.  
According to data provided by several sources, the airplane had been previously involved in a 
mishap on July 20, 2001.  The previous mishap was reported to be the result of fuel starvation 
due to a defective or improperly installed fuel selector valve, which resulted in a forced landing 
near Monroe, Louisiana  No records of the reported accident were available in the NTSB or 
FAA accident database.  As result of the mishap, the airplane was reported to been out of 
service until May 2002.  All necessary repairs were performed at a repair station at the DTN 
airport.  
COMMUNICATIONS
The pilot of the Cessna 120 aircraft reported that he had been communicating with the accident 
airplane on 123.45.  No distress calls were received from the pilot of the accident airplane on 
either 123.45 or on the tower frequency.  
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The Global Positioning System (GPS) location of the accident site, provided by a member of the 
Sheriff Department, was recorded at 32 degrees 35 minutes and 35 seconds north latitude and 
93 degrees, 45 minutes, 56 seconds west longitude.  
The airplane impacted the ground in a 100-foot wide pasture, which was oriented on a 
measured heading of 340 and 160 degrees magnetic heading.  The ground was soft with several 
saturated sections.  The nose and main landing gear tires made ground impressions varying in 
depth from 8 to 12 inches deep.  The aircraft impacted the ground and came to rest on a 
measured heading of 280 degrees, approximately 4 nautical miles from the departure end of 
the runway at DTN.  
The engine remained partially attached to the airframe.  The two top engine mounts separated 
from the airframe at the airframe mounting point as the attaching hardware pulled out of the 
honeycomb.  The engine was found canted forward about 30 degrees nose low.  No evidence of 
a catastrophic engine failure was noted.  The barrel of the #3 cylinder showed evidence of 
exposure to high heat (paint peeling and bluing).  Engine control continuity was established to 
the throttle, mixture control and carburetor heat.   The mixture control was found in the full 
rich position, the throttle was found in the closed position, and the carburetor heat was found 
in the cold/off position.
Five quarts of oil were present in the engine crankcase.  The oil had an olive-green color and 
appeared to be clean.  The propeller was rotated by hand and continuity to the engine 
accessory section was confirmed.  The oil filter canister was removed from the aircraft and 
opened for inspection during the engine examination.  No metal chips or any other 
contaminants were found within the paper elements of the oil filter.  
The propeller remained attached to the engine.  The bottom half of the chromed spinner dome 
was found crushed inwards and did not show any evidence or signatures of rotational damage.  
No leading edge damage was found on either propeller blade.  One propeller blade was found 
slightly bend aft about 5 to 10 degrees.  The other blade was undamaged.  
Approximately 2.5 ounces of straw colored fuel were drained from the carburetor bowl during 
the engine examination.
The muffler and some of the exhaust pipes were crushed; however, the carburetor remained 
attached to the engine, and appeared to be undamaged.
The windshield assembly was not compromised and was found separated from the aircraft.  
The sliding canopy, reported to have been removed by the first responders, was found in the 
closed and locked position at the time of the accident.  The fuselage was buckled in several 
areas.  The underside of the airplane was crushed upwards.   
Both wings remained attached to the airframe.  There was no leading edge damage to either or 
the wings or the horizontal stabilizers. The wings were buckled and pushed upward. The flaps 
were found extended to the 2/3 (two third) position.  The elevator trim indicator in the cockpit 
was found in the neutral position; however, the elevator trim was found in the full up (nose 
down) position.
All flight control surfaces, with the exception of the rudder and vertical stabilizer, remained 
attached to their respective surfaces.  Flight control continuity was established to the elevators, 
rudder, and ailerons.  The vertical stabilizer and the rudder were found partially separated to 
the airframe, and rotated towards the left side of the airframe.
The nose landing gear was folded in the aft direction.  The nose gear tire was destroyed by a 
minor post-impact fire.  The main landing gears were pushed up into the skin for the lower 
portion of both wings. Also, the gears were spread and the laminations of the fiberglass main 
landing gear legs were spread.  The tubular nose landing gear assembly was buckled.
The fuel selector was found in the off position; however, one of the first responders to the 
accident later reported that the fuel selector had been found in the left position and was moved 
to the off position by one of the first responders.  The aircraft's 12-gallons tubular fuel cells 
were intact and not compromised.  Both fuel tanks were found near the full position.  Fuel was 
drained from both tanks during recovery.  The fuel drained from the airplane appeared to be 
straw colored, and had the odor consistent with automotive gasoline.  No evidence of water 
contamination was found in the gasoline.
The antennas on the bottom of the airplane were crushed and found lying on their left side
Neither of the two occupants of the airplane made contact with the instrument panel during 
the impact sequence, thus the instruments and gauges were mostly undamaged.  The airspeed 
indicator was reading zero.  The altimeter was reading minus 90 feet.  The altimeter setting 
was found reading 30.14 inches.  The directional gyro was reading 216 degrees.  The attitude 
indicator was level in a slight right turn.  The magnetic compass was reading 277 degrees.  The 
OBS on NAV 1 was set on 046 degrees.  The clock was stopped at 2:37.  The Hobbs meter was 
reading 2,606.7 hours.  The engine tachometer was reading 0839.32 hours.  The fuel primer 
was found in the locked position.  The cabin heater was found in the off position. 
FIRE
The top of the battery case was found separated from the fiberglass battery case.  The inner 
side of the battery case top had evidence of a post-impact fire.  The top of the battery did not 
show any evidence of fire damage.  Two of the screw-on filler caps on the battery were missing.    
The inside of the engine cowling showed evidence of fire and smoke damage to the area above 
the engine driven fuel pump.  The electric fuel pump was wet from an apparent leak.  The fuel 
system was tested for leaks on the airplane using the aircraft electrical system.  Fuel was 
observed leaking from the engine driven fuel pump when the system was pressurized.
The inside of the side Plexiglas windows in the airplane bore the smell of smoke; however, no 
evidence of an in-flight fire was found in the engine compartment or cabin.  The airplane was 
not equipped with a hand-held fire extinguisher.  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1353 METAR weather report from the DTN airport reported winds from 310 degrees at 13 
knots, gusting to 22 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, with few clouds at 4,100 feet, temperature 
9 degrees Centigrade, dew point of minus 1 degree Centigrade, and an altimeter setting of 
30.01 inches of Mercury.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFROMATION
An autopsy and toxicological tests were requested and performed on the pilot.  Forensic 
Pathologists, Inc., of Bossier City, Louisiana, performed the autopsy on January 3, 2003, as 
requested by the Caddo Parish Coroner's Office.  The FAA's Civil Aero medial Institute (CAMI) 
in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma performed toxicological tests.  Toxicological tests were negative 
for alcohol or drugs.  
SURVIVAL FACTORS
The airplane was found to be equipped with a NARCO model ELT-10 electronic locator 
transmitter (ELT).  The ELT, which was installed in the tail cone of the aircraft, was found to 
be in the "off" position.  The ELT battery was found to have expired on June 2002 (the last 
annual inspection was completed on July 21, 2002).   The ELT did not operate and thus did not 
aid in locating the wreckage of the airplane.  
The fire department was alerted as to the possibility of an aircraft accident at 1359; however, 
the aircraft was located from the air until 1427, approximately 41 minutes after the accident.
The airplane was equipped with shoulder harnesses and seat belts for both occupant of the 
airplane.  The seat belts and shoulder harnesses had a "like-new" appearance to them and it 
was assumed that they had been installed at the time the interior was refurbished.  None of the 
seat belts or shoulder harness was found stretched or damaged on any way.
According to the first responders, the passenger was found in the cargo compartment located 
aft of the two side-by-side seats.   
Examination and evaluation of the signatures of the damage sustained by seat tracks, the 
bottom of both seat cushions, and both seat backs, were consistent with both occupants of the 
airplane occupying their respective seats at the time of the accident.  
TEST AND RESEARCH
An engine examination and complete wreckage layout examination was conducted at ASOD on 
January 7, 2003.  The engine was successfully ran for 12 minutes.  In order to facilitate the 
engine run, the carburetor float assembly and the electrical harnesses for both magnetos were 
replaced.  Both items had been fire damaged. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was recovered by ASOD prior to 1730 on January 3, 2003, and transported to 
Lancaster, Texas.  The wreckage was released to the owner's representative following the layout 
examination and engine run.
