The un-registered gyrocopter was destroyed when it impacted terrain.  The un-certified pilot 
received fatal injuries as a result of the crash.  A witness to the accident stated that the 
gyrocopter made a westerly turn at an altitude of about 50 feet above ground level and passed 
in front of him at an altitude of 100 feet above ground level.  The witness said within seconds 
he observed the gyrocopter in an abrupt climb followed by a quick descent, followed by an even 
faster climb.  The witness said the gyrocopter then tumbled to the ground.  The witness 
described the incident as a classic phugoid oscillation or "pilot induced oscillation."  The 
Rotorcraft Flying Handbook refers to this as "an unintentional up-and-down oscillation of the 
gyroplane accompanied with alternating climbs and descents of the aircraft."  The weather was 
reported as: Wind 020 degrees at 16 knots and gusts at 21 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky 
condition overcast at 2,100.
The inadvertent pilot induced oscillation.  Factor to the accident was the wind gusts.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2003, at 1430 central standard time, an un-registered, amateur-built, Air 
Command gyrocopter was destroyed after a loss of control while maneuvering in the traffic 
pattern at the Lansing Municipal Airport, Lansing (IGQ), Illinois.  The gyrocopter was reported 
to have taken off to the north from a north/south taxiway.  The un-certified pilot was fatally 
injured.  The flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a 
flight plan.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The local 
flight had just originated when the accident occurred.
According to a written statement by a witness who had 28 years experience building and flying 
gyroplanes, he observed the gyrocopter takeoff from what appeared to him as the new 
north/south taxiway. He stated the gyrocopter appeared to heading north and climbing.  The 
witness reported that before reaching the east/west runway the gyrocopter made a turn to a 
westerly heading. He estimated the altitude at 50 feet. The witness stated that as the 
gyrocopter passed in front of him it climbed to approximately 100 feet.  The witness stated that 
within seconds he observed the gyrocopter transition into an abrupt climb, which quickly 
turned into a nose down attitude. The witness reported that the gyrocopter made a quick 
descent followed by an even faster climb. The gyrocopter then nosed over and tumbled to the 
ground.  The witness stated "In my observation this scenario appeared to be a classic phugoid 
oscillation of increasing amplitude referred to as "pilot induced oscillation" or PIO."  
The FAA-H-8083-21 Rotorcraft Flying Handbook refers to PIO as "an unintentional up-and-
down oscillation of the gyroplane accompanied with alternating climbs and descents of the 
aircraft. PIO is often the result of an inexperienced pilot overcontrolling the gyroplane, but this 
condition can also be induced by gusty wind conditions. While this condition is usually thought 
of as a longitudinal problem, it can also happen laterally."
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The final forensic toxicology fatal accident report from the Federal Aviation Administration 
showed no cyanide; no ethanol: and 60.77 (ug/ml, ug/g) Salicylate detected in blood.  
Salicylate is commonly known as aspirin.
An autopsy was performed by the Cook County Medical Examiner's Office, Cook County, 
Illinois.
WEATHER INFORMATION
At 1425 the weather at IGQ was reported as: Wind 020 degrees at 16 knots and gusts at 21 
knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition overcast at 2,100.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to the Commander Elite website, the gyrocopters' empty weight is listed as 300 
pounds.  FAR part 103.1 states that for a vehicle to be considered an ultra light it must weigh 
less than 254 pounds empty weight, excluding floats and safety devices.
