The pilot of a tailwheel-equipped homebuilt airplane lost control of the aircraft during the 
takeoff roll from the 4,200-foot long by 75-foot wide asphalt Runway 32.  The 647-hour 
instrument-rated private pilot stated that he applied full power slowly, holding back pressure 
on the controls until the airplane became airborne.  During the transition from back pressure 
to forward pressure a gust of wind came from the west.  The pilot was unable to compensate for 
the wind in a timely fashion to maintain directional control of the airplane.  The airplane 
became airborne after cresting the top of a berm on the east side of the runway, and landed 
hard on the far side of the berm, spraying the landing gear.  The nearest weather reporting 
station, which is located 34-nautical miles north of the accident site, reported winds from 290 
degrees at 17 knots,  gusting to 24 knots.  The peak winds were reported from 270 degrees at 27 
knots.   
The pilot's loss of directional control as result of his failure to compensate for the prevailing 
wind conditions.   A contributing factor was the gusty crosswinds.
On January 1, 2003, at 1555 central standard time, a Wood Thorp T-18 tailwheel-equipped 
homebuilt airplane, N335BW, was substantially damaged upon collision with terrain following 
a loss of control while attempting to takeoff from the Clark Field Municipal Airport (SEP), near 
Stephenville, Texas.  The instrument-rated private pilot sustained serious injuries and his 
pilot-rated passenger received minor injuries.  The airplane was owned and operated by the 
pilot, who was also the builder of the airplane.   Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for 
the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight for which a flight plan was not filed.  
The 220-nautical mile cross-country flight was originating at the time of the accident, and was 
destined for the Baytown Airport (HPY) near Baytown, Texas.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the 647-hour pilot, 292 
hours of which were in the accident airplane, reported that he applied full power slowly, 
holding back pressure on the controls until the airplane became airborne.  During the 
transition from back pressure to forward pressure a gust of wind came from the west.  The pilot 
was unable to compensate for the left crosswind in a timely manner to maintain directional 
control of the airplane.  The airplane became airborne after cresting the top of a berm on the 
east side of the runway, and landed hard on the far side of the berm, spreading the landing 
gear.  The landing gear pointed toward each wing tip, but the airplane was still progressing 
forward, dragging the landing gear.  The landing gear "hung up" on with the ground and the 
airplane came to a sudden stop, nosed over, and came to rest in the inverted position.  
The pilot's sister witnessed the accident, summoned for help, and was the first responder to the 
accident site.  Local fire department and EMS personnel arrived at the  accident site.  Airbags 
were used to lift the airplane and the canopy was removed to facilitate the extraction of the two 
injured occupants.   
According to witnesses at the airport, the pilot lost directional control of the airplane during 
the initial takeoff roll from Runway 32.  Runway 32 was reported to be a 4,200 feet long by 75 
feet wide asphalt runway.
An FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, reported that the canopy was crushed, 
the propeller was damaged, and both wings sustained structural damage.  No anomalies were 
noted with the airframe or the 160-horsepower Lycoming IO-320-B1A engine.  
The nearest weather reporting station is located at the Mineral Wells Airport (MWS), which is 
located 34-nautical miles north of SEP.  At 1453 the weather station at MWS reported winds 
from 290 degrees at 17 knots, gusting to 24 knots.  The peak winds were reported from 270 
degrees at 27 knots.  
