National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Centralia, IL
Accident Number: CEN16LA096
Date & Time: 02/01/2016, 1435 CST
Registration: N41852
Aircraft: RAYMOND Z BROWN CONDOR
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis A witness observed the sport pilot departing in his experimental, amateur-built gyroplane when, about 300 ft above ground level, the gyroplane turned right and the rotor blades began to slow.
The gyroplane then made a sharp left turn, descended, and abruptly pitched up before impacting a field.
A postaccident examination of the gyroplane found that the belt driving the prerotator had broken and had become entangled in the engine timing belt, which would have resulted in a loss of engine power.
No other anomalies were detected with the airframe and engine.
An autopsy did not reveal any medical concerns with the pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the prerotator belt, which impeded the engine's timing belt and resulted in a loss of engine power at low altitude.
The sport pilot was fatally injured and the gyroplane was substantially damaged.
The gyroplane was registered to and operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight plan.
The local flight originated from the Centralia Municipal Airport (KENL), Centralia, Illinois at an unknown time.
According to information obtained by the responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors, an instructor pilot rated eyewitness watched the gyroplane as it departed runway 36.
Upon reaching 300 ft above ground level, the gyroplane began a right turn.
During the climb, the gyroplane rotor blades began to slow down.
Another witness reported that the engine lost power.
The gyroplane made a "tight" left turn towards the airport.
It then rolled wings level and began descending in a flat attitude.
Prior to impact, the gyroplane pitched up abruptly and impact the ground.
The accident occurred about 1 mile from the airport.
His log book was not located during the course of the investigation, and his flight experience could not be determined.
He used a valid driver's license to exercise sport pilot privileges rather than possessing an FAA medical certificate.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information Aircraft Make: RAYMOND Z BROWN Registration: N41852 Model/Series: CONDOR NO SERIES Aircraft Category: Gyroplane Year of Manufacture: 2012 Amateur Built: Yes Airworthiness Certificate: Experimental Serial Number: 41852 Landing Gear Type: Tricycle Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: Unknown Certified Max Gross Wt.
It was powered by a Subaru EJ22 engine driving a four-bladed composite Warp Drive propeller and equipped with Dragon Wings rotor blades.
It was issued a Special Airworthiness Certificate as an experimental amateur build on December 22, 2012.
The builder listed the gyroplane as a Condor and it followed the design of a Rotor Flight Dynamics Twin Dominator.
The gyroplane restraint system consisted of a single lap belt.
All major components were located at the accident site.
There was an impact crater located next to where the wreckage had come to rest.
The fuselage was slightly twisted and the main rotor blades were bent, but remained attached to the rotor mast.
Medical And Pathological Information As of the writing of this report, an autopsy did not reveal any medical concerns with the pilot.
The manner of death resides with the Marion County Coroner and is still undetermined.
The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute performed forensic toxicology on specimens from the pilot.
Results were negative for carbon monoxide, ethanol, and drugs.
Survival Aspects The pilot was wearing a helmet similar to a Comtronics Aircraft Helmet.
However, its make and model could not be verified.
Tests And Research The gyroplane was recovered to a hanger and examined by the FAA inspector.
They found that the belt driving the prerotator had broken and had become entangled in the timing belt.
No other anomalies were detected with the airframe and engine.
The gyroplane's prerotator had a freewheeling mechanism which would allow for free rotation of the rotor system.
In addition, the prerotator would not have been engage during the accident.
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Jason T Aguilera Adopted Date: 03/23/2017 Additional Participating Persons: Stanley Swank; FAA FSDO; Springfield, IL Publish Date: 03/23/2017 Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92677
