Page 1 of 13
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Deland, FL
Accident Number:
ERA12FA265
Date & Time:
04/02/2012, 1920 EDT 
Registration:
N514KT
Aircraft:
SAPP LARRY E SEAWIND 3000
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
3 Serious, 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot/owner flew the experimental amateur-built amphibious airplane with a pilot-rated passenger on 
a long cross-country flight to a land-based airport, the day prior to the accident. The purpose of the trip 
was to begin training for a seaplane rating, which was to be conducted in another airplane type, at a 
nearby lake. While en route, the airplane™s transponder malfunctioned, and the purpose of the accident 
flight was to fly to another airport to have the transponder replaced at a maintenance facility. The 
airplane departed from a 4,301-foot-long, asphalt runway. The airplane experienced a total loss of 
engine power shortly after takeoff, stalled, and descended into the rooftop of a supermarket located 
about 1 mile from the departure end of the runway, where it was consumed by a postcrash fire. 
 
The pilot-rated passenger reported that there were no problems with the airplane™s takeoff roll and initial 
climb. As the pilot turned crosswind, the engine suddenly quit. He was also not able to recall the point at 
which the airplane lifted off the runway, the altitude the engine lost power, or any instrument 
indications. His next recollection was rolling on the floor of the supermarket. A pilot at the departure 
airport reported that the accident airplane rotated about 500 feet prior to the end of the runway, and 
began a shallow climb, while mostly maintaining a high pitch angle. Shortly thereafter, he observed the 
airplane stall and enter a descending left spin, before it disappeared behind a tree line. 
 
Postaccident examination of wreckage did not reveal any catastrophic preimpact malfunctions; however, 
the condition of the wreckage precluded the ability to functionally check the engine, its associated 
components and fuel system. In addition, it could not be determined if debris found in the airplane™s fuel 
system was present prior to the postcrash fire. While the logbooks for the engine were not located, the 
investigation noted that the engine was installed on an airplane that was involved in a fatal accident 
about 19 years prior to the accident. The engine was overhauled about 10 years 6 months prior to the 
accident and at the time of the accident, appeared to have been rebuilt with parts from several engines. 
The pilot recently purchased the airplane, which had undergone a period of not being flown for about 3 
years prior to the purchase.
Page 2 of 13ERA12FA265
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined due to the postaccident condition of the 
airframe and engine, which resulted in an inadvertent stall and subsequent collision with a building. 
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 13ERA12FA265
Factual Information
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
 
On April 2, 2012, about 1920 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built amphibious 
Seawind 3000, N514KT, owned and operated by a private individual, was substantially 
damaged when it impacted a building shortly after takeoff from the Deland Municipal Airport 
(DED), Deland, Florida. The private pilot owner and a commercial pilot passenger were 
seriously injured (The private pilot owner succumbed to his injuries on May 26, 2012). One 
person inside the building was seriously injured, and two other individuals inside the building 
sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had 
been filed for the flight that was destined for the Daytona Beach International Airport (DAB), 
Daytona Beach, Florida. The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
 
According to witnesses and information obtained from the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA), the pilot/owner and pilot-rated passenger flew from the Aurora Municipal Airport 
(ARR), Aurora, Illinois, to DED on April 1, 2012, with a refueling stop in Tennessee, to begin 
training for a seaplane rating on the morning of the accident. The training was to be conducted 
on a lake in Altamonte Springs, Florida, utilizing a float equipped Maule M-7-235. The owner 
originally intended to land in Sanford, Florida; however, he elected to land at DED after the 
airplane's transponder malfunctioned while en route. The purpose of the accident flight was to 
fly to DAB to have the transponder replaced at a maintenance facility. 
 
During a telephone conversation with an employee at the maintenance facility, the pilot/owner 
Page 4 of 13ERA12FA265
reported that he was new to the airplane, which he had purchased about 6 weeks earlier, after 
it had not been flown for about 3 years. 
 
The airplane departed from runway 23, a 4,301-foot-long, asphalt runway.
 
The passenger reported that there were no problems with the airplane™s takeoff roll and initial 
climb. As the pilot turned crosswind, the engine suddenly quit. His next recollection was 
rolling on the floor of a supermarket. The passenger did not hear any engine sputtering or 
observe any other anomalies during the flight. He was also not able to recall the point at which 
the airplane lifted off the runway, the altitude the engine lost power, or any instrument 
indications.
   
A pilot at DED reported that he landed on runway 23, and while taxiing, observed the accident 
airplane depart. The airplane rotated about 500 feet prior to the end of the runway, and began 
a shallow climb, while mostly maintaining a high pitch angle. Shortly thereafter, he observed 
the airplane "stall" and enter a descending left spin, before it disappeared behind a tree line. 
He did not hear any communications from the accident airplane over the airport common 
traffic advisory frequency after the takeoff.
A witness, who was in a car that was parked outside the front entrance of the supermarket, 
reported that she heard one or two "sputtering" engine sounds. She then looked up and 
observed the airplane in a climb attitude, very low in the sky. The airplane turned left and 
immediately descended straight down, nose first into the roof of the supermarket. 
Page 5 of 13ERA12FA265
 
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
60
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/09/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 20 hours (Total, this make and model), 7 hours (Last 
24 hours, all aircraft)
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
52
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/03/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 4000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 10 hours (Total, this make and model)
 
The pilot/owner, age 60, held a private pilot certificate, with ratings for airplane single-engine 
land, airplane multiengine land and instrument airplane. His most recent FAA third-class 
medical certificate was issued on September 9, 2010. At that time, he reported a total flight 
Page 6 of 13ERA12FA265
experience of 450 hours. The pilot reported 495 hours of total flight experience, which included 
15 hours during the previous 12 months, on an insurance application dated September 22, 
2009.  
 
The pilot/owner™s logbooks were not located and his total flight experience and his flight 
experience in make and model could not be determined.  
 
The passenger, age 52, held a commercial pilot certificate, with ratings for airplane single-
engine land, airplane multiengine land and instrument airplane. He also held a flight instructor 
certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine, multiengine and instrument airplane. His 
most recent FAA second-class medical certificate, prior to the accident, was issued on January 
3, 2012. At that time, he reported 4,000 hours of total flight experience.
 
The passenger had known the pilot since 1994. He was not aware of the pilot™s intention to 
purchase the accident airplane. He was aware that the pilot was previously interested in 
purchasing the certified version of the Seawind upon its release. The passenger had flown with 
the pilot in the accident airplane for about 1 hour, about 1 week prior to the accident. He 
believed the pilot had received some initial training in the airplane from the individual who 
brokered the sale; however, he was not able to estimate the pilot™s flight experience in make 
and model.  
 
Page 7 of 13ERA12FA265
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
SAPP LARRY E
Registration:
N514KT
Model/Series:
SEAWIND 3000 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2002
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
60
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/03/2011, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-K1G5D
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
 
The amphibian, four-seat, high-wing, retractable-gear, composite airplane, serial number 60, 
was manufactured from a kit in 2002. It was powered by a tail-mounted Lycoming IO-540-
K1G5D, serial number L-18822-48A, 300-horsepower engine, equipped with a three-bladed 
Hartzell HC-E3YR-1RF constant-speed propeller assembly.
 
According to records obtained from the FAA, the airplane was issued an experimental 
airworthiness certificate in July 2002, and was purchased by the private pilot on January 7, 
2012.
 
The airframe and engine logbooks were not located.
Page 8 of 13ERA12FA265
 
According to Lycoming, the engine was manufactured in 1978 and subsequently shipped to 
Piper Aircraft Company.
 
A search of the NTSB accident database revealed that the same serial number engine that was 
installed on the accident airplane was previously installed on a Piper PA32RT-300, N2221G 
that was involved in a fatal accident on March 7, 1993, after it experienced a partial loss of 
engine power during takeoff, in Big Bear City, California (NTSB Accident Number - 
LAX93FA141). At that time, the engine had been operated for about 3,800 total hours and 
about 1,030 hours since it was overhauled during February 1985.  
 
An engine repair invoice from a repair station in Zephyrhills, Florida, revealed that the engine 
was overhauled during October 2001.
 
The airplane listing information provided by the pilot™s representative indicated that the 
airplane had been operated for 400 hours, which included the engine being operated for 400 
total hours since overhaul. The listing also noted that the airplane was equipped with long 
range fuel tanks (110 gallons), had undergone a condition inspection on May 3, 2011, and the 
sale price included 10 hours of dual instruction. The broker was fatally injured in a Seawind 
3000 accident that occurred in Sarasota, Florida, on January 12, 2013 (NTSB Accident Number 
Œ ERA13FA109).
 
Page 9 of 13ERA12FA265
A third individual, who was a friend of the passenger, and was also attending the seaplane 
training reported that the pilot/owner told him the that the airplane performed well during the 
flight from Illinois to Florida, and cruised at 155 knots, with a fuel burn of 17 gallons per hour. 
The pilot/owner also mentioned to him that the airplane was purchased from an estate sale 
and had not been flown for a 3 year period.
 
According to fueling records obtained from a fixed-base operator at McMinn County Airport 
(MMI), Athens, Texas, the airplane was ﬁtopped-offﬂ with 50.8 gallons of 100-low-lead aviation 
gasoline on April 1, 2012. 
 
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DED, 80 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1935 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
170°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
240°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.87 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 15°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Deland, FL (DED)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Daytona Beach, FL (DAB)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0720 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Page 10 of 13ERA12FA265
 
The reported weather at DED, elevation 80 feet, at 1935 was: wind 240 degrees at 7 knots, 
visibility 7 statute miles; sky clear; temperature 29 degrees Celsius (C); dew point 15 degrees C; 
altimeter 29.87 inches of mercury. 
 
Airport Information
Airport:
Deland Municipal (DED)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
80 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
23
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4301 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
1 Serious, 2 Minor
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Serious, 2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
29.056389, -81.300833 (est)
 
The airplane descended into the roof of a supermarket, located about 1 mile from the departure 
end of runway 23. The airplane penetrated the roof, and impacted shelving before coming to 
rest upright, on a heading of about 260 degrees.
 
Page 11 of 13ERA12FA265
The airplane was initially examined at the accident site and then recovered to a storage facility 
for additional examination.
 
A postcrash fire destroyed the cockpit and consumed the airframe, with the exception of the 
outboard 8 feet of the right wing and small composite fragments. The outboard 56 inches of the 
right aileron and outboard 11-inches of the right flap remained attached. Both right wing fuel 
tank caps remained installed. The right elevator tip was located on the roof top. All three 
landing gear were located in the debris, as was the top portion of the vertical fin. 
 
All primary flight controls were connected at their respective control columns and pedals in the 
cockpit. Flight control continuity for the elevator was confirmed from the cockpit to the 
elevator bellcrank control tube. The right aileron control cable remained attached to the 
control surface. The left aileron cable was intact to a charred portion of the left aileron 
bellcrank. The rudder control cables were continuous from the cockpit, to about the mid-cabin 
area. 
 
The propeller assembly remained attached to the crankshaft flange. One propeller blade was 
melted about 24 inches from the hub. A second blade was separated about 17 inches from the 
hub, with its outboard section located in the debris. A third blade was intact. Two of the 
propeller blades had curled tips and contained a series of small leading edge gouges. All of the 
propeller blades were relatively straight, with no twisting damage. The propeller pitch change 
mechanism remained intact; however, it did not display any witness marks associated with 
propeller blade angle position. 
 
Page 12 of 13ERA12FA265
The engine, including all accessories sustained fire damage. A subsequent teardown of the 
engine at Lycoming Engines, Williamsport, Pennsylvania, did not reveal any preimpact 
malfunctions. The engine was rotated about 350 degrees, with corresponding valve continuity 
and piston movement, prior to coming to a hard stop. During disassembly, a piece of molten 
metal was located between a connecting rod and counterweight, which resulted in restricted 
movement. The spark plugs were removed and their electrodes were found intact. The fuel 
injector fuel inlet screen was found properly installed and absent of contamination. It was also 
noted that the engine crankcase numbers did not match. In addition, five of the six cylinders 
contained different part numbers. According to a Lycoming representative, two of the cylinders 
(Nos. 1 and 2) were not approved for installation on the IO-540K series engine. 
 
The engine fuel flow transducer, fuel line and fitting, which were heavily fire damaged, were 
examined at the Safety Board™s Material™s Laboratory, Washington, DC., in an attempt to 
identify if debris found in those components may have been present prior to the accident. A 
black colored particulate was removed from the transducer and similar material was removed 
from the fuel line. Examination of the particles utilizing a Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) 
micro-spectrometer with a germanium attenuated total reflectance (ATR) accessory revealed 
no significant spectral patterns, which was consistent with little or no organic material present. 
The samples were then analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and quantitative 
standardless energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS), which revealed the presence of 
materials found within the engine and fuel system. Due to the extent of the fire damage to the 
transducer, fuel lines, and fitting it was not possible to determine if the debris was present 
prior to the fire.       
Page 13 of 13
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Luke Schiada
Adopted Date:
12/02/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Joseph W Gramzinski; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL
Mike Childers; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Tom McCreary; Hartzell Propeller Inc.; Piqua, OH
Publish Date:
01/31/2018
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=83275
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
