National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Dickinson, ND
Accident Number: CHI07LA064
Date & Time: 02/01/2007, 1615 MST
Registration: N6631C
Aircraft: Cessna 414A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The airplane received substantial damage when the right main landing gear retracted upon landing.
The pilot reported that when he attempted to lower the landing gear during approach, both main landing gear indications did not show a down and locked condition.
After several attempts at recycling the landing gear, the pilot tried to use the emergency gear extension method, but both main landing gear indications were not down and locked.
The pilot then contacted an individual at the airport who informed the pilot that his main gear appeared to be down.
The pilot then attempted to land the airplane, during which the right main gear retracted.
Post accident examination of the landing gear system revealed no anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The undetermined failure of the emergency landing gear system and the retraction of the right main landing gear during landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR - UNDETERMINED 2.
(C) LANDING GEAR,EMERGENCY EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: GEAR RETRACTION ON GROUND Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 business flight was operating on an instrument rules flight plan.
The pilot was uninjured.
The flight originated from Billings Logan International Airport, Billings, Montana, about 1445, en route to DIK.
The pilot reported that as he neared DIK, he attempted to lower the landing gear.
The pilot reported that he received a down and locked indication from the nose gear; however, both main landing gear did not show a down and locked indication.
After several attempts at recycling the landing gear, the pilot tried to use the emergency gear extension method but still did not receive a down and locked indication for the main gear.
The pilot then contacted an individual at the airport who informed the pilot that his main gear appeared to be down.
The pilot then landed the airplane, during which the right main gear retracted.
According the Federal Aviation Administration inspector,  an Airframe & Powerplant (A&P) mechanic with Inspection Authorization (IA) reported that the airplane was placed on jacks in order to cycle the landing gear system.
The landing gear system operated normally, no anomalies were detected, and no repairs were made to the landing gear system.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
