National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Blue Earth, MN
Accident Number: GAA17CA215
Date & Time: 04/02/2017, 2200 CDT
Registration: N8889X
Aircraft: CESSNA 182
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Controlled flight into terr/obj
(CFIT)
Injuries: 2 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that, while approaching the destination airport in night, marginal visual meteorological conditions, he turned on the pilot-controlled runway lights.
He added that he began a descent to the runway without observing the runway lights or airport and encountered "ground fog" about 200 to 300 ft above ground level (agl).
He further added that he continued the descent to the runway while referencing the navigational moving map and GPS altitude on his electronic flight bag (EFB) application ForeFlight.
Subsequently, while in a left turn, the airplane impacted terrain about 1 nautical mile south of the runway.
The left wing, firewall, and fuselage sustained substantial damage.
The pilot reported that there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
He added that, while en route, he reset his airplane-installed barometric pressure altimeter to the GPS altitude indicated on his EFB, which resulted in a "300 ft.
error."
An automated weather observing station, about 14 nautical miles west of the accident airport, recorded visibility at 2 1/2 statute miles, light rain, mist, and an overcast cloud ceiling at 300 ft agl.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's decision to continue the night, visual flight into instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in controlled flight into terrain while on final approach.
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's improper use of an electronic flight bag.
The accidents can involve pilot spatial disorientation or controlled flight into terrain.
Preflight weather briefings are critical to safe flight.
In-flight weather information can also help pilots make decisions, as can in-cockpit weather equipment that supplements official information.
In-cockpit equipment requires an understanding of the features and limitations.
We often see pilots who decide to turn back after they have already encountered weather, at which point, it is too late.
Pilots shouldn't allow a situation to become dangerous before deciding to act.
Additionally, air traffic controllers are there to help; be honest with them about your situation and ask for help.
Even when flying at night, visual weather conditions can also be challenging.
Remote areas with limited ground lighting provide limited visual reference cues for pilots, which can be disorienting or render rising terrain visually imperceptible.
Topographic references can help pilots become more familiar with the terrain.
The use of instruments, if pilots are proficient, can also help pilots navigate these challenging areas.
See http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_020.pdf for additional resources.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents.
Note that this should not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations (FARs).
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Adam M Gerhardt Adopted Date: 06/20/2017 Additional Participating Persons: Allan Thilmany; FAA; Minneapolis, MN Publish Date: 06/20/2017 Note: This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94958
