This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Brinnon, WA
Accident Number: WPR17LA084
Date & Time: 04/02/2017, 1529 PDT
Registration: N167CB
Aircraft: CIRRUS DESIGN CORP SR22
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
On April 2, 2017, at 1529 Pacific daylight time (PDT), a Cirrus Design Corporation SR22, 
N167CB, impacted mountainous terrain near Mount Christie, in Jefferson County, 
Washington. The airplane was operated by The Flight Academy under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Part 91. The certified flight instructor (CFI) and student 
pilot sustained serious injuries. The airplane sustained substantial damage during the accident 
sequence. The instructional flight departed Langley, Washington, about 1400. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.
The operator reported that the instructional flight had departed with no known destination or 
flight plan. The United States Air Force Rescue Coordination Center (AFRCC) received a 406 
mhz Emergency Locator Transmission (ELT) from an unregistered source at 1529 PDT with a 
location near the accident site. Washington Air Search and Rescue (WASAR) responded to the 
reported ELT location. Additionally, at 1548 PDT, a Delta Airline flight received a radio 
transmission from the accident flight stating they had crashed.
The wreckage was subsequently located and both pilots were hoisted from the accident site and 
transported to a local hospital.
The accident site was located .4 NM southwest of Mount Christie, at an elevation of 4,700 feet 
MSL. The accident site is located inside the Olympic National Forest. 
The airplane wreckage will be recovered for further examination.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CIRRUS DESIGN CORP
Registration: N167CB
Model/Series: SR22 NO SERIES
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: The Flight Academy
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: KSHN, 271 ft msl
Observation Time: 2253 UTC
Distance from Accident Site: 32 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 12°C / 1°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 17 knots / 26 knots, 250°
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.25 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: LANGLEY, WA (W10)
Destination: BREMERTON, WA (PWT)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 2 Serious
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude: 47.697500, -123.550000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Patrick H Jones
Additional Participating Persons: Donald Bacon; Federal Aviation Administration; Renton, WA
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
