This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Edgewater, FL
Accident Number: ERA17FA143B
Date & Time: 04/01/2017, 0842 EDT
Registration: N425AE
Aircraft: GRUMMAN AMERICAN AVN. CORP.
AA-5B
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On April 1, 2017, about 0842 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 170B, N8082D, and a Grumman 
American AA-5B, N425AE, were destroyed during an in-flight collision near New Smyrna 
Beach, Florida. The airline transport pilot flying the Cessna and the airline transport pilot 
flying the Grumman were both fatally injured. The airplanes were part of a formation flight 
that departed from Spruce Creek Airport (7FL6), Daytona Beach, Florida, about 0839, and was 
destined for Arthur Dunn Airport (X21), Titusville, Florida. No flight plan was filed. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and the personal formation flight was conducted under 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Both accident airplanes were participating in a formation flight with three other airplanes. All 
five pilots participating in the formation flight were members of a pilot group based at 7FL6. 
On the morning of the accident, members of the group were flying to X21 to attend a monthly 
breakfast event.
The five-airplane formation flight involved in the accident included a Great Lakes biplane, the 
accident Cessna, the accident Grumman, a Grumman AA-1C (Lynx), and an American 
Champion 8KCAB (Super Decathlon), all of which took off from 7FL6 in elements. The flight 
leader was flying the biplane and the accident Grumman took off in formation first, followed by 
the Cessna and the Lynx taking off in formation next, followed by the Decathlon.
After takeoff from 7FL6, the flight initially formed into a five airplane "Vic" or "V" formation, 
with the flight leader in the biplane at the apex, and the rest of the flight in echelon with the 
Grumman in the No. 2 position, and the Decathlon in the No. 5 position, to the left of the flight 
leader, and the Cessna in the No. 3 position, and the Lynx in the No. 4 position, to the right of 
the flight leader.
The formation flight then turned south towards X21. Due to the position of the sun, the flight 
leader decided to change to a left echelon formation where the airplanes would be arranged 
diagonally, to his left, with each airplane being stacked slightly low, behind, and to the left of 
the airplane ahead. This arrangement allowed the pilots to avoid the sun glare. This would 
require the Cessna (No. 3) and the Lynx (No. 4) to transition across from right to left behind 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
the leader. The Grumman would remain in the No. 2 position to the left and aft of the leader, 
the Cessna in the No. 3 position to the left and aft of the Grumman, the Lynx in the No. 4 
position to the left and aft of the Cessna, and the Decathlon in the No.5 position to the left and 
aft of the Lynx.
According to the flight leader, moments after he commanded the Cessna and the Lynx to the 
left, in the corner of his peripheral vision at approximately his 7 o'clock position, he saw a 
"flash" or something white, like the bottom of an airplane.
According to the pilot of the Lynx, when the flight leader commanded the Cessna, and himself 
to the left, he heard the flight leader transmit "cleared to cross," and he observed the Cessna 
start to move to the left "slow and normal." He stayed with the Cessna, and when it was almost 
on the left echelon bearing line, he saw the it move into position behind the Grumman. He then 
suddenly saw "parts" coming back towards him on his right side, along with what appeared to 
be "vapor." He then saw the Grumman abruptly pitch up, and go past him above and to his 
right. The Grumman then looked like it was entering a loop as the airplane's nose was already 
past vertical and he could see the top of the airplane. He then observed something on the right 
side of the Cessna move upward before its tail began to "slew to the left," and disappeared from 
view.
The biplane and the Lynx then broke formation, with the biplane immediately pulling up and 
turning hard left, and the Lynx entering a left 60째 banked turn. The flight leader in the biplane 
could see parts of the airplanes falling to the ground, and he could see the Cessna descending 
like a falling leaf with what appeared to be the right wing folded over. The flight leader then 
began to circle the accident site, and reported the accident over the radio to an air traffic 
controller at New Smyrna Beach Municipal Airport, (EVB), New Smyrna Beach, Florida. He 
then continued to circle the accident site until emergency responders arrived.
According to witnesses who were driving on Interstate Highway 95 (I-95), they saw the 
formation flight traveling southbound. They observed that the formation flight was about 1/4 
mile west of I-95 when the collision occurred, and they observed the "wing" on one of the 
airplanes come off, the airplane tumble, and then rapidly descend tail low, until they lost sight 
of it behind a tree line. They also saw the other airplane descend rapidly, almost straight down, 
until losing sight of it. The witnesses also watched as parts from both airplanes descend to the 
ground with one piece landing in the median between the northbound and southbound lanes. 
Moments after the collision occurred, another formation flight flew north along the east side of 
I-95.
Examination of the accident site revealed that a 1/4-mile-long debris field, with most the debris 
being contained in a 1,036 ft long by 290 ft wide section. The Grumman and Cessna came to 
rest approximately 220 ft apart.
Examination of the wreckage of the Cessna revealed that the monocoque structure of the aft 
fuselage was completely separated from the rest of the airplanes structure, just forward of the 
empennage. The empennage was attached to the rest of the airplane by the control cables for 
the elevator, rudder, and pitch trim, which were twisted around each other multiple times. 
Further examination of the aft fuselage and empennage also revealed the presence of paint 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
transfers, which matched the trim color of the Grumman. These were present on the leading 
edge of the vertical stabilizer which had been crushed back, the right horizontal stabilizer, and 
the right side of the aft fuselage.
The Cessna's right wing flap came to rest approximately 397 ft northeast of the main wreckage 
of the Cessna. The inboard section of the right aileron was missing, the right aileron control 
cable had been severed, and the area of the wing just forward of the right wing flap mounting 
location, displayed evidence of propeller strikes, and was missing large sections of its structure.
Examination of the wreckage of the Grumman revealed that no major portions of the airplane 
were missing. The leading edges of the propeller blades were damaged and displayed 
semicircular gouges
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and maintenance records, the Cessna was 
manufactured in 1952. Its most recent annual inspection was completed on October 1, 2016. At 
the time of the inspection, the airplane had accrued 4596.8 total hours of operation.
According to FAA and maintenance records, the Grumman was manufactured in 1977. Its most 
recent annual inspection was completed on September 1, 2016. At the time of the inspection, 
the airplane had accrued 1673.4 total hours of operation.
According to FAA records, the pilot of the Cessna held an airline transport pilot certificate with 
ratings for airplane multi-engine land, and commercial privileges for airplane single-engine 
land. He also held a flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane single engine, 
airplane-multi engine, and instrument airplane; a flight engineer certificate with a rating for 
flight engineer turbojet powered; and a mechanic certificate with ratings for airframe and 
powerplant. He also held type ratings for the B-737, B-757, B-767, B-777, BE-1900, and BE-
300. His most recent FAA first-class medical certificate was issued on February 10, 2017. He 
had accrued about 14,620 total hours of flight experience.
According to FAA records, the pilot of the Grumman held an airline transport pilot certificate 
with ratings for airplane multi-engine land, and commercial privileges for airplane single-
engine land, and airplane single-engine sea. She also held a flight instructor certificate with 
ratings for airplane single engine, airplane-multi engine, and instrument airplane; a flight 
engineer certificate with a rating for flight engineer turbojet powered; and a ground instructor 
certificate with ratings for advanced and instrument. She also held type ratings for the A-330, 
B-747, B-757, B-767, BE-1900, and CE-510S. Her most recent FAA first-class medical 
certificate was issued on October 19, 2016. She had accrued about 11,368 total hours of flight 
experience.
The wreckage of both airplanes was retained by the NTSB for further examination.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: GRUMMAN AMERICAN AVN.
CORP.
Registration: N425AE
Model/Series: AA-5B
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: KEVB, 10 ft msl
Observation Time: 1247 EDT
Distance from Accident Site: 6 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 20째C / 17째C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Scattered / 5000 ft agl
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 6 knots / , 260째
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.02 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: DAYTONA BEACH, FL
(7FL6)
Destination: TITUSVILLE, FL (X21)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude: 28.959444, -80.957222
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Todd G Gunther
Additional Participating Persons: Robert E Haynes; FAA / FSDO; Orlando, FL
Henry Soderlund; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
