This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Garden Ridge, TX
Accident Number: CEN17LA149
Date & Time: 04/03/2017, 1934 CDT
Registration: N580TX
Aircraft: HUGHES WILLIAM J AVENTURA UL
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On April 3, 2017, about 1934 central daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Hughes 
model Aventura UL amphibian airplane, N580TX, sustained substantial damage during a 
forced landing near Garden Ridge, Texas. The airline transport pilot sustained serious injuries. 
The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91. Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident. The local flight departed Kitty Hawk Flying Field (TS67), located near Garden Ridge, 
Texas, about 1915.
The pilot reported that the purpose of the flight was to simulate water landings by performing 
low passes over a grassy area that was situated along the western edge of runway 14/32 (700 
feet by 200 feet). The pilot reported that he had completed several low passes before the 
accident. The pilot stated that after completing an uneventful low pass, while on the right 
crosswind leg, the airplane experienced a total loss of engine power and the propeller stopped 
rotating. The pilot subsequently completed a forced landing to a nearby clearing; however, he 
did not recall the impact sequence.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector performed the postaccident examination of 
the airplane at the accident site. The airplane landing gear were positioned for a water landing. 
The emergency ballistic parachute recovery system was armed but had not deployed. The three 
fuel tanks (1 main, 2 auxiliary) contained automotive gasoline premixed with engine oil. The 
fuel filter assembly and both carburetors contained fuel. Engine crankshaft continuity was 
confirmed by rotating the propeller. The spark plugs exhibited features consistent with normal 
engine operation. The propeller remained attached to the crankshaft and appeared 
undamaged. One of the three propeller blades had punctured the fabric-covered aft fuselage 
during the impact sequence. The propeller was removed from the engine to facilitate an 
operational engine test run. The engine, a 55-horsepower Hirth model 3202, serial number 
901269, started and ran at various engine speeds without any hesitation or anomalies. The 
postaccident examination and operational test run revealed no evidence of a mechanical 
malfunction or failure that would have precluded normal engine operation.
At 1958, the automated surface observing system (ASOS) located at Randolph Air Force Base 
(RND), about 6 miles south of the accident site, reported: wind 200 degrees at 5 knots, clear 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
sky, 10 mile surface visibility, temperature 26 degrees Celsius, dew point 8 degrees Celsius, and 
an altimeter setting of 29.69 inches of mercury.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: HUGHES WILLIAM J
Registration: N580TX
Model/Series: AVENTURA UL UL
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: Yes
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: RND, 761 ft msl
Observation Time: 1958 CDT
Distance from Accident Site: 6 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 26°C / 8°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 5 knots / , 200°
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.69 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Garden Ridge, TX (TS67)
Destination: Garden Ridge, TX (TS67)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Serious
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude: 29.625278, -98.278056 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Andrew T Fox
Additional Participating Persons: Frank G Fortmann; Federal Aviation Administration - San Antonio FSDO; San Antonio, TX
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
