Page 1 of 11
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MIAMI, FL
Accident Number:
MIA00FA102
Date & Time:
03/03/2000, 1529 EST 
Registration:
N611BC
Aircraft:
McDonnell Douglas HU-600N
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation -
Analysis 
The Sky 6 pilot was returning to Tamiami Airport, Miami, Florida, when he 
overheard a friend departing the airport. They established radio contact on the air-to-air 
frequency, and the sky 6 pilot decided to join his friend on the outbound leg. He made a 180 
degree turn, and joined up on the right side of his friends helicopter. They talked for a short 
time and the Sky 6 pilot departed. His friend stated, Sky 6 started a descent estimated at about 
15 degree nose-down attitude. His passenger stated Sky 6 descent was about a 45 degree nose 
down attitude. The friend and the passenger stated the nose of Sky 6 pitched up 70 degrees or 
past the 90 degree point. The helicopter yawed to the left, held there, appeared to slide 
backwards, the nose pitched down, the tail boom assembly separated, and the helicopter 
collided with terrain. Another news helicopter pilot, who knew the Sky 6 pilot, stated he 
overheard Sky 6 talking with another pilot on the air-to-air frequency. Based on there 
conversation he assumed they knew each other. At about 1530, he and a flight controller heard 
Sky 6 state, 'watch this.' There was no other communication between Sky 6 and the other pilot. 
Witnesses on the ground stated they observed both helicopters in straight and level flight. The 
accident helicopter nose was observed to pitch down and then pitched up to a near vertical 
nose-up attitude. The helicopter yawed to the left, slid backwards, the nose pitched down, and 
the tail boom separated. The helicopter started rotating to the right until it disappeared from 
view. Other news helicopter pilots stated the Sky 6 pilot would arrive at a news scene and stop 
the helicopter by conducting a cyclic climb maneuver and then bring the helicopter to a hover. 
A friend of the Sky 6 pilot stated he had a conversation with the pilot during the first part of 
February 2000. The pilot described a maneuver that he had been performing in the helicopter. 
He would make a high speed pass down a runway followed by a steep pull-up. At the top of the 
pull-up he would reverse the  heading by 180 degrees, and then recover from the ensuing dive 
similar to a hammerhead turn in a fixed wing aircraft. Examination of the airframe, flight 
controls, engine assembly and accessories revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical 
failure or malfunction. Examination of the tail boom assembly revealed four main rotor blade 
strikes in addition to the fracture that resulted in the separation of the tail boom. 
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 11MIA00FA102
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's ostentatious display and in-flight decision to perform an abrupt low altitude 
pitch up maneuver (aerobatic flight). This resulted in the main rotor blades colliding with and 
separating the tail boom assembly while maneuvering, and the helicopters subsequent in-flight 
collision with terrain. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: ABRUPT MANEUVER
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) OSTENTATIOUS DISPLAY - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. LOW ALTITUDE FLIGHT/MANEUVER - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
4. MISC ROTORCRAFT,MAIN ROTOR/TAIL BOOM CONTACT
5. MISC ROTORCRAFT,TAIL BOOM - SEPARATION
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 11MIA00FA102
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 3, 2000, at about 1529 eastern standard time, a McDonnell Douglas HU-
600N, N611BC, registered to General Electric Capital Corporation, operated by WTVJ NBC 6, 
as a 14 CFR Part 91 photography flight, crashed in a residential area while maneuvering in the 
vicinity of Miami, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed. The helicopter was destroyed by a post crash fire. The airline transport pilot and news 
photographer were fatally injured. The flight originated from Kendall-Tamiami Executive 
Airport (TMB), Miami, Florida, about 26 minutes before the accident.
Friends of the pilot who were flying in another helicopter (N97UP) stated N611BC (Sky 
6) was inbound to TMB when they talked to him on an air to air frequency. They got a visual 
location on each other and N611BC made a 180-degree turn, passed below them, and then 
joined up on their right side with about 300 yards separation in straight and level flight. They 
talked for a while and then Sky 6 departed. The pilot of N97UP observed Sky 6 initiate a 
descent which he estimated to be about a 15-degree nose-down attitude. His passenger 
estimated the descent at about a 45-degree nose-down attitude. The pilot observed the nose 
pull up to about a 30-degree nose-up attitude, and then pitched up about 70-degrees. The 
passenger stated the nose pulled up to an attitude past the 90-degree point. The helicopter 
yawed to the left, held there and appeared to be sliding backwards. The nose started to pitch 
down and the tail boom assembly separated. The helicopter descended and collided with the 
terrain. 
Witnesses on the ground who observed the accident stated they observed both 
helicopters in straight and level flight. The accident helicopter nose pitched down and then 
pitched up to an almost vertical nose-up attitude. The helicopter yawed to the left, started to 
descend backwards, the nose pitched down and the tail boom separated. The helicopter started 
rotating to the right until it disappeared from their view. Black smoke was then observed 
coming from the ground up.
A helicopter pilot for channel 10 television was dispatched to cover the same bus/train 
accident as Sky 6. He contacted Miami tower to get authorization to enter into class "B" 
airspace and was informed that Sky 6 was over the scene. He attempted to locate Sky 6 visually 
but was unable to do so. He asked his cameraman to see if he could locate him with his 
equipment which was successful. He then informed Miami tower that he had Sky 6 in sight. He 
continued to monitor the Miami tower frequency and the VHF radio air-to-air frequency 
(123.025.) He subsequently heard Sky 6 inform Miami tower that he was clear of the area. A 
short time later he heard the Sky 6 pilot talking on the air-to-air frequency with another pilot. 
Based on their conversation he figured that they knew each other. He overheard the pilot of 
Sky 6 tell the other pilot to keep flying east bound. At about 1530, he heard the pilot of Sky 6 
state, "watch this." There were no other communications heard between Sky 6 and the other 
pilot. The Sky 10 pilot stated he completed his mission over the bus/train accident and 
informed Miami tower that he was returning to TMB. He turned towards TMB and observed 
smoke. He thought it was a brush fire, and then he noticed that it was black smoke, and knew it 
had to be a house or vehicle fire of some sort. He headed towards the smoke. Upon arrival his 
cameraman informed him that it was a helicopter. He contacted the flight coordinator on 
frequency 123.025, and asked him to check on the status of their aircraft. The coordinator 
Page 4 of 11MIA00FA102
asked him what he thought had happened. He asked the coordinator if he had heard anything, 
and the coordinator replied, "watch this."
A friend of the deceased Sky 6 pilot stated that he had a conversation with the pilot 
during the first part of February 2000. The pilot described a maneuver that he had been 
performing in the Sky 6 Notar helicopter. The maneuver entailed a high speed pass down a 
runway followed by a steep pull-up. At the top of the pull-up, the Sky 6 pilot informed him that 
he would reverse the heading by 180-degrees, and then recover from the ensuing dive similar 
to a hammerhead turn in a fixed wing aircraft. He also stated that the control forces during the 
recovery from the maneuver were extremely high. 
Two helicopter pilot's for different local area television stations stated the deceased pilot 
would normally arrive on a news scene and would stop the Sky 6 helicopter by conducting a 
cyclic climb maneuver. He would pitch the nose of the helicopter up to about a 45 degree angle 
or a near vertical nose-up attitude, and then bring the helicopter to a hover. He would normally 
be lower than the other helicopters on scene and would conduct high speed sideward flight. 
When he would depart a news site, he would make a very nose low departure, and when he 
departed TMB he would fly down the taxiway between 30 to 40 feet and he would make a cyclic 
climb departure. 
Cameramen from channel 6 and the employer of the deceased pilot did not substantiate 
all of the statements made by the 2 helicopter pilots from the other television stations. One 
cameramen stated 2 days before the accident he was standing in the main editing area at the 
TV station when the deceased photographer stated he would be flying with the deceased pilot 
on Friday March 3, 2000. The photographer stated he was concerned about flying with the 
deceased pilot because he was an aggressive pilot. He informed them that when they left TMB 
with the helicopter parked on a dolly that the pilot would initiate a steep high bank turn right 
after takeoff. He stated he did not mind the pilot doing it a couple of times, but after 7 or 8 
times it became annoying. He also stated he discussed his displeasure of the maneuver with the 
pilot because he did not feel there was any need to be performing that type of maneuver.
An attorney who was receiving turbine instruction at TMB on the day of the accident 
stated he was walking out to the helicopter when he met his instructor pilot returning from a 
flight with another student. As they approached the helicopter the other pilot stated, "There he 
is in another one of those 60 degree banks!" The attorney stated, "I looked where he was 
looking (toward the NE of where we were walking) and saw Sky 6 on a heading of about 180 at 
an altitude of about 200 feet, again over the center of TMB. Just as Keith had said, Sky 6 was in 
a bank of at least 60 degrees. I could see the entire rotor head and most of the rotor disk. The 
bank was so steep that the disk was almost a perfect circle, and Sky 6 was dropping-losing 
altitude at a high rate of speed. It soon disappeared from view, blocked from our sight by 
buildings. My initial reaction was that it was too low to recover from such a high rate of descent 
and must have crashed. When there was no crash or explosion, however, I said something like 
"He is really hot dogging it!" My thought at the time was that the pilot must have a death wish, 
or he was perhaps demonstrating the capabilities of the aircraft to someone. However it struck 
me that 200 feet above the center of TMB was not a good place to demonstrate such a 
dangerous maneuver and wondered what the pilot was doing. At this point Jim said that he 
had seen Sky 6 earlier in the day performing some various maneuvers and that Sky 6, when he 
was standing near the FKC helicopters, passed very fast and very low over his head. He said 
something about "getting a haircut." I asked if Paul Barth was flying it and he said no, it was 
Page 5 of 11MIA00FA102
Ruben (something-the name did not stick in my mind). At that time or later he said that Ruben 
"was just back from Oregon" and was working for Paul Barth again....
After we returned from the Jet Ranger flight Todd and Jim and I were sitting in Jim's 
FKC office chatting when the phone rang with a call from one of Jim's friends who said that 
one of the news helicopters had crashed....Jim Billberry remarked that if Sky 6 had crashed it 
might have been caused by Ruben Rivera "rolling" or inverting Sky 6. He said something like 
"Ruben knows how to roll it, and he has done it before." 
The instructor stated in a subsequent interview that the scuttle butt going on around the 
airport was that the deceased pilot had rolled or inverted Sky 6.
Review of recorded communications between Sky 6, Sky 10, N97UP, and Tamiami Air 
Traffic Control Tower (ATCT), Local Control North, Miami ATCT, Local Control North, and 
Miami ATCT, Guard  VHF Emergency position revealed that Sky 6 contacted and received 
clearance for an echo departure from TMB at 2003:45. At 2008:15,  Sky 6 contacted Miami 
ATCT six miles south of the airport and was cleared into class "B" airspace. Sky 6 informed the 
controller that he would remain about 2 miles south of the airport. Sky 10 contacted Miami 
ATCT at 2016:32 off of TMB and informed the controller that he would be working south 
southwest of the airport. Sky 10 was cleared into class "B" airspace and was informed to look 
out for Sky 6. At 2019:13, Sky 10 informed Miami ATCT that he had Sky 6 in sight. At 2020:33, 
Sky 6 informed Miami ATCT that he was clear of the class "B" airspace. Miami ATCT informed 
Sky 6 that radar service was terminated, frequency change approved, and to squawk VFR. At 
2024:06, N97UP contacted Tamiami ATCT and requested an echo departure. The request was 
approved, and N97UP was advised to use caution due to inbound traffic. At 2024:40, Sky 6 
contacted Tamiami ATCT and informed the controller that he was 6 miles northeast, inbound 
for an echo arrival. Sky 6 was advised to proceed with caution that traffic was outbound on 
echo. The controller contacted N97UP and informs him of the inbound Sky 6 traffic. N97UP 
requested and received approval for a frequency change. At 2026:02, Sky 6 informed Tamiami 
ATCT that he was going to join up with N97UP on the outbound leg. At 2029:17, N97UP 
contacted Miami radio on guard VHF  emergency position and states, "yeah we got an 
emergency got a helicopter down." At 2034:29, Sky 10 contacted Tamiami ATCT and stated, 
"uh yes sir I'd like to report a possible aircraft down in the vicinity here where I'm at."
Review of the Discrete Area Radar Tracking System, National Track Analysis Program, 
(NTAP), reveals that Sky 6 was initial radar contact, 300 feet, heading 002 degrees in class "B" 
airspace at 2009:57.  Sky 6 was observed maneuvering within the airspace and the altitude 
varies between 700 to 200 feet. Sky 6 leaves class "B" airspace at 2020:22 and radar service is 
terminated at 2020:34, heading 360 degrees at 300 feet. Sky 6 is observed maneuvering on the 
edge of the class "B" airspace from 2020:34 to 2022:53. The altitude varies from 400 to 100 
feet. At 2022:53, Sky 6 exits class "B" airspace at 400 feet, and flies towards the southwest. At 
2024:11, Sky 6 descends to 300 feet. At 2025:02, N97UP is initial radar contact, 200 feet 
departing TMB. At 2026:21, Sky 6 descends to 200 feet and is observed on radar starting a left 
turn. N97UP is at 500 feet heading east bound. At 2027:11, Sky 6 is located to the right of 
N97UP. Both helicopters are at 600 feet heading east bound. At 2027:25, both helicopters are 
at 800 feet heading east bound. At 2028:02, Sky 6 is at 600 feet heading east bound and 
N97UP is at 800 feet heading east bound. The last radar return for Sky 6 was recorded at 
2028:16. Sky 6 is at 1,000 feet and N97UP is at 800 feet. N97UP was observed on radar flying 
around the local area and landed at TMB at 2116:39.
Page 6 of 11MIA00FA102
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The Federal Aviation Administration, Information Management Section records, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma indicates that the pilot was found guilty and convicted on or about 
August 5, 1988, in the United States District Court, Northern District of Florida, of conspiracy 
to import, importation, conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute, and possession with 
intent to distribute, over 100 kilograms of marijuana involving the use of an aircraft, and he 
was sentenced to the Federal Prison Center in Atlanta, Georgia. All previous airman certificates 
held by the pilot at the time of the conviction were revoked on May 21, 1992, pursuant to 14 
CFR Part 61.15 (a) (2). The pilot was employed by Helicopter Aviation Services Leasing Inc., on 
March 5, 1990. He was one of the contract pilots flying the Sky 6 helicopter, for WTVJ/NBC 
television station. He held an airline transport pilot certificate with ratings and limitations for 
rotorcraft-helicopter, commercial privileges, airplane single engine land, glider. In addition, 
the certificate had a restriction stating, carrying passengers in airplanes for hire is prohibited at 
night and on cross-country flights of more than 50 nautical miles. The certificate was issued on 
May 23, 1999. He was issued a first class medical certificate with no limitations issued on May 
21, 1999. Review of the pilot's logbook revealed his last recorded entry was on January 31, 
2000. The first recorded flight in the HU-600N was on February 12, 1998. The pilot had 
recorded as logged 5.9 dual hours in the HU-600N and 520.4 hours as the pilot-in-command. 
The passenger was employed by WTVJ/NBC channel six television station on March 5, 
1990, as a photographer. He was on the authorized dispatcher list to fly in the Sky 6 helicopter, 
however there was no record located indicating that he had completed the required safety 
briefing and that he had signed the HASL-001 consent form required by the Sky 6 Operations 
and Procedures Manual.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Review of the helicopter maintenance records revealed the aircraft completed a 
100/150/300 hour inspection on January 2, 2000, and the aircraft was determined to be in  an 
airworthy condition. The maintenance records revealed compliance with all manufactures 
Service Bulletins and FAA Airworthiness Directives.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The nearest weather reporting facility at the time of the accident was Kendall-Tamiami 
Executive Airport, Miami, Florida. The 1450 surface weather observation was: 3,500 broken, 
visibility 10 miles, temperature 84 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point temperature 42 degrees 
Fahrenheit, wind from 290 degrees at 6 knots, and altimeter 29.98 inHg. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The main wreckage of N611BC was located in two different locations. The tail boom 
assembly had separated from the main fuselage at station number 275, and was located on the 
back porch adjacent to a swimming pool located at 9305 SW 122nd Lane Miami, Florida, in the 
Oak Ridge Residential complex. The main body of the wreckage was located on an island 
planter (flower bed) adjacent to a circular drive at the north entrance of Oak Ridge near SW 121 
Street and 93rd Avenue.
Examination of the crash site revealed the helicopter collided with the ground in a nose 
down right roll attitude on a heading of 020-degrees magnetic separating the nose mounted 
Page 7 of 11MIA00FA102
camera. At least five rotor blade strikes were present on the ground located to the right rear of 
the initial point of ground contact. The helicopter rolled to the left and yawed right where the 
remnants of the tail boom struck a tree, separated with the remainder of the left skid and 
flotation device, and came to rest on its left side on a heading of 135-degrees magnetic. The left 
and right fuel bladders ruptured, and the airframe was consumed by post crash fire from  
fuselage station 0.0 to fuselage station 275.0. The collective pitch was found in the full down 
position and the throttle was full open. The tail boom slot assemblies sustained extensive heat 
and fire damage, and was separated from the tail boom. The left skid separated from the strut 
attach point, and the skid tow separated 2 1/2 feet aft of the skid toe. The right skid separated 2 
1/2 feet aft of the skid toe. The center skid section was consumed by post crash fire and both 
struts remained attached to the airframe and were damaged by post crash fire.
Examination of the main rotor system revealed excessive damage due to main rotor 
blade lead/lag excursions and high flapping angles. One strap assembly had evidence of 
overload fractures of several laminates while the remaining five strap pack assemblies 
remained attached and exhibited evidence of overload bending. All six main rotor blade pitch 
case housings and attached components as well as the upper main rotor system flight controls 
were consumed by post crash fire. The main rotor transmission chip detectors were removed 
and no evidence of metal particles were present.
All six main rotor blades exhibited evidence of lead lag bending. Five of the six main 
rotor blades exhibited evidence of rotational damage in the form of chordwise scarring. White 
paint transfer marks were present from contact with the tail boom assembly. Two main rotor 
blades had evidence of complete overload fractures. One main rotor blade was separated four 
feet inboard from the main rotor blade tip, and was located two houses north of the crash site 
at 1250 SW 93 Avenue. Another main rotor blade separated 4 inches inboard from the main 
rotor blade tip.
Examination of the engine to transmission interconnecting drive shaft revealed evidence 
of overload failures of both couplings. The output shaft from the main transmission to the fan 
gear box was consumed by post crash fire. The forward coupling had evidence of overload 
failure. The aft coupling remained attached to the fan gear box input shaft. The NOTAR fan 
pitch control assembly was damaged by post crash fire. When rotated by hand the assembly 
provided pitch input to the fan pitch plate.
Examination of the tail boom assembly revealed evidence of three main rotor blade 
strikes in addition to the fracture that resulted in the separation of the tail boom at about 
fuselage station 275.0. One strike extended perpendicular across the top of the tail boom 
assembly in the form of yellow paint transfer from the main rotor blade tip cap. The additional 
main rotor blade strikes on the tail boom occurred from about fuselage station 280.0 to 
fuselage station 291.0, and from fuselage station 291.0 to fuselage station 295.0. The upper left 
vertical stabilizer separated from the horizontal stabilizer, and the rotating thruster cone and 
stationary thruster exhibited evidence of multiple overload fractures. The aircraft directional 
control system, forward and center thruster control cables had stainless steel safety wires 
installed. Continuity of  both vertical stabilizers and the rotating thruster was confirmed. The 
three thruster control cables exhibited evidence of fire and overstress damage.
Examination of the airframe and flight control assembly revealed no evidence of a 
precrash mechanical failure or malfunction before the main rotor blades collided with the tail 
boom assembly.  Continuity of the flight control system was confirmed for yaw and roll. 
Page 8 of 11MIA00FA102
Continuity of the pitch control could not be determined due to fire damage. (For additional 
information see Boeing Accident Case File, an attachment to this report.)
The engine assembly was removed and transported to the engine manufacture for 
further analysis. Examination of the engine assembly was conducted at Rolls-Royce Allison, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, on  April 4, 2000. The Rolls-Royce Allison report concluded: (For 
additional information see Rolls-Royce Accident Investigation Report attached as an 
attachment to this report.)
* No pre-accident discrepancies were noted on the engine. * Engine continuity, N1 and N2 was 
established. * Examination of the engine during disassembly revealed that it had ingested 
debris, post crash, which migrated through the turbine and was also found deposited on the 1st 
stage nozzle. * Heavy rubbing signatures were present on the blade tracks of the compressor 
impeller and the 2nd stage turbine wheel, indicative of external lateral impact loads imparted 
to the engine while operating. * All damage to the engine was deemed the result of external 
impact forces incurred during the crash sequence.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. Valerie J. Rao, Associate 
Medical Examiner, The Miami Dade County Medical Examiner Department, Miami, Florida, 
on March 4, 2000. The cause of death was helicopter crash. Postmortem toxicology of 
specimens from the pilot were performed by the Miami-Dade County Medical Examiner 
Department and the Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Federal Aviation Administration, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. Carbon monoxide and cyanide testing was not performed, and no 
ethanol was detected. Benzoylecgonne, 0.14 (ug/ml, ug/g) an inactive cocaine metabolite was 
detected in the brain, and 0.209 (ug/ml, ug/g) was detected in the liver. No cocaine was 
present, and it could not be determined if the pilot was impaired at the time of the accident.
Postmortem examination of the passenger was conducted by Dr. Valerie J. Rao, 
Associate Medical Examiner, The Miami Dade County Medical Examiner Department, Miami, 
Florida, on March 4, 2000. The cause of death was helicopter crash.
TEST AND RESEARCH
Review of MD 600N Rotorcraft Flight Manual Section II Limitations, 2-1. Flight 
Restrictions states, "Aerobatic Flight is not approved." Title 14 CFR Party 91.301 states, "For 
the purposes of this section, aerobatic flight means an intentional maneuver involving an 
abrupt change in an aircraft's attitude, an abnormal attitude, or abnormal acceleration, not 
necessary for normal flight."
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage of N611BC was released to Mr. Charles G. Maynard, Sample International 
Aviation, Inc., Ormond Beach, Florida, on March 5, 2000. The pilot's logbook was released to 
Mr. Paul H. Barth, Helicopter Aviation Services and Leasing Inc., Miami, Florida, on  March 
13, 2000. The engine assembly was released to Mr. Charles G. Maynard on May 2, 2000.
Page 9 of 11MIA00FA102
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/21/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
6506 hours (Total, all aircraft), 526 hours (Total, this make and model), 5900 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 90 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
McDonnell Douglas
Registration:
N611BC
Model/Series:
HU-600N HU-600N
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
RN008
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/02/2000, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3850 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
44 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
964 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
250-C47M
Registered Owner:
GENERAL ELECTRIC CAPITAL 
CORP
Rated Power:
600 hp
Operator:
WTVJ NBC 6
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 10 of 11MIA00FA102
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TMB, 10 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1450 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
270°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (TMB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1503 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
CARROL     A SMITH
Adopted Date:
03/02/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
SUZANNE M MEJIA; MIAMI, FL
WARREN W SISETZINGER; INDIANAPOLIS, IN
JONATHAN D KURTZ; MESA, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 11 of 11MIA00FA102
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
