The pilot and gunner were participating in a low-level, aerial predatory control operation.  
They were operating over terrain that was approximately 8,300 feet above mean sea level.  
While maneuvering in a turn at slow airspeed to make an additional pass over an area with 
coyotes, the airplane impacted the ground with the right wing tip, and then came to rest 
inverted. A witness, who was working with the pilot from the ground, was in a drainage wash 
while the airplane circled overhead.  They had just identified a coyote den and there were 
coyotes traversing up and down the wash.  The airplane went out of the witness's view, and 
then the witness heard the impact of the airplane with the ground.  No evidence of any 
preimpact mechanical anomalies was discovered.  Weight and balance calculations showed 
that the airplane was out of its aft center of gravity limits by 1.6 inches, which would result in 
less stable flight characteristics, especially during slow flight.  Previous accidents involving 
similar flight regimes have been associated with wake vortices encounters. Although it is 
possible that the airplane encountered its own wake vortices, this could not be determined with 
the available evidence.  Based on standard atmospheric conditions and the temperatures at the 
closest reporting stations, the density altitude would have been about 10,000 feet.
The pilot's failure to maintain an adequate airspeed during low altitude maneuvering flight that 
resulted in a stall.  The pilot's decision to operate the airplane at a center of gravity beyond the 
rear limit, the low altitude of the flight, and the high density altitude were contributing factors.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 1, 2007, at 0825 mountain daylight time, a Christen Industries A-1 (Husky), N9602R, 
collided with rugged terrain approximately 10 statute miles west of Loa, Utah.  The United 
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) was operating the airplane that was owned by the 
Utah Department of Agriculture and Food as a public use flight under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The commercial pilot and the passenger (who was serving as a 
gunner) were killed.  The airplane was substantially damaged. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and USDA flight tracking procedures were in effect at the time of the accident.  The 
airplane departed from Richfield Municipal Airport, Richfield, Utah, at 0630.
According to USDA personnel, the purpose of the flight was to conduct aerial predator control 
operations.  The operations were conducted through an agreement between the state of Utah 
and the federal government.  The flight had been scheduled as a result of confirmed reports 
from a local ranch owner that lambs were being attacked and killed by coyotes.
A witness, who was employed by the state of Utah as a Predatory Tracker and in radio contact 
with the pilot and gunner, described the accident sequence.  The witness stated that there were 
multiple coyotes in the area at the time of the accident.  He was located on the western slope of 
a draw that ran from southwest to northeast.  He was approximately 200 yards from, and 75 
feet lower than the accident site.  The witness recalled the airplane flying over him, and then 
making a left turn to pass behind and to the eastern slope of the draw.  As the airplane flew 
over the eastern edge of the draw in a northeasterly direction, the witness lost sight of it.  He 
then heard a loud crashing noise, followed by complete silence.  A post impact fire erupted 
shortly thereafter.  He further stated that there were no distress calls from the pilot or gunner.  
The witness stated that up until the accident, the operation was proceeding "normally."
A USDA pilot reviewed information provided by the witness and the details of the accident site.  
Based on his experience, the pilot indicated that under normal circumstances, the accident 
pilot would have made a left turn and transitioned southwest-bound to the area of the 
Predatory Tracker, to once again attain the coyotes near the tracker.  However, if the 
pilot/gunner identified other coyotes that ran out of the wash, they may alter their course.  The 
USDA pilot stated the location of the accident site was consistent with the pilot making a left 
turn, with the intention of returning to the area of the Predatory Tracker.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
