Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Crowley Ranch, OR
Accident Number:
SEA08FA005
Date & Time:
10/03/2007, 1410 PDT 
Registration:
N91254
Aircraft:
Piper PA-18
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to witnesses near the accident site, the pilot was maneuvering the airplane while 
herding cattle when the accident occurred. A witness reported that he observed the airplane 
"...dive down at the cows and then pull up at a pretty sharp angle." The witness stated this 
occurred twice, and after the second maneuver, the pilot initiated a 360 degree turn. After 
completing the turn, with the wings level, the airplane collided with a series of power 
transmission lines that were located at the pilot's 12 o'clock position. The airplane 
subsequently collided with terrain. Postaccident examination and teardown of the airframe and 
engine revealed no evidence of a mechanical malfunction or failure prior to impact.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate clearance from a power transmission line while 
maneuvering. Contributing to this accident was the pilot's diverted attention, and decision to 
maneuver at a low altitude.
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION
2. (C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) ALTITUDE - LOW - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 6SEA08FA005
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 3, 2007, about 1410 Pacific daylight time, a Piper PA-18 (Super Cub), N91254, was 
substantially damaged during a collision with power transmission lines and terrain near the 
Crowley Ranch Airstrip (78OR), Crowley, Oregon. The solo commercial pilot, the airplane 
owner, was killed. The visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight was operated under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, when the accident occurred. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated from 
Crowley Ranch about 1400.
Witnesses reported that the pilot was working cattle when the accident occurred. A witness 
said that he observed the airplane "...dive down at the cows and then pull up at a pretty sharp 
angle." The witness stated this occurred twice, and after the second maneuver, the pilot 
initiated a 360 degree turn. After completing the turn, with the wings level, the airplane 
collided with a series of power transmission lines that were located at the pilot's 12 o'clock 
position.  
A second witness, who was working the same cattle from an all terrain vehicle (ATV), reported 
that he observed the airplane flying in the area just before the accident. He noted that he heard 
the airplane, but lost sight of it. Moments later he became concerned when he heard the 
airplane's engine "shut off." He looked out in the direction of the airplane just as it collided 
with terrain in a nose-low attitude and rolled over. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 76, held an airline transport pilot (ATP) certificate, commercial pilot certificate 
and flight instructor certificate. He held a second-class airman medical certificate issued on 
June 18, 2007. On the Application for Airman Medical Certificate, the pilot listed 35,000 hours 
total flight time and 400 hours total flight time in the 6 months preceding the medical 
application.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Piper Aircraft manufactured the tailwheel-equipped PA-18 airplane, serial number 91254, in 
1982. The two-place tandem seat airplane was powered by a 150-hp Lycoming O-360 engine.  
Review of copies of maintenance logbook records showed an annual inspection of the airframe, 
engine and propeller was completed on September 7, 2007, at a recorded tachometer reading 
of 2,571 hours. The annual inspection included the airframe, engine and propeller. 
Review of engine, airframe and propeller records disclosed no open maintenance 
discrepancies. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest weather reporting facility to the accident site was the Rome State Airport, (KREO), 
located approximately 43 nautical miles (nm) south of the accident location at an elevation of 
4,050 feet msl.  The following meteorological report was issued during the period of the 
accident:  At 1352, the observation was, in part, wind variable at 7 knots, temperature 14 
degrees Celsius, dew point 2 degrees Celsius. Visibility and sky conditions were not reported.  
Witnesses stated the visibility was unrestricted.
Page 3 of 6SEA08FA005
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted terrain approximately two miles south of the airstrip. A deputy from the 
Malheur County Sherriff's Office reported that it came to rest, inverted, approximately 267 feet 
from where it struck the power lines. He reported that wreckage debris was scattered between 
the point of initial impact and the final resting point of the main wreckage. First responders 
reported that the airplane's wing fuel tanks contained fuel, but could not quantify the specific 
amount. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on October 5, 2007. According to the autopsy report, 
the cause of death was attributed to "Blunt Force Trauma." 
The FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed forensic 
toxicology tests on specimens from the pilot. The toxicology reports stated no ethanol, carbon 
monoxide, cyanide or listed drugs were detected. No drugs of abuse were detected. 
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION
A wreckage examination was completed on November 8, 2007, by the NTSB IIC and Parties to 
the investigation. 
The cylinders, crankcase and overhead components were intact and no evidence of an 
uncontained engine failure was noted. The spark plugs were removed and the center electrodes 
showed normal operating signatures when compared to the Champion aviation check a plug 
chart. The cylinders were examined utilizing a borescope and no mechanical damage or 
evidence of oil starvation was noted. Lubrication was present throughout the engine. The 
crankshaft rotated by hand; compression was established in all cylinders and drive train 
continuity was established throughout the engine. Both magnetos produced spark at each lead 
when manually rotated.
Examination and teardown of the engine revealed no evidence of a mechanical malfunction or 
failure prior to impact.
Examination of the airframe revealed no evidence of a pre impact flight control surface 
anomaly or flight control system component failure.
Page 4 of 6SEA08FA005
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
76, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/01/2006
Flight Time:
35000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3163 hours (Total, this make and model), 22 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N91254
Model/Series:
PA-18 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
18-8209018
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/2007, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2581 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-320
Registered Owner:
Ronald J Sutphin
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
Ronald J Sutphin
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6SEA08FA005
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KREO, 4053 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
43 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1352 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Light and Variable / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Crowley Ranch, OR (78OR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Crowley Ranch (78OR)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1400 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
CROWLEY RANCH AIRSTRIP (78OR)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
4128 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
43.307778, -117.894167
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis  J Hogenson
Adopted Date:
07/30/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Lew Sanders; Federal Aviation Administration; Boise, ID
Troy R Helgeson; Textron Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Charlie Little; Piper Aircraft; Vero Beach, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA08FA005
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
