Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
VENICE, LA
Accident Number:
FTW99LA155
Date & Time:
06/01/1999, 1448 CDT 
Registration:
N7131U
Aircraft:
Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
About 150 feet agl and 60 knots, as the helicopter was accelerating, the pilot heard a loud 
'bang,' and the low rotor rpm and engine out audio warning activated.  The pilot initiated an 
autorotation to a grassy area, 'flared the aircraft, and placed it in six to eight inches of water.'  A 
main rotor blade contacted the tailboom, partially separating it aft of the horizontal stabilizer.  
A passenger reported that the pilot 'pulled pitch right before the landing and we landed with 
one medium bump and then followed very quickly with another medium bump with a loud 
sound with it.'  The passenger further reported that the landing attitude was 'relatively normal;' 
however, 'it was possibly a little more pitched up than normal.'  An examination of the engine 
revealed that the Spur Adapter Gearshaft was fractured at the forward splines.  According to 
the engine manufacturer's metallurgist, 'severe spline wear led to [the] spiral fatigue failure of 
the Spur Adapter Gearshaft and Compressor Adapter Coupling.'  The reason for the spline wear 
was not determined. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper touchdown procedure, resulting in a main rotor blade contacting the 
tailboom.  Factors were the soft and wet terrain conditions, and the loss of engine power due to 
the spiral fatigue failure of the gas generator turbine shafting due to spline wear. 
Page 2 of 6FTW99LA155
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) TURBOSHAFT ENGINE,GAS GENERATOR TURBINE SHAFT - WORN
2. (F) TURBOSHAFT ENGINE,GAS GENERATOR TURBINE SHAFT - FATIGUE
3. (F) TURBOSHAFT ENGINE,GAS GENERATOR TURBINE SHAFT - FRACTURED
4. TURBOSHAFT ENGINE,GAS GENERATOR TURBINE SHAFT - SEPARATION
5. AUTOROTATION - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
6. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - WET
7. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT
8. (C) TOUCHDOWN - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
9. MISC ROTORCRAFT,MAIN ROTOR/TAIL BOOM CONTACT
Page 3 of 6FTW99LA155
Factual Information
 On June 1, 1999, at 1448 central daylight time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N7131U, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing, following a loss of engine power near Venice, 
Louisiana. The helicopter was owned and operated by Chevron USA, Inc., of New Orleans, 
Louisiana.  The commercial pilot and the two passengers were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company VFR flight plan was filed for the 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 aerial observation flight.  The local flight originated from the 
West Delta 30 platform located in the Gulf of Mexico, at 1426.
The pilot reported that he flew the helicopter at an altitude of about 150 feet agl and an 
airspeed of 60 knots, while inspecting a pipeline, which was reported to have a possible oil 
leak.   After completing the inspection, as the helicopter was accelerating (to return to West 
Delta 30), he heard a loud "bang," and the low rotor rpm and engine out audio warnings 
activated.  The pilot further reported that he "entered autorotation, flared the aircraft, and 
placed it in six to eight inches of water.  It was a grassy area, so I didn't pop the floats."  
The passengers reported hearing a loud "bang," and the aircraft began to "shudder/shake."  
The passenger in the rear seat reported that after the bang, he heard a "metallic grinding 
screeching sound."  The helicopter "lurched," yawed to the left, and "pitched forward."  The 
pilot maneuvered the helicopter to the "edge of open water and onto a grassy mat in the 
marsh."  The pilot "pulled pitch right before the landing and we landed with one medium bump 
and then followed very quickly with another medium bump with a loud sound with it."  The 
rear seat passenger further reported that the landing attitude was "relatively normal;" however, 
"it was possibly a little more pitched up than normal."  The rear seat passenger also reported 
that the landing was "reasonably soft."
Examination of the helicopter by the FAA inspector revealed that the tailboom was partially 
separated aft of the horizontal stabilizer, and the tail rotor assembly was damaged.  Both main 
rotor blades were damaged.  A piece of blade, aft of the main spar and outboard of the trim tab, 
was separated from one main rotor blade.  The outboard section of this blade was bent upward.
A teardown examination of the Allison 250-C20J engine, serial number CAE270491, was 
conducted at the operator's maintenance facility in New Orleans, Louisiana, under the 
supervision of the FAA.  A continuity check of the compressor through the accessory gearbox 
revealed a disconnect.  Removal of the compressor section revealed that the Spur Adapter 
Gearshaft (SAG) was fractured at the forward splines.  The accessory gearbox was torn down 
revealing "major" damage to the #2-1/2 roller bearing.  The lower magnetic plug had a "large" 
amount of flaking type debris adhering to it, and the upper gearbox magnetic plug had a 
"small" amount of sliver type debris adhering to it.  According to the engine manufacturer's 
metallurgist, "severe spline wear led to [the] spiral fatigue failure of the Spur Adapter 
Gearshaft and Compressor Adapter Coupling."  The damage to the #2-1/2 bearing "appeared to 
be secondary" to the failure of the SAG.  The metallurgist reported that "no metallurgical cause 
was determined for the spline wear."  The compressor had accumulated a total time of 11,898.2 
hours, with 2,694.9 hours since overhaul.  See the excerpts of the enclosed manufacturer report 
for details of the examination.
Page 4 of 6FTW99LA155
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Private
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/08/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3385 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1825 hours (Total, this make and model), 2036 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 162 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 55 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N7131U
Model/Series:
206B 206B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
4111
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/06/1999, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
44 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
6464 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250C-20J
Registered Owner:
CHEVRON USA, INC.
Rated Power:
420 hp
Operator:
CHEVRON USA, INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
AC2A
Page 5 of 6FTW99LA155
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
WEST DELTA 30, GM 
(NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
VFR on top
Departure Time:
1426 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DOUGLAS    D WIGINGTON
Adopted Date:
11/30/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
JAMES R COPPIT; BATON ROUGE, LA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW99LA155
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
