National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PISGAH, MS
Accident Number: MIA99LA022
Date & Time: 11/01/1998, 1600 CST
Registration: N383FF
Aircraft: FERGUSON RANS S-10 SAKOTA
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane was observed flying down the centerline of the runway between 150 to 200 feet agl, and commence an abrupt steep bank to the left.
Once into the 45 to 50 degree bank, the nose dropped, and the ballistic recovery parachute was seen to partially deploy.
The airplane continued in the descending spiral until impact with the ground.
No evidence of  precrash malfunctions of flight controls were found.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during a low altitude maneuver resulting in the aircraft's uncontrollable descent until impact with the terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - TURN TO REVERSE DIRECTION Findings 1.
LOW ALTITUDE FLIGHT/MANEUVER - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS Factual Information On November 1, 1998, about 1600 central standard time, an experimental, Ferguson Rans S-10 Sakota, N383FF, registered to a private individual, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed while maneuvering overhead Pisgah Airstrip, Pisgah, Mississippi.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The amateur-built airplane was destroyed and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, sustained fatal injuries.
The flight originated from the private strip about 20 minutes before the accident.
During the left bank, the nose dropped and the ballistic recovery chute (BRS), was observed to deploy.
The left bank continued for about 270 degrees, the nose dropped 25 to 30 degrees below the horizon trailing the partially deployed BRS, and the airplane impacted the terrain in a nearly vertical attitude.
The engine sounded normal the whole time.
The father mentioned that he thought the pilot had no acrobatic experience.
A friend of the pilot who helped build the airplane and who had given dual instruction to the pilot about 5 to 6 weeks previously in the same airplane stated they performed maneuvers and steep turns above 5,000 feet agl.
Examination of the airplane by FAA personnel revealed the airplane impacted the ground in a near vertical attitude, upright, heading about 180 degrees.
The ballistic recovery system, (BRS) drogue chute was about 60-feet forward of the wreckage and the main canopy was deployed behind the left wing and both appeared undamaged.
Severe fuselage crushing extended rearward to aft of the pilot's seat.
The wings, aft fuselage and empennage were minimally damaged.
Flight control continuity from the cockpit control stick about the roll axis was impossible to confirm due to impact damage to rod ends under the cockpit floor, but was confirmed using control linkage outward of the damage to the flight controls.
Pitch control continuity was confirmed from stick to elevator.
Rudder control path continuity was confirmed from pedals to control surface.
Engine control continuity was not possible due to impact damage.
The Hobbs meter indicated 64.9 hours.
The two composite fuel tanks had been compromised, and the wreckage smelled of fuel.
The fuel lines and carburetors contained fuel and the pilot's father said the tanks were nearly full at takeoff.
The main fuel valve and the right fuel valve were found in the "on" position and the left valve was in an intermediate position.
Seat belts and harnesses were intact and still attached to their respective anchoring points.
The pilot was found with seat belt and harness fastened.
(For additional information see attached FAA Inspector's Statement).
Postmortem examination of the pilot was performed by Steven T. Hayne, M.D., Deputy Coroner, Rankin County, Pearl, Mississippi, on November 1, 1998, and revealed cause of death to be attributed to multiple traumatic injuries suffered in the crash.
No findings that could be considered causal were noted.
Toxicological testing was conducted at the Federal Aviation Administration Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
The tests were negative for ethanol, carbon monoxide, basic, acidic, and neutral drugs.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 37, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
