National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MASON, MI
Accident Number: CHI99LA017
Date & Time: 11/01/1998, 1200 EST
Registration: N5908D
Aircraft: Piper PA-22-20-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said the tail wheel-equipped airplane began yawing to the left as he brought the airplane onto its main landing gear during takeoff.
He said he over corrected with right rudder and then left rudder.
The pilot said a yaw oscillation followed and the airplane departed the runway's left edge.
Shortly after departing the runway's edge, the airplane's right main gear tire dug into the ground.
The airplane ground-looped to the right and came to a stop on its right wing tip and nose.
The pilot said he had 19-hours total time in the airplane and about 255-hours in a tail wheel-equipped home built airplane that was similar to the accident airplane except with about half the horse power.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: was the pilot not maintaining control of the airplane.
A factor in this accident was the pilots lack of total experience in the airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT OBTAINED/MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: DRAGGED WING,ROTOR,POD,FLOAT OR TAIL/SKID Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS Factual Information On November 1, 1998, at 1200 eastern standard time (est), a Piper PA-22-20-150, N5908D, piloted by a private pilot, was substantially damaged during a ground loop event that occurred while on the initial takeoff roll.
The airplane was taking off on runway 09 (3,503' X 75' dry asphalt) at the Mason-Jewett Field, Mason, Michigan.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating on a flight plan.
The pilot and passenger reported no injuries.
The flight was departing Mason, Michigan, at 1200 est.
The pilot said the airplane began yawing to the left as he brought it onto its main gear for takeoff.
He said he over- corrected with right rudder and the airplane yawed rapidly to the right and then over-corrected to the left.
According to the pilot, he caused the airplane to occillate about its yaw axis due to another over-correction.
The airplane departed the runway's left edge into the grass and ground looped to the left.
The pilot said "The right wheel dug into the soil on the left side of the runway and the airplane tipped up...
."
The pilot said he may have applied too much right rudder as he brought the airplane onto its main landing gear.
According to the pilot, he had 19-hours in the accident airplane.
He said he had about 255-hours in a homebuilt tail wheel airplane that was about the same size as the accident airplane.
He said the experimental airplane had a 70-HP engine on it.
The accident airplane was equipped with a 150 horse power engine.
The pilot said he had about 1-hour of dual instruction in N5908D before flying it as pilot-in-command.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
