National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WILLOW, AK
Accident Number: ANC99LA011
Date & Time: 11/03/1998, 1450 AST
Registration: N5129Y
Aircraft: Piper PA-12
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The certificated private pilot reported that while in cruise flight at 1,000 feet msl, all engine power was lost.
He stated that all attempts to restore engine power failed, forcing him to select an open swampy meadow as an emergency landing area.
During the ensuing landing roll, the airplane's main landing gear contacted soft tundra, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings, fuselage and tail.
The NTSB investigator-in-charge did not have access to the airplane or engine after recovery, and was unable to perform a postaccident inspection.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power due to an undetermined reason.
A factor associated with the accident was unsuitable terrain for a forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On November 3, 1998, about 1450 Alaska standard time, a wheel equipped Piper PA-12 airplane, N5129Y, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power and subsequent off airport forced landing about 15 miles northeast of Willow, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The certificated private pilot, and the one passenger aboard were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator- in-charge on November 4, 1998, the pilot reported that while in cruise flight at 1,000 feet msl, all engine power was lost.
He stated that all attempts to restore engine power failed, forcing him to select an open swampy meadow as an emergency landing area.
During the ensuing landing roll, the airplane's main landing gear contacted soft tundra, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the wings, fuselage and tail.
The NTSB investigator-in-charge did not have access to the airplane or engine after recovery, and was unable to perform a postaccident inspection.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
