National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: JANESVILLE, WI
Accident Number: CHI99LA016
Date & Time: 11/01/1998, 2001 CST
Registration: N8069M
Aircraft: Cessna 310I
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis A preflight inspection was conducted in the hangar.
The airplane was then pulled from the hangar by use of a tow bar.
The pilot and two passengers boarded the airplane and departed on a local flight.
During the landing gear retraction a loud bang was heard.
Attempts to extend the gear were unsuccessful and an emergency landing was initiated.
During the final approach the engines were shut down.
When it was obvious that the airplane would touch down short of the runway an attempt to regain power was initiated; however, restoration of power was not sufficient to avoid impact with the terrain 750 feet short of the runway.
An examination subsequent to the accident found the tow bar adjacent to the airplane in the field.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate preflight inspection in which he failed to remove the tow bar from the nose gear.
Also causal was his misjudgment of distance and altitude from the runway which resulted in both his premature shutdown of the engines and an undershoot of the runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: STANDING - PRE-FLIGHT Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) MISCELLANEOUS EQUIPMENT - NOT REMOVED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - JAMMED ---------- Occurrence #2: WHEELS UP LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
(C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - POOR - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: UNDERSHOOT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 5.
(C) DISTANCE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 6.
ENGINE SHUTDOWN - PREMATURE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On November 1, 1998, at 2001 central standard time, a Cessna 310I, N8069M, sustained substantial damage during an undershoot to runway 4 (6,701' X  150' dry/asphalt) at Rock County Airport, near Janesville, Wisconsin.
The pilot said that because the nose landing gear would not extend an emergency landing was initiated.
He said that during the emergency landing the engine power was reduced to zero and the landing was short of the runway.
The pilot and one passenger reported no injuries, while the pilot rated passenger reported minor injuries.
The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.
No flight plan was on file.
The local flight departed at 1825.
In his written statement, the owner/pilot indicated that the pre-flight was conducted in the hangar.
He said he decided to pull the airplane out of the hangar by use of a tow bar, after which using an auxiliary power unit the engines were started.
The pilot was in the left seat during the engine startup.
After stowing the auxiliary power unit, the other passengers boarded the airplane and the airplane departed on a local flight.
During the landing gear retraction a "... loud bang was heard...
."
He said that when he attempted to lower the landing gear utilizing both normal and emergency landing gear extension procedures; he was unable to obtain a safe gear down indication.
After making a low pass over the airport, it was determined that the nose landing gear  was not extended.
He said he then decided that an emergency landing would have to be conducted.
He stated that during the final approach the engines were shut down, and the fuel and electrical switches were turned off.
The pilot said that it then became apparent that the airplane would touch down short of the runway.
At that point the pilot/passenger in the right seat took the controls and an attempt to regain power was initiated; however, the airplane impacted the terrain 750 feet short of the runway, prior to restoration of sufficient power to avoid the undershoot.
After the accident the tow bar was found adjacent to the airplane in the field.
A subsequent examination of the airplane revealed no pre-accident anomalies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 41, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
