National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Buena, WA
Accident Number: WPR10LA150
Date & Time: 03/03/2010, 1653 PST
Registration: N6233V
Aircraft: MUFFETT QUICKSLVR SPRNT II
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The student pilot reported that he had been performing touch-and-go practice takeoff and landings at a private airstrip.
After approximately 10 landings, he taxied the airplane back to the parking area where he met with the former owner of the airplane and discussed the flight.
After a short conversation, the pilot taxied to the end of the runway and departed to the east.
The pilot reported that shortly after takeoff, the engine experienced a total loss of power and he attempted to land in a nearby field.
The airplane subsequently impacted terrain, which resulted in substantial damage to the fuselage and wing assembly.
The pilot attributed the loss of engine power to a lack of fuel, stating that the airplane's fuel supply was exhausted.
The former owner of the airplane, who also witnessed the accident, responded to the accident site and reported observing no fuel in the fuel tank, lines, or filter.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion as a result of the student pilot™s inadequate fuel planning.
The airplane, which is owned by the student pilot, was operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The student pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, sustained serious injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight that originated from Buena.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) Investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 5, 2010, the student pilot stated he was practicing touch-and-go landings at the private airstrip.
After approximately 10 landings, the pilot taxied the airplane back to the parking area where he met with a friend (the former owner of the airplane) and discussed the flight.
After a short conversation the pilot taxied to the departure end of the runway and departed to the east.
He reported that shortly after takeoff the engine lost power and he attempted to land in a nearby field.
The airplane subsequently impacted terrain, which resulted in substantial damage to the fuselage and wing assembly.
The pilot attributed the loss of engine power to a lack of fuel, stating that the airplane simply ran out of gas.
An acquaintance of the pilot (and former owner of the airplane) reported that he heard the airplane takeoff.
The acquaintance went to the accident site to assist the pilot.
He reported that while at the site, he observed no fuel in the fuel tank, lines or filter.
He further reported that the student pilot had run out of fuel on two previous occasions.
The pilot did not submit a Pilot/Operator Report, Form 6120.1.
Multiple attempts to contact the pilot following the March 5 telephone conversation were not successful.
