Page 1 of 15
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Mount Airy, NC
Accident Number:
NYC08MA090
Date & Time:
02/01/2008, 1128 EST 
Registration:
N57WR
Aircraft:
RAYTHEON AIRCRAFT COMPANY 
C90A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
6 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
While flying a nonprecision approach, the pilot deliberately descended below the minimum 
descent altitude (MDA) and attempted to execute a circle to land below the published circling 
minimums instead of executing the published missed approach procedure. During the circle to 
land, visual contact with the airport environment was lost and engine power was never 
increased after the airplane had leveled off. The airplane decelerated and entered an 
aerodynamic stall, followed by an uncontrolled descent which continued until ground impact. 
Weather at the time consisted of rain, with ceilings ranging from 300 to 600 feet, and visibility 
remaining relatively constant at 2.5 miles in fog. Review of the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) 
audio revealed that the pilot had displayed some non professional behavior prior to initiating 
the approach. Also contained on the CVR were comments by the pilot indicating he planned to 
descend below the MDA prior to acquiring the airport visually, and would have to execute a 
circling approach. Moments after stating a circling approach would be needed, the pilot 
received a sink rate aural warning from the enhanced ground proximity warning system 
(EGPWS). After several seconds, a series of stall warnings was recorded prior to the airplane 
impacting terrain. EGPWS data revealed, the airplane had decelerated approximately 75 knots 
in the last 20 seconds of the flight. Examination of the wreckage did not reveal any preimpact 
failures or malfunctions with the airplane or any of its systems. Toxicology testing detected 
sertraline in the pilot™s kidney and liver. Sertraline is a prescription antidepressant medication 
used for anxiety, obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, 
and social phobia. The pilot™s personal medical records indicated that he had been treated 
previously with two other antidepressant medications for ﬁanxiety and depressionﬂ and a 
history of ﬁimpatienceﬂ and ﬁcompulsiveness.ﬂ The records also documented a diagnosis of 
diabetes without any indication of medications for the condition, and further noted three 
episodes of kidney stones, most recently experiencing ﬁsevere and profound discomfortﬂ from a 
kidney stone while flying in 2005. None of these conditions or medications had been noted by 
the pilot on prior applications for an airman medical certificate. It is not clear whether any of 
the pilot™s medical conditions could account for his behavior or may have contributed to the 
accident.
Page 2 of 15NYC08MA090
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane in instrument meteorological conditions. 
Contributing to the accident were the pilot's improper decision to descend below the minimum 
descent altitude, and failure to follow the published missed approach procedure.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Use of medication/drugs - Pilot
Use of policy/procedure - Pilot (Factor)
Environmental issues
Low ceiling - Decision related to condition
Low visibility - Decision related to condition
Drizzle/mist - Decision related to condition
Page 3 of 15NYC08MA090
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 1, 2008, about 1128 eastern standard time, a Raytheon Aircraft Company C90A, 
N57WR, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during a missed approach 
following an instrument approach to the Mount Airy/Surry County Airport (MWK), Mount 
Airy, North Carolina. The certificated commercial pilot, pilot rated passenger, and four 
passengers were fatally injured. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and an 
instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed for the flight, which departed Polk 
County Airport/Cornelius Moore Field (4A4), Cedartown, Georgia. The personal flight was 
conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
According to witness statements, rain, low ceilings, and fog were present in the local area. The 
pilot was first heard to check in on the MWK common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF), and 
announce ﬁfinal 36, Mount Airy.ﬂ The airplane was then observed to ﬁbreak out of the cloudsﬂ 
at approximately 500 feet above ground level (agl), in close proximity to the airport, and then 
descend ﬁrapidlyﬂ for about 200 feet. It was then observed to ﬁside stepﬂ to the left of the 
runway, and fly parallel to it for its entire length. The airplane then made a ﬁhardﬂ left turn at 
the end of the runway and climbed into the ﬁfog.ﬂ A few minutes later, it came out of the 
bottom of the clouds in a nose down attitude, disappeared behind trees east of the airport and 
the sound of impact was heard. 
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) air traffic control (ATC) voice and radar 
data, the airplane departed 4A4 at approximately 1024 and arrived in the vicinity of MWK 
approximately 50 minutes later. 
After arrival in the local area, the pilot contacted Greensboro Approach (GSO) and advised the 
controller that he was level at 4,000 feet above mean sea level (msl) on a northeast-bound 
track toward MWK. The GSO controller then instructed the pilot to maintain 4,000 feet msl 
until crossing the EDLIF waypoint, fly the Global Positioning System (GPS) approach to 
runway 36 at MWK, and switch to the CTAF for the airport. 
Radar data obtained from the terminal radar approach control facility at GSO contained 
recorded radar targets for the accident airplane from 1112 until 1128. During the GPS approach 
to runway 36, the airplane was recorded tracking inbound to the airport. The last radar target 
on final approach was recorded at 1125:40, at 2000 feet, approximately 1.25 nautical miles 
(nm) from the runway 36 threshold. No more radar targets were recorded until 1127:49, when 
the target representing the airplane reappeared on radar on a left base leg at 2300 feet. The 
target continued to turn left to about a 020-degree heading, overfly the threshold of runway 36 
at 2300 feet, and continue on a 020-degree heading for another 14 seconds. The last target was 
recorded to the east of the airport, .6 nm south of the accident site, at 2,700 feet. 
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight. The wreckage was located at 36 degrees, 
27.797 minutes north latitude, 80 degrees, 33.042 minutes west longitude, at an elevation of 
1,219 feet msl.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane 
multiengine land, airplane single engine land, and instrument airplane. He reported 780 total 
Page 4 of 15NYC08MA090
hours of flight experience on his most recent application for a FAA second-class medical 
certificate, dated August 6, 2007.
According to FAA records, the pilot-rated passenger held a private pilot certificate with ratings 
for airplane single engine land and instrument airplane. According to pilot records, he had 
accrued 1082.8 total hours of flight experience. His most recent application for a FAA second-
class medical certificate was dated November 9, 2006.
 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
According to FAA and maintenance records, the airplane was manufactured in 2005. The 
airplane™s most recent manufacturer™s recommended inspection program, phase inspection, 
was completed on November 9, 2007. At that time the airplane had accrued 799.7 total hours 
of operation. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
According to National Weather Service (NWS) analysis charts, a surface occluded/cold front 
was moving eastward across western North Carolina during the late morning of February 1. 
Also, the charts indicated that a warm front over southern/eastern North Carolina was moving 
northward. A low-level cold wedge was situated between the fronts over north-central North 
Carolina (including MWK). The cold wedge was characterized by light easterly/northeasterly 
low-level flow near the surface and a strong inversion at about 5,000 feet. At and above the 
inversion, strong southerly-south southwesterly winds with speeds exceeding 50 knots were 
indicated over central North Carolina.
Widespread IFR conditions with scattered rain and drizzle were prevalent in the cold wedge. 
Cloud Conditions on Approach
Infrared satellite images for the nominal times of 1110 and 1132 indicated cloud-top radiative 
temperatures in the vicinity of MWK ranged between +4 and Œ6 degrees Celsius (C). Upper air 
data implied cloud tops in this temperature range were 7,200 and 13,000 feet msl. 
Surface Weather Conditions 
An Automated Weather Observing System-3 (AWOS-3) recorded and disseminated official 
weather observations at MWK.  
A weather observation taken about 3 minutes before the accident included: calm winds, 
visibility 2 and 1/2 miles in drizzle, overcast clouds at 600 feet, temperature 1 degrees C, dew 
point 0 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.90 inches of mercury. 
A weather observation taken about 13 minutes after the accident included: calm winds, 
visibility 2 and 1/2 miles in heavy drizzle, broken clouds at 300 feet, overcast at 600 feet, 
temperature 1 degrees C, dew point 0 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.90 inches of 
mercury. 
A review of surrounding weather observations by a NTSB meteorologist and post-accident 
certification of the equipment indicated that the AWOS-3 was reporting current weather 
conditions within the design specifications of the system.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Page 5 of 15NYC08MA090
According to the Airport Facility Directory, MWK was a public use airport. It had one runway, 
oriented in an 18/36 configuration. Runway 36 was asphalt, in good condition. It was 4,300 
feet long by 75 feet wide. The runway had non-precision markings that were in good condition. 
It was equipped with runway end identifier lights, medium intensity runway edge lights, and a 
2-light precision approach path indicator.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
During examination of the wreckage, it was discovered that the airplane was equipped with an 
L-3 Communications FA 2100-1010 Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR). Examination of the 
recorder by the NTSB's vehicle recorders laboratory revealed that the CVR had recorded 31 
minutes and 3 seconds of useable audio.
The following is a summary of the recorded events:
The recording began at 10:57:23, prior to the pilot being cleared for the approach. Review of 
the audio revealed that the private pilot passenger who was seated in the front right seat of the 
airplane was assisting the pilot during the flight.
At 10:57:49, a discussion ensued between the pilot and pilot-rated passenger regarding a 
possible diversion if needed to another airport that was 25 miles from MWK. At that time the 
pilot asked the pilot-rated passenger if he remembered how to shoot an instrument landing 
system (ILS) approach in ﬁthis thing.ﬂ 
At 10:58:08, the pilot rated passenger advised him that he thought he could.
At 11:00:58, the pilot began to sing to the passengers, "Save my life I'm going down for the last 
time." This continued until 11:01:22, when the pilot began a commentary to the passengers 
stating, "If anybody back there believes in the good Lord, I believe now would be a good time to 
hit your knees."
Shortly after, the pilot began a descent to 11,000 msl.
At 11:03:32, the pilot commented to the pilot-rated passenger, ﬁlet™s slow down a little bit.ﬂ 
This was followed by the pilot advising the pilot rated passenger that if he reduced power 
anymore, it would scare his passengers.
At 11:05:40, the pilot and pilot-rated passenger received the weather via the AWOS. The 
weather they received at that time was: wind calm, visibility 3 miles in heavy drizzle, overcast 
ceiling at 600 feet, temperature 1 degree C, dewpoint Œ1 degree C, and altimeter 29.91 inches of 
mercury.
At 11:06:25, the pilot stated, ﬁyou watch ‚em Œ you watch this ice for me,ﬂ as the windshield was 
beginning to accrete ice.
At 11:06:47, the pilot-rated passenger reminded the pilot to set his altimeter to the reported 
barometric pressure.
At 11:06:58, the pilot advised the pilot-rated passenger that the ice was melting off the 
airplane.
Moments later, the pilot was instructed by ATC to descend at pilot™s discretion to 6,000 feet.
At 11:09:08, the pilot requested the pilot-rated passenger to help ﬁmake sure we™re set up,ﬂ and 
to ﬁread me off.ﬂ
Page 6 of 15NYC08MA090
At 11:09:13, the pilot-rated passenger began to brief the GPS runway 36 approach procedure.
At 11:11:28, the pilot-rated passenger asked the pilot, ﬁDo you want to go ahead and slow down 
a little bit?ﬂ The pilot replied that he was at 160 knots and that he did not want to slow further 
do to ice.
Shortly after, the pilot was cleared to descend to 4,300 feet.
At 11:15:58, the pilot began to talk about the simulator and ground training he received. This 
continued until 11:17:03 at which time the pilot was cleared to descend to 4,000 feet.
At 11:17:37, the pilot was cleared for the ﬁGPS runway three six approach, Mount Airy.ﬂ
At 11:17:57, a conversation between the two pilots began regarding the approach and what 
altitudes they could descend to as they reached each designated navigational fix on the 
approach.
At 11:22:17, the pilot advised the pilot rated passenger to ﬁhave that missed approach thing 
ready.ﬂ
At 11:22:32, a sound similar to flap handle movement and flap extension was recorded.
At 11:22:38, conversation once again ensued regarding what altitudes they could descend to as 
they reached each designated navigational fix on the approach.
At 11:23:07, the pilot-rated passenger stated, ﬁget it down.ﬂ
At 11:23:39, conversation once again ensued regarding what altitudes they could descend to as 
they reached each designated navigational fix on the approach.
At 11:24:10, a sound similar to landing gear extension was recorded.
At 11:24:24, the pilot-rated passenger stated ﬁsixteen hundred not fifteen.ﬂ Moments later the 
pilot responded, ﬁI know but I™m gonna bust it.ﬂ The pilot-rated passenger replied ﬁuh no were 
not.ﬂ
At 11:24:30, the pilot stated ﬁI mean I don™t wanna Œ I™m gonna bust it this way. I™m not gonna 
Œ I™m not going to uh.ﬂ
At 11:25:28, the pilot-rated passenger stated ﬁcome on down.ﬂ Moments later he reiterated, 
ﬁkeep bringing her on down.ﬂ
At 11:26:07, the pilot advised the pilot-rated passenger that they ﬁwe™re way highﬂ and that 
ﬁwe™re gonna have to circle.ﬂ The pilot-rated passenger replied, ﬁkeep bringing it.ﬂ The pilot 
then stated, ﬁwe can™t Œ we can™t land.ﬂ
At 11:26:18, ﬁsink rate. sink rateﬂ was recorded from the enhanced ground proximity warning 
system (EGPWS).
At 11:26:25, a sound similar to flap handle movement and flap retraction was recorded.
At 11:26:36, the pilot stated, ﬁwe™re low.ﬂ Moments later the pilot-rated passenger stated, 
ﬁfourteen hundred.ﬂ
At 11:26:44, the pilot stated, ﬁI don™t know how safe this is.ﬂ
At 11:27:14, the pilot-rated passenger stated, ﬁcircle to land is seventeen hundred, stay at 
eighteen hundred.ﬂ
Page 7 of 15NYC08MA090
At 11:27:14, the pilot asked the pilot-rated passenger if he could see the airport. The pilot-rated 
passenger stated that he could but that ﬁyou need to circle around and go missed.ﬂ
At 11:27:24, the pilot-rated passenger repeated that the pilot needed to ﬁgo missed,ﬂ and 
moments later advised him that he could no longer see the ground.
At 11:27:42, the pilot stated that he did not know which way he was going. The pilot-rated 
passenger then advised him to ﬁturn back to a heading of three six oh.ﬂ
At 11:27:48, a sound similar to a stall warning horn was recorded. This sound was repeated 
multiple times throughout the remainder of the recording.
At 11:28:17, the sound of increasing engine noise along with a sound similar to autopilot 
disconnect was recorded.
At 11:28:23, ﬁsink rate. pull upﬂ was recorded from the EGPWS.
The recording ended at 11:28:26.
 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest in a residential area, upright on a magnetic heading of 200 degrees. 
Its angle of impact was approximately 45 degrees nose down. The fuel system was 
compromised in multiple locations and the ground around the wreckage was fuel-soaked. No 
debris path existed, and the initial impact point coexisted with the remains of the airplane. All 
major components of the airplane were accounted for at the accident site.
Examination of the wreckage revealed no evidence of any preimpact malfunctions, structural 
failures, or in-flight fire. The landing gear was in the extended position prior to impact, and 
both propellers revealed evidence of propeller blade S-bending. No evidence of mechanical 
failure of the propellers or engines was discovered. 
The wreckage displayed crush, fragmentation, and compression damage. Ground scars 
corresponding to the leading edges of the wings were also evident. All doors exhibited evidence 
of being closed on impact and the fuel filler caps were found to be in the closed and locked 
position, with the exception of the left wing fuel filler cap, which was still attached by its 
lanyard to the filler port and was impact damaged.
The nose section had been crushed, the windscreen was partially buried below ground level, 
and the copilot™s side window had been displaced inward. The right-hand side of the fuselage 
sidewall was fractured forward of seat 4B, and the right wing had been displaced from its 
mounting position at both aft attach fittings but remained attached by the center wing attach 
point. The rear fuselage from the aft pressure bulkhead to the horizontal stabilizer was crushed 
and the skin torn nearly circumferentially, with the right side of the fuselage skin separated 
from the trailing edge of the wing to the leading edge of the horizontal stabilizer.
The left wing outer panel had remained attached to the center wing at 3 locations; the aft lower 
fitting, the forward upper fitting, and the aft upper fitting. The aft upper fitting was fractured 
just outboard of the faying surface.
Examination of the primary and secondary flight controls revealed that the left and right 
ailerons and rudder control surfaces exhibited impact damage (crushing and chord-wise 
buckling) and were partially separated from their mounts. Both elevator control surfaces 
Page 8 of 15NYC08MA090
remained attached. Control continuity was established for all flight controls from the respective 
control surface to the main cabin, where crushing of the cockpit floor precluded further 
examination. The rudder trim tab actuatorextension was measured and the extension 
corresponded to a 1 to 2 degree rudder trim tab trailing edge left position. The aileron trim tab 
actuator extension was measured and the extension corresponded to a 7.5 degree aileron trim 
tab trailing edge up position. Both elevator trim actuator extensions were measured and those 
extensions corresponded to a 6 to 7 degree elevator tab trailing edge down position. The 
electric pitch trim was OFF. The cockpit flap switch was in the APPROACH (15 degree) 
position. The four flap actuator extensions were measured, and those extensions corresponded 
to the flaps being between the APPROACH FLAP and FLAP UP positions.
SURVIVAL FACTORS INFORMATION
The airplane™s passenger restraint system consisted of shoulder harnesses and seat belts. These 
were installed by the manufacturer as standard equipment for all six seating positions. 
The cockpit seats shoulder harnesses were of a "Y" configuration with the single strap being 
contained in an inertial reel attached to the back of the seat. The two straps were designed to be 
worn with one strap over each shoulder and fastened by metal loops into the seat belt. Spring 
loading at the inertial reel kept the harness snug, but would allow normal movement required 
during flight operations. The inertial reel was equipped with a locking device that would secure 
the harness in the event of sudden movement or an impact action.
The shoulder harnesses on the passenger seats consisted of a single strap which was routed 
through the top of the seatback and terminated in a triangular metal fastener. The strap was 
designed to be worn diagonally. It ran from the outboard shoulder to the inboard hip area, 
where it was secured by hooking a metal fastener around a securing stud on the male half of 
the seatbelt buckle. The shoulder harness strap coiled and uncoiled from an inertial reel built 
into the passenger seat. Spring loading at the inertial reel kept the shoulder harness snug, but 
allows considerable freedom of movement. However, the inertial reel also incorporated a 
locking device that would secure the harness strap in the event of sudden movement.
According to the King Air C90A Pilot™s Operating Handbook (POH), all occupants were 
required to wear seatbelts during takeoff and landing. If a seat was equipped with a shoulder 
harness, it was also required to be worn during takeoff and landing. 
According to the Surry County Medical Examiner, four of the occupants were found 
unrestrained near the front of the passenger cabin. Examination of the wreckage, and occupant 
restraint system by NTSB investigators revealed, that on four of the six seats, the passenger 
restraints were unfastened. 
14 CFR Part 91.107
According to 14 CFR Part 91.107, ﬁNo pilot may take off a U.S.-registered civil aircraft (except a 
free balloon that incorporates a basket or gondola, or an airship type certificated before 
November 2, 1987) unless the pilot in command of that aircraft ensures that each person on 
board is briefed on how to fasten and unfasten that person's safety belt and, if installed, 
shoulder harness.ﬂ
Additionally, ﬁNo pilot may cause to be moved on the surface, take off, or land a U.S.-registered 
civil aircraft (except a free balloon that incorporates a basket or gondola, or an airship type 
certificated before November 2, 1987) unless the pilot in command of that aircraft ensures that 
Page 9 of 15NYC08MA090
each person on board has been notified to fasten his or her safety belt and, if installed, his or 
her shoulder harness.ﬂ
AM-400-90/2
According to the FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute's publication AM-400-90/2, seat belts 
will only protect occupants in minor impacts; however the use of shoulder belts will reduce 
major injuries by 88 percent and fatalities by 20 percent. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Autopsies were performed on the pilot and pilot rated passenger by the North Carolina Baptist 
Hospital, Department of Pathology on behalf of the Surry County Medical Examiner. 
Toxicological testing of the pilot and pilot rated passenger was conducted at the FAA 
Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
The toxicological report for the pilot rated passenger revealed that no drugs or ethanol were 
detected in his liver or muscle.
The pilot's forensic toxicology report revealed:
" >> SERTRALINE detected in Kidney
>> SERTRALINE detected in Liver 
>> DESMETHYLSERTRALINE detected in Kidney
>> DESMETHYLSERTRALINE detected in Liverﬂ
According to the 2008 edition of Drug facts and Comparisons, Sertraline (commonly known by 
the trade name Zoloft), is a prescription antidepressant medication also used for anxiety, 
obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and social 
phobia. Desmethylsertraline is a metabolite of sertraline.
On applications to the FAA for his Airman Medical Certificate, the pilot had indicated a history 
of ﬁHay fever or allergy,ﬂ ﬁKidney stone or blood in urine,ﬂ and ﬁAdmission to hospital,ﬂ but the 
FAA records did not indicate that any details of the conditions were provided or requested. The 
most recent application, dated August 6, 2007, specifically indicated ﬁNoﬂ in response to 
ﬁDiabetesﬂ and ﬁMental disorders of any sort, depression, anxiety, etc.ﬂ
Review of the pilot™s personal medical records indicated a history of symptoms of ﬁanxiety and 
depressionﬂ in 1996, treated with paroxetine, and a history of ﬁimpatienceﬂ and 
ﬁcompulsivenessﬂ in 2001, treated with citalopram. The records also documented that from 
December 4, 2006 through December 31, 2007, the pilot had filled 6 prescriptions for 30 
tablets of 50 mg sertraline.
The pilot™s personal medical records also indicated that the pilot had been diagnosed with 
diabetes in 2006, with elevated fasting blood glucose of 148 mg/dL, and elevated non-fasting 
blood glucose of 274 mg/dL. The records included no documentation of treatment other than a 
plan for a dietary consult, education, and instructions for blood sugar monitoring.
The pilot™s personal medical records further noted three episodes of kidney stones, most 
recently experiencing ﬁsevere and profound discomfortﬂ from a kidney stone while flying in 
2005.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Page 10 of 15NYC08MA090
Approach Information
Review of the GPS runway 36 approach for MWK revealed that the minimum descent altitude 
(MDA) authorized for a straight in approach was 1,680 feet msl. The MDA for a circling 
approach was 1,700 feet msl. 
The missed approach point (MAP) was located at the runway threshold.
The missed approach was a ﬁClimbing left turn to 4000 direct EDLIF WP and hold.ﬂ
Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM)
According to the AIM, after passing the final approach fix on final approach, aircraft are 
expected to continue inbound on the final approach course and complete the approach or effect 
the missed approach procedure published for that airport.
The AIM advises that, the MAP on a nonprecision approach is not designed with any 
consideration to where the aircraft must begin descent to execute a safe landing. It is developed 
based on terrain, obstructions, navigational aid location (if one exists) and possibly air traffic 
considerations. Because the MAP may be located anywhere from well prior to the runway 
threshold to past the opposite end of the runway, the descent from the MDA to the runway 
threshold cannot be determined based on the MAP location. Descent from MDA at the MAP 
when the MAP is located close to the threshold would require an excessively steep descent 
gradient to land in the normal touchdown zone. Any turn from the final approach course to the 
runway heading may also be a factor in when to begin the descent. 
The AIM also cautions that descent to a straight-in landing from the MDA at the MAP may be 
inadvisable or impossible, on a non-precision approach, even if current weather conditions 
meet the published ceiling and visibility. Aircraft speed, height above the runway, descent rate, 
amount of turn and runway length are some of the factors which must be considered by the 
pilot to determine if a landing can be accomplished. 
In addition, the AIM states that, descent below the MDA, including during the missed 
approach, is not authorized unless the conditions stated in 14 CFR Section 91.175 exist.
14 CFR Part 91.175
According to 14 CFR Part 91.175 (Operation below decision height (DH) or MDA), where a DH 
or MDA is applicable, no pilot may operate an aircraft, except a military aircraft of the United 
States, at any airport below the authorized MDA or continue an approach below the authorized 
DH unlessŠ
(1) The aircraft is continuously in a position from which a descent to a landing on the intended 
runway can be made at a normal rate of descent using normal maneuvers, and for operations 
conducted under part 121 or part 135 unless that descent rate will allow touchdown to occur 
within the touchdown zone of the runway of intended landing; 
(2) The flight visibility is not less than the visibility prescribed in the standard instrument 
approach being used; and 
(3) Except for a Category II or Category III approach where any necessary visual reference 
requirements are specified by the Administrator, at least one of the following visual references 
for the intended runway is distinctly visible and identifiable to the pilot: 
(i) The approach light system, except that the pilot may not descend below 100 feet above the 
Page 11 of 15NYC08MA090
touchdown zone elevation using the approach lights as a reference unless the red terminating 
bars or the red side row bars are also distinctly visible and identifiable. 
(ii) The threshold. 
(iii) The threshold markings. 
(iv) The threshold lights. 
(v) The runway end identifier lights. 
(vi) The visual approach slope indicator. 
(vii) The touchdown zone or touchdown zone markings. 
(viii) The touchdown zone lights. 
(ix) The runway or runway markings. 
(x) The runway lights. 
(d) Landing. No pilot operating an aircraft, except a military aircraft of the United States, may 
land that aircraft whenŠ
(1) For operations conducted under paragraph (l) of this section, the requirements of (l)(4) of 
this section are not met; or
(2) For all other part 91 operations and parts 121, 125, 129, and 135 operations, the flight 
visibility is less than the visibility prescribed in the standard instrument approach procedure 
being used.
(e) Missed approach procedures. Each pilot operating an aircraft, except a military aircraft of 
the United States, shall immediately execute an appropriate missed approach procedure when 
either of the following conditions exist: 
(1) Whenever operating an aircraft pursuant to paragraph (c) or (l) of this section and the 
requirements of that paragraph are not met at either of the following times:
(i) When the aircraft is being operated below MDA; or 
(ii) Upon arrival at the missed approach point, including a DH where a DH is specified and its 
use is required, and at any time after that until touchdown. 
(2) Whenever an identifiable part of the airport is not distinctly visible to the pilot during a 
circling maneuver at or above MDA, unless the inability to see an identifiable part of the 
airport results only from a normal bank of the aircraft during the circling approach. 
Balked Landing (Go Around/Missed Approach)
Review of the King Air C90A POH revealed that in the event of a missed approach, engine 
power should be increased to ﬁMAX ALLOWABLE,ﬂ and initially airspeed of 101 knots should 
be maintained. 
Further review revealed that not only should the flaps be retracted but the landing gear as well. 
When clear of obstacles, the airplane should be accelerated to normal climb airspeed. 
Terrain Avoidance Warning System (TAWS)
A Honeywell/Bendix King KMH-980 Multi-Hazard Awareness System was installed and 
Page 12 of 15NYC08MA090
operating on the accident airplane. The KMH-980 paired a KTA-970 traffic alert system and a 
KGP-860 EGPWS to meet TAWS requirements.
The EGPWS used airplane inputs including geographic position, pressure altitude, and rate of 
climb, combined with an internal terrain, obstacle, and airport database information to predict 
potential conflicts between the predicted aircraft flight path and any terrain or obstacles within 
the database.
The system also utilized airspeed and ground speed to provide warning of potential wind shear 
conditions. If the logic for any programmed warning condition was satisfied, the EGPWS 
would provide visual and aural warning in the cockpit.
The data extracted from the EGPWS contained flight history information for 79 parameters. 
Review of the data revealed an approximate 75-knot decrease in ground speed during the last 
20 seconds of the flight.  
The accident airplane experienced two EGPWS alerts during the accident flight. The first came 
at system time 1137:34:38±1 second (s) and consisted of a Mode 1 ﬁsink rateﬂ warning. The 
second alert was a simultaneous Mode 1 ﬁsink rateﬂ and ﬁpull upﬂ warning at system time 
1137:36:42±1s (The ±1s uncertainty was due to the nominal one second update rate of the 
recorded data.).
According to the Honeywell KMH-980 Pilot™s Guide, initially the voice alert ﬁSink Rateﬂ would 
be heard, and a yellow caution alert annunciator lamp would illuminate.
If an aircraft continued in a high rate of descent, the ﬁSink Rate-Sink Rateﬂ voice alert would be 
repeated at an increasing frequency. 
If an aircraft penetrated the warning boundary, the voice alert ﬁPull Upﬂ would be heard 
continuously and a red warning annunciator lamp would illuminate. 
In both cases, if a pilot reacted to decrease the high rate of descent and the aircraft flight path 
exited the alerting/warning envelope, the annunciator lamp would extinguish and the voice 
alerts would cease.
Stall Warning System
According to the airplane manufacturer, the airplane would stall at 88 knots indicated airspeed 
at maximum gross weight with the flaps up and the engines at idle power.
Indication of an impending aerodynamic stall was provided to the pilot by the stall warning 
system. The system consisted of a lift transducer vane on the leading edge of the left wing, a 
stall warning horn mounted forward of the right instrument panel, a stall warning light on the 
upper center of the instrument panel, a lift transducer heater element, a circuit breaker, and a 
transistor switch.
Aerodynamic forces acting on the lift transducer vane would change when a stall was imminent 
and the vane would move. When the vane moved, the transistor switch would be activated 
which would complete the circuit to the stall warning horn and light; the horn would sound, 
and the light would be illuminated. With a standard onset rate of 1 knot per second, this would 
occur at 5 to 8 knots prior to the stall. 
Stall Recovery 
According to the Airplane Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-3A), a stall occurs when the smooth 
Page 13 of 15NYC08MA090
airflow over the airplane™s wing is disrupted, and the lift degenerates rapidly. This is caused 
when the wing exceeds its critical angle of attack. This can occur at any airspeed, in any 
attitude, with any power setting.
At the first indication of a stall, the pitch attitude and angle of attack must be decreased 
positively and immediately. Since the basic cause of a stall is always an excessive angle of 
attack, the cause must first be eliminated by releasing the back elevator pressure that was 
necessary to attain that angle of attack or by moving the elevator control forward. This lowers 
the nose of the airplane and returns the wing to an effective angle of attack. 
Second, the maximum allowable power should be applied to increase the airplane™s airspeed 
and assist in reducing the wing™s angle of attack. The throttle should be promptly, but 
smoothly, advanced to the maximum allowable power. 
Third, straight-and-level flight should be regained with coordinated use of all controls.
History of Flight
Approach-IFR final approach
not used
Approach-IFR missed 
approach
Terrain avoidance alert
Stall warn/stick-shaker/pusher
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Private
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/06/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/17/2006
Flight Time:
780 hours (Total, all aircraft), 392 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft)
Page 14 of 15NYC08MA090
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
RAYTHEON AIRCRAFT 
COMPANY
Registration:
N57WR
Model/Series:
C90A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
LJ-1678
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/09/2007, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
10160 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
800 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney Aircraft of 
Ca
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-21
Registered Owner:
BLUE SKY AIRWAYS INC
Rated Power:
550 hp
Operator:
BLUE SKY AIRWAYS INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MWK, 1249 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1141 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 / 300 ft agl
Visibility
2 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
1°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Heavy - Drizzle; Fog
Departure Point: 
Cedartown, GA (4A4)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Mount Airy, NC (MWK)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1024 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Mt. Airy/Surry County Airport 
(MWK)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1249 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
Global Positioning System
Runway Length/Width:
4301 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 15 of 15NYC08MA090
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
5 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
6 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
36.463333, -80.550833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd G Gunther
Adopted Date:
04/22/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael W Harville; FAA/FSDO; Greensboro, NC
Denis Rivard; TSBC; Ottawa, Canada,   
Paul Yoos; Hawker Beechcraft; Wichita, KS
Thomas A Berthe; Pratt & Whitney Canada; Montreal, Canada,   
Tom McCreary; Hartzell Propeller; Piqua, OH
Publish Date:
04/22/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
