Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
KAMUELA, HI
Accident Number:
LAX96LA104
Date & Time:
02/01/1996, 1240 HST 
Registration:
N90194
Aircraft:
Bell 206BIII
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
The pilot experienced two engine chip warning light illuminations while conducting local air 
tours.  After the second warning light illumination, the operator instructed the pilot to ferry the 
helicopter to the company's maintenance base.  The engine sustained a total loss of power 
while en route to the maintenance facility and the pilot executed an emergency landing.  The 
helicopter sustained a hard landing.  The engine examination disclosed that the nose case (No. 
1) bearing failed and the engine sustained a catastrophic failure due to oil starvation. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
failure of the nose case (No.1) bearing resulting in oil starvation. 
Page 2 of 6LAX96LA104
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,BEARING - FAILURE,TOTAL
2. (C) FLUID,OIL - STARVATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. AUTOROTATION - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Page 3 of 6LAX96LA104
Factual Information
 On February 1, 1996, at 1240 hours Hawaiian standard time, a Bell 206BIII Helicopter, 
N90194, experienced a hard landing while executing an emergency autorotation near Kamuela, 
Hawaii.  The pilot was conducting a visual flight rules positioning flight to Waimea-Kohala 
Airport, Kamuela, at the time of the accident.  The helicopter, registered to and operated by 
Kenai Air Hawaii, Inc., Kailua Kona, Hawaii, sustained substantial damage.  The certificated 
commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  The flight originated at Hilo International Airport, Hilo, Hawaii, at 1205 hours.
The investigating FAA inspector reported the engine nose case (No. 1) bearing failed and the 
entire rotating group seized.  He also said that the pilot reported that the helicopter 
experienced metal chip detector warning lights on two previous flights.
The pilot reported in the accident report that he had been assigned to fly a tour flight schedule 
on the accident date.  He departed Keahole Airport, Kailua Kona, at 0800 and arrived at Hilo 
Airport at 0836 in another helicopter.
He departed Hilo Airport in the accident helicopter on a tour flight at 0910.  When returning 
from the tour flight, about 0950, the engine chip light illuminated.  After landing at Hilo 
Airport, a mechanic removed the upper engine chip plug.  The plug contained a small "metal 
flaking/fuzz" particle.  The chip light did not illuminate during a post maintenance engine run-
up.
The pilot departed on another tour flight at 1040.  The engine chip light again illuminated 
during the return flight, about 1125.  The mechanic removed the upper engine chip plug and 
found that it again contained a small "metal flaking/fuzz" particle.  
The company management decided that the helicopter should not be used for further tour 
flights and that it should be ferried to Keahole Airport, the company's principal maintenance 
facility.  
Selected portions of the pilot's written statement follows:  
I departed Hilo Airport at 1205 local northwest bound and passing Honokaa I turned toward 
Waimea Airport climbing to 3,600 Ft. msl.  Passing southeast of Lakeland, the ENG Chip light 
illuminated. [The] engine oil pressure began to fluctuate between 50 - 100 psi while the engine 
oil temperature remained constant at 95C [95 degrees Celsius]. [The] engine torque pressure 
began to fluctuate with the engine oil pressure.  Two (2) minutes later the TOT [Total Oil 
Temperature] rose to 750 degrees at 70 percent torque.  I then felt a slight shudder and brief 
vibration [which was] later determined probably caused by a windshear line (normal in this 
area). [The] TOT [gauge] then went to 800 degrees at minimum torque.  I was approximately 1 
1/2 miles east of the Waimea runway and turned directly toward the runway.  After the turn I 
smelled what seemed to be hot oil, followed by initial [main] rotor decay.  I entered 
autorotation at 3,000 Ft. msl indicated.  After entry the LOW ROTOR RPM warning horn, 
followed by the ENGINE OUT warning horn, sounded.  I maintained my autorotative descent 
and flared at 50 Ft. agl [above ground level] and applied full collective. [The] rotor RPM had 
deteriorated to 50 percent to full application, not much cushioning, resulting in a hard 
autorotative landing at 1240 local 1/2 mile southeast of midfield at Waimea Airport.
The engine was sent to Allison for examination.  The disassembly examination revealed the 
Page 4 of 6LAX96LA104
engine sustained a catastrophic failure due to oil starvation.  According to an Allison 
representative, the oil starvation resulted from the failure of the nose case bearing.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
59, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/02/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
9984 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5714 hours (Total, this make and model), 9230 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 183 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 52 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N90194
Model/Series:
206BIII 206BIII
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1697
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/20/1996, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
24 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
17094 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
250C20
Registered Owner:
KENAI AIR HAWAII, INC.
Rated Power:
420 hp
Operator:
KENAI AIR HAWAII, INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Page 5 of 6LAX96LA104
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4000 ft agl
Visibility
15 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
225°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
HILO, HI (IT0)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (MUE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1205 HST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
WAIMEA-KOHALA (MUE)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
2671 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
A.         D LLORENTE
Adopted Date:
09/24/1996
Additional Participating Persons:
STEVEN   DOUGLAS; HONOLULU, HI
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX96LA104
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
