Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Siler City, NC
Accident Number:
ERA15LA231
Date & Time:
06/02/2015, 0800 EDT 
Registration:
N985K
Aircraft:
BEECH A36
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The purpose of the accident flight was to reposition the accident airplane in order to have 
maintenance performed on its alternator. The accident pilot planned to fly with the airplane's 
landing gear extended for the duration of the flight and used a handheld radio for 
communications, presumably because of the intermittent or non-functional state of the 
alternator. Another pilot, who was flying in his own airplane, accompanied the accident flight, 
and they arrived in the vicinity of the destination airport about the same time. As the accident 
pilot maneuvered his airplane to land, the accompanying pilot watched as the accident airplane 
flew a downwind traffic pattern leg very close to the runway, then entered a "tight" base-to-
final turn. The airplane subsequently entered what the accompanying pilot described as an 
accelerated aerodynamic stall and descended in a nose-down attitude toward the ground. The 
airplane impacted trees and terrain about 500 ft short of the runway threshold. A postaccident 
examination of the wreckage revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical malfunctions 
or failures, with the exception of the alternator, which failed a diagnostic test run.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed and his exceedance of the airplane's critical 
angle of attack while maneuvering for landing, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall.
Page 2 of 7ERA15LA231
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Angle of attack - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 7ERA15LA231
Factual Information
On June 2, 2015, about 0800 eastern daylight time, a Beech A36, N985K, was substantially 
damaged when it impacted terrain while attempting to land at Siler City Municipal Airport 
(SCR), Siler City, North Carolina. The private pilot was seriously injured, and the commercial 
pilot-rated passenger was fatally injured. The airplane was privately owned and operated under 
the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 91. Instrument meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight, which originated from 
Moore County Airport (SOP), Pinehurst, North Carolina.
According to a friend of the pilot, the purpose of the accident flight was to reposition the 
airplane in order to have maintenance performed on the alternator. The accident airplane 
departed from SOP, and, due to concerns related to the airplane's electrical system, the pilot 
kept the landing gear extended for the duration of the flight and planned to utilize a handheld 
communication radio. The friend departed SOP a short time later in his own airplane and 
arrived in the area of SCR before the accident airplane. The friend reported that a "haze" layer 
was present near the north side of the airport that was not present toward the south. The friend 
subsequently maneuvered his airplane so that the accident airplane could enter the traffic 
pattern and land first.
The accident airplane initially entered the traffic pattern on a downwind leg for landing on 
runway 22, but upon noting the haze to the north, the pilot announced that they would 
transition over top of the airport to a left downwind for landing on runway 4. The friend 
intermittently observed the accident airplane as it maneuvered and noted that, while on the 
downwind-to-base turn to the runway, the airplane was near the runway in a left bank and 
nose-high attitude. He further described the turn from base to final as "too tight," and he 
thought that the airplane had entered an accelerated stall. When he next saw the airplane, it 
was in a nose-down attitude heading toward a stand of trees that bordered the runway's east 
side short of the runway threshold. The friend did not observe the impact, but when he did not 
receive a reply to his inquiries as to their position, he assumed that the airplane had crashed. 
He subsequently orbited the area where he last observed the airplane and located the accident 
site. He then landed his own airplane, contacted emergency services, and proceeded to the 
accident site to render assistance.
The pilot seated in the left seat held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-
engine land. He held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third-class medical certificate, 
which was issued in June 2014. On the application for that certificate, he reported 1,430 total 
hours of flight experience. The pilot-rated passenger, who was seated in the right seat, held a 
commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single- and multi-engine land, and 
instrument airplane, as well as a flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane single- 
and multi-engine land and instrument airplane. The passenger held an FAA second-class 
medical certificate, which was issued in September 2014, and on the application for that 
certificate, she reported 4,900 total hours of flight experience. According to the friend, the 
passenger was not operating in the capacity of a flight instructor on the accident flight.
Page 4 of 7ERA15LA231
An FAA inspector examined the airplane at the accident site and identified the initial impact 
point as a tree located about 500 ft southeast of the runway 4 approach threshold and about 
300 ft southeast of the extended runway centerline. The wreckage came to rest about 65 ft from 
the initial impact point on a 65° magnetic bearing. First responders advised the inspectors of 
an odor of fuel at the accident site but indicated that there was no postimpact fire.
Detailed examination of the wreckage confirmed flight control continuity from the control 
column and rudder pedals to each flight control surface. The landing gear selector switch was 
found in the extended position, and examination of the landing gear actuators revealed 
positions consistent with the landing gear being extended at impact. The flap actuator was 
found in the retracted position. One of the three propeller blades was separated from the 
propeller hub, and all three blades exhibited chordwise scratching. The airplane's alternator 
was removed and placed on a test bench. The alternator failed the diagnostic test run, with the 
report noting that the unit produced "low output" and recommending replacement of the stator 
and/or rotor.
The 0755 weather observation at SCR included calm wind, 7 statute miles visibility, a broken 
ceiling at 200 ft, and overcast ceiling at 9,000 ft, temperature 19°C, dew point 19°C, and an 
altimeter setting of 30.04 inches of mercury. At 0815, the weather conditions included 5 
statute miles visibility in light rain, scattered clouds at 200 ft, scattered clouds at 6,500 ft, and 
an overcast ceiling at 8,000 ft.
The North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Chief Medical 
Examiner, Raleigh, North Carolina, performed an autopsy of the pilot-rated passenger. The 
reported cause of death was "multiple injuries."
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Loss of control in flight
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
72, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/01/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1430 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 7ERA15LA231
Pilot-Rated Passenger Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
69, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/01/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
4900 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N985K
Model/Series:
A36 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1981
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
E-1947
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/17/2013, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3651 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3501 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental Motors
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-BB
Registered Owner:
BHB OF THE SANDHILLS LLC
Rated Power:
Operator:
BHB OF THE SANDHILLS LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ERA15LA231
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KSCR, 614 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1155 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
73°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Broken / 200 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 200 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.04 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
PINEHURST/SOUTHERN 
PINES, NC (SOP)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Siler City, NC (SCR)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0720 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Siler City Municipal Airport (SCR)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
615 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
4
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5000 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
35.697222, -79.508333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Dennis Diaz
Adopted Date:
05/09/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Cecil J Land; FAA/FSDO; Greensboro, NC
Andrew Hall; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Christopher Lang; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
05/09/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91285
Page 7 of 7ERA15LA231
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
