Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Oshkosh, WI
Accident Number:
CEN15FA249
Date & Time:
06/02/2015, 1520 CDT 
Registration:
N123SX
Aircraft:
MONNETT JOHN T JR SONEX SA
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot and passenger departed on a local flight in the amateur-built experimental airplane 
using an intersection departure from the runway. Several frames of a surveillance video that 
captured the airplane during the initial climb from the runway showed a thin white trail of 
vapor/smoke behind the airplane. GPS data recovered from the airplane indicated that the 
airplane climbed to about 100 ft above ground level, leveled off, turned left at the end of the 
runway, and entered a descent. Shortly thereafter, the airplane collided with parked vehicles 
about 0.25 miles from the departure end of runway. Examination of the accident site indicated 
that the airplane impacted in a near-vertical attitude, consistent with an aerodynamic stall.
During examination of the wreckage, no evidence of airframe malfunction or failure was 
detected. The propeller displayed no evidence of rotational damage, consistent with a loss of 
engine power before impact. The engine's turbocharger would not rotate, and the turbocharger 
compressor housing displayed impact marks made by the compressor wheel, indicating that 
there was little relative motion between the blades and the housing at the time of the impact. 
The turbocharger's wastegate system was tested on an exemplar engine, and no anomalies were 
noted. It could not be determined whether the turbocharger would not rotate due to impact 
damage or whether it seized in flight resulting in a partial loss of engine power. Engine test 
runs with a turbocharger in a seized condition could not be conducted. 
The mixture control lever was found near the idle-cutoff position with a corresponding 
witness/impact mark around the circumference of the control stem, indicating that the lever 
was in the cutoff position at the time of impact. It could not be determined at what point 
during the flight the lever was moved to the cutoff position. Attempts to produce white smoke 
from the engine by leaning the mixture to the cutoff position and by inducing a loss of engine 
power due to water contamination were unsuccessful. The exemplar engine's failure to produce 
white smoke when the mixture was leaned suggests that the loss of engine power was not the 
result of the pilot moving the mixture control lever to the cutoff position during takeoff. It is 
possible that the pilot moved the lever to the cutoff position after the airplane departed from 
controlled flight. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
Page 2 of 9CEN15FA249
The circumstances of the accident are consistent with the pilot failing to maintain sufficient 
airspeed following a loss of engine power during takeoff, resulting in the airplane's wing 
exceeding its critical angle-of-attack and a subsequent aerodynamic stall. Instead of using the 
full runway length of 6,179 ft, the pilot elected an intersection takeoff with about 2,570 ft of 
available runway. Calculations showed that, had the pilot used the entire runway for takeoff, 
sufficient runway for a landing following the loss of engine power would likely have been 
available.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain sufficient airspeed following a loss of engine power during initial 
takeoff climb, which resulted in the airplane's wing exceeding its critical angle-of-attack and a 
subsequent aerodynamic stall. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined 
because examination of the wreckage revealed no mechanical deficiencies. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's decision to conduct an intersection takeoff.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Angle of attack - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 9CEN15FA249
Factual Information
History of Flight
Takeoff
Loss of engine power (partial)
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On June 2, 2015, about 1520 central daylight time, a Sonex SA amateur-built airplane, 
N123SX, impacted unoccupied, parked military vehicles at a manufacturing facility shortly 
after departing the Wittman Regional Airport (OSH), Oshkosh, Wisconsin. The private pilot 
and pilot rated passenger were fatally injured, and the airplane was substantially damaged. The 
airplane was registered to and operated by Sonex Aircraft LLC, under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the flight which operated without a flight plan. The local flight was originating at the time of 
the accident.
According to OSH air traffic control tower personnel, the airplane departed runway 9 from the 
intersection of runway 9 and runway 13. After clearing the airplane for takeoff, the tower 
controller focused his/her attention on inbound traffic and did not witness the accident.
A surveillance video from Oshkosh Defense manufacturing facility captured a portion of the 
accident flight. The video captured the airplane during its initial climb from the runway. In 
several of the frames, a wisp of white appears to briefly emanate from the airplane.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/22/2013
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 715 hours (Total, all aircraft), 25 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 4 of 9CEN15FA249
The pilot, age 40, held a private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land, 
airplane single engine sea, and gliders. He was issued a third class medical certificate on 
February 22, 2013, without any limitations. As of March 15, 2015, the pilot had accrued 715 
hours of total time. He was estimated to have at least 540 hours in Sonex type airplanes and 25 
hours in the AeroVee Turbo airplane.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MONNETT JOHN T JR
Registration:
N123SX
Model/Series:
SONEX SA 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2007
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
0008
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/12/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
24 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
150 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Experimental
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
AeroVee Turbo
Registered Owner:
SONEX AIRCRAFT LLC
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
SONEX AIRCRAFT LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The Sonex SA was a low-wing, tailwheel, 2 seat airplane built in 2007, serial number 0008. It 
was powered by a 100 horsepower AeroVee Turbo engine driving a wood composite, fixed 
pitch, Sensenich propeller. On June 20, 2007, it was issued a special experimental/amateur-
built airworthiness certificate. The original AeroVee engine was removed and the company's 
prototype AeroVee Turbo was installed on May 8, 2014, which returned the airplane back to 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Phase 1 test flight period, at a tachometer time of 96.52 
hours. Phase 1 was completed on September 23, 2014, at a tachometer time of 118.2 hours. The 
last recorded maintenance on the airplane was a modification to the cockpit avionics, on 
January 12, 2015, at a tachometer time of 126.8. Following that maintenance, the airplane was 
flown cross-country to Florida, and returned back to Oshkosh, Wisconsin, on April 28, 2015. A 
company mechanic recalled flying with the accident pilot for no more than 1 hour in the days 
preceding the accident flight and stated the flight was uneventful.
The airplane was last fueled on April 28, 2015, at the De Kalb Taylor Municipal Airport and 
flown about 125 nautical miles to Oshkosh, Wisconsin.
Page 5 of 9CEN15FA249
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KOSH, 782 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1537 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
325°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.1 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
OSHKOSH, WI (OSH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
OSHKOSH, WI (OSH)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1520 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
At 1537, an automated weather reporting facility located at the Wittman Regional Airport, 
reported wind from 130° at 11 knots, visibility 10 miles, a clear sky, temperature 72° F, dew 
point 39° F, and an altimeter setting of 30.10 inches.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
43.992500, -88.545833 (est)
The accident site was located about a ¼ mile east-northeast of the departure end of runway 9. 
The airplane came to rest on a general heading of 220 degrees on unoccupied parked military 
vehicles located on Oshkosh Defense property. All components of the airplane were found in 
the immediate vicinity of the accident site. The engine separated from the airplane and was 
located on the ground in front of the airplane. All major components remained attached to the 
airplane. The airplane was transported to a secure facility for further examination.
Both wings displayed impact damage. The leading edge of the left wing was twisted rearward. 
The left flap remained attached to the left wing. The left aileron remained attached to the 
aileron push/pull rod. The outboard portion of the left aileron as well as the outboard portion 
of the left wing outboard of the aileron control rod section was torn and separated. The leading 
Page 6 of 9CEN15FA249
edge of the right wing displayed rearward accordion crushing. The right aileron and flap 
remained attached to the wing. The empennage was distorted and wrinkled near the aft cockpit 
and relatively undamaged near the rudder. The horizontal stabilizers, vertical stabilizer, and 
rudder were not damaged. Both elevators were buckled at their inboard sides. Flight control 
continuity was established from the ailerons to a section under the cockpit control stick. In 
addition, elevator continuity was established from the elevators to the same section under the 
cockpit control stick. This area was crushed and distorted resulting in an inability to smoothly 
move the cockpit controls. Continuity to the rudder was established to the rudder pedals. The 
flaps appeared to be in the retracted position. The flap selector bracket was deformed and flap 
handle was bent away from the bracket. Both throttles (left and right seat positions) were in the 
full forward position. The mixture control was near the idle-cutoff position with a 
corresponding witness/impact mark around the circumference of the control stem. The 
elevator trim was near the full nose down position, which, according to the company, was an 
area normal for takeoff in this airplane. No preimpact anomalies were detected with the 
airframe.
The propeller remained attached to the engine. Both tips of the wooden propeller were 
fractured in an aft direction. There were gouges on the nose cone of the propeller. No rotation 
scoring was detected on the propeller nose cone or the propeller blades.
The AeroInjector carburetor was impact separated from the engine, but remained connected to 
the airframe via the throttle and mixture cables. The intake housing to the turbocharger was 
impact separated. The cylinder rocker box over the No. 3 and 4 cylinders was also impact 
separated. There was some rearward distortion to the No. 3 and 4 valve rocker arms and rod 
housings. Engine continuity was confirmed through the engine to the flywheel. In addition, 
valve train continuity was established. Seven of the 8 spark plugs were removed and examined. 
None of the spark plugs appeared excessively gapped and were not fouled. The top No. 1 spark 
plug was bound tightly, so it was not removed during the examination to prevent any damage 
to the plug or housing. Oil was detected throughout the engine. All four cylinders were 
borescoped and found to have normal wear and deposits on the cylinder bores, pistons, and 
valves. The AeroInjector's throttle slide operated smoothly and normally, and its needle valve 
was installed in the proper orientation. The needle valve was unobstructed and channeled fuel 
when fuel was added to the AeroInjector's fuel inlet.
The engine's turbocharger could not be rotated by hand. Disassembly of the turbo found static 
marks corresponding to compressor blades without any smearing or deformation of the blades. 
Disassembly of the turbo found that the bearing housing was cracked. Disassembly was halted 
after finding a crack in the housing and the component was shipped to the NTSB materials 
laboratory in Washington D.C. for further examination.
The airplane was equipped with a MGL Avionics iEFIS Lite electronic flight instrument system. 
The unit's micro SD card and portions of the iEFIS were shipped to the NTSB vehicle recorders 
laboratory for data download.
Page 7 of 9CEN15FA249
Airport Information
The Wittman Regional Airport is a public airport with a control tower, and it is serviced by 4 
runways aligned with 18/36, 9/27, 5/23, and 13/31. The airplane departed from runway 9, 
which is a 6,179 foot long, grooved concrete reported to be in good condition. The pilot elected 
to do an intersection takeoff from the intersection of runway 9 and 13, with about 2,570 feet of 
available runway for the takeoff.
Medical And Pathological Information
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Fond du Lac County Medical Examiner as 
authorized by the Winnebago County Coroner's Office. The cause of death was multiple 
traumatic injuries.
The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute performed forensic toxicology on specimens from 
the pilot. Testing was negative for carbon monoxide and ethanol. Ibuprofen was detected in 
cavity blood. Ibuprofen is a non-narcotic analgesic and anti-inflammatory agent.
Tests And Research
Turbocharger
The turbocharger was sent to the NTSB materials laboratory for examination. Sonex did not 
provide turbocharger manufacturer information regarding the components of the turbocharger 
assembly, but did provide an exemplar assembly for comparison with the accident assembly. 
No manufacturer identification marks were present of the exemplar turbine or compressor 
housings. The manufacturer name and serial number for the exemplar wastegate actuator were 
present on the left face of the exemplar wastegate actuator housing. However, the left face of 
the accident wastegate actuator housing had an unpainted machined surface, and both the 
manufacturer and serial number were missing.
Impact marks were located at the upper and aft portions of the compressor housing surface. 
The impact marks were relatively distinct and discrete consistent with little relative motion 
between the blades and the housing at the time of impact. Corresponding blade damage was 
observed on the compressor wheel. Six of the compressor blades had radial cracks that 
emanated inward from the outer edges. The cracks were all associated with deformation of the 
blade where the airfoils between the cracks and the blade tip were bent toward the pressure 
face of the blade (toward the direction of rotation). Both the compressor wheel and turbine 
wheel turned together freely within the center housing when either wheel was rotated by hand. 
The flange for attaching the center housing to the compressor housing was fractured around 
the circumference. The fracture surface was uniform and rough consistent with overstress 
fracture. The location of the fracture was consistent with the compressor housing moving to the 
right relative to the center housing.
Page 8 of 9CEN15FA249
While differences were noted between the accident and exemplar wastegate actuator in terms 
of spring coil diameter and number of coils, the displacement response was very close between 
the two actuators.
The accident wastegate actuator was shipped to Sonex for further testing on a test cell engine.
Wastegate Actuator Functional Testing
The accident engine was impact damaged and could not be used to conduct testing. The 
accident wastegate actuator was installed on a test bed engine. Under the auspices of the NTSB 
and FAA, the engine was started and run to maximum power. The wastegate opened when 
manifold pressure exceeded 43 inches and maintained manifold pressure between 40 to 43 
inches. Engine RPMs varied but were generally about 3,100. The wastegate actuator was then 
opened and the engine functionally tested. The engine produced about 2,500 RPM and 
manifold pressure was between 28 to 29 inches.
The actuator was returned to normal operation and the engine functionally tested. Attempts to 
replicate a production of white smoke from the engine were attempted utilizing the full range 
of mixture level motion and speeds and included forcing a loss of engine power due to water 
intrusion. The attempts to replicate the production of white smoke using the test engine were 
unsuccessful.
Of note, actual engine performance with a turbocharger in a seized condition could not be 
conducted. A company employee reported he experienced a degraded turbocharger system a 
few weeks prior to the engine functional test. During that flight, the airplane would fly level, 
but could not maintain a positive climb. He reported that after the flight, the turbo was 
examined and found to not be completely seized, but the piston ring-type seal on the shaft 
connecting the compressor and turbine wheels had partially seized and interfered with the 
shaft's ability to rotate. An examination of the accident turbocharger did not find a similar 
signature. Replicating a seized turbocharger during engine operation was not possible.
Engine Disassembly
The accident engine was disassembled and no preimpact anomalies were detected with the 
engine.
MGL Avionics iEFIS Lite and micro SD card
The micro SD card did not contain any flight performance data for the accident flight, or any 
flights prior to the accident. Only GPS coordinate and altitude information could be retrieved 
directly from the iEFIS. However, this data did not include time information, so airplane 
performance could not be evaluated.
Of the data available, the recording began near the intersection of runways 9 and 13. The 
airplane departed near taxiway alpha and climbed to about 100 feet above ground level. It then 
leveled off and turned left over railroad tracks at the end of the runway and began a descent, at 
which point the recording ended.
Page 9 of 9CEN15FA249
Additional Information
Runway Available
The accident airplane's ground run was about 1,700 feet before the airplane took off from the 
runway. The airplane climbed straight ahead for about 2,150 feet before beginning a left turn. 
The distance traveled during the left turn to the accident site was approximately 583 feet. A 
departure from runway 9 and taxiway B1 would have provided about 5,695 feet of runway 
available.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jason T Aguilera
Adopted Date:
01/11/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Darrell McCullion; FAA FSDO; Milwaukee, WI
Joe Norris; Sonex Aircraft; Oshkosh, WI
Publish Date:
01/11/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91294
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
