Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
HILLIARD, FL
Accident Number:
MIA99FA208
Date & Time:
08/01/1999, 1125 EDT 
Registration:
N9888L
Aircraft:
Gulfstream American AA-1B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that they flew to Hilliard Airpark to practice soft field techniques, and after the 
initial soft field landing they taxied the length of the field and discussed the takeoff, density 
altitude, obstacles on the climbout, takeoff weight, and selected a point on the field beyond 
which point they would initiate a rejected takeoff if necessary.  The pilot further stated that 
after a brief run-up, they initiated the takeoff and climbout with the engine developing normal 
power, but as they approached the trees on climbout, he relinquished control to the flight 
instructor-rated passenger when it became apparent they were not going to clear the trees. The 
pilot stated that the rated passenger assumed control and tried to turn the airplane slightly to 
the left to an area where the trees were shorter and offered better clearance, but the right wing 
hit a tree and the aircraft crashed nose down and came to rest inverted. The airport had been 
notamed closed, and the runway marked with an X, indicating that it was closed. The airport 
and runway closures were due to tree growth off the end of the runways, along the flight path. 
The pilot did not give any indication that he checked the notams, or that he was aware that the 
airport was closed. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's failure to obtain notams and his improper planning and decision to use a closed 
runway for takeoff with tall trees on the departure end, resulting in a subsequent collision with 
the trees. 
Page 2 of 8MIA99FA208
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) NOTAMS - NOT OBTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - CLOSED
5. OBJECT - TREE(S)
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 8MIA99FA208
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 1999, about 1125 eastern daylight time, a Gulfstream American AA-1B, 
N9888L, registered to a private owner, operated as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed on 
takeoff from Hilliard Airpark, Hilliard, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and 
no flight plan was filed.  The airplane was destroyed.  The private-rated pilot sustained serious 
injuries, and the flight instructor-rated passenger received fatal injuries.  The flight was 
originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that they flew to Hilliard Airpark to practice soft field techniques, and 
after the initial soft field landing they taxied the length of the field and discussed the takeoff, 
density altitude, obstacles on the climbout,  takeoff weight, and selected a point on the field 
beyond which point they would initiate a rejected takeoff if necessary.  The pilot further stated 
that after a brief run-up, they initiated the takeoff and climbout with the engine developing 
normal power, but as they approached the trees on climbout he relinquished control to the 
flight instructor-rated passenger when it became apparent they were not going to clear the 
trees. The pilot stated that the rated passenger assumed control and tried to turn the airplane 
slightly to the left to an area where the trees were shorter and offered better clearance, but the 
right wing hit a tree and the aircraft crashed nose down and came to rest inverted.  The pilot 
also stated he was conscious during the whole ordeal, and subsequently crawled for help.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held an FAA private pilot certificate, issued on December 2, 1997.  He also held 
an FAA  third class medical certificate issued on September 2, 1997, with no limitations. 
The pilot's logbook showed one flight each month in 1999 except for April and May, 
when the logbook showed three and two flights respectively. The last flight logged in the pilot's 
logbook prior to the accident was in July 1999. Additional information on the pilot is contained 
in this report under First Pilot Information and in attachments to this report.
The rated-passenger held an FAA commercial pilot certificate with airplane single and 
multiengine land instrument  ratings, as well as a flight instructor certificate with airplane 
single and multiengine land instrument ratings. FAA records showed that the flight instructor-
rated passenger's last medical certificate was a Class III, issued in October 1996.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Information pertaining to N9888L is contained in this report on page 2, under Aircraft 
Information.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. For additional 
information, please see Weather Information on page 3 of this report.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
On January 13, 1999, the State of Florida Department of Transportation conducted an 
inspection of Hilliard Airpark, and determined that the airport did not meet the minimum 
State standards for a public airport.  The inspection report stated that a public airport must 
have at least 2,000 feet of usable runway, and stated that in order to meet this requirement the 
Page 4 of 8MIA99FA208
trees at the ends of the runways at Hilliard Airpark must be cut. The State also requested that 
the Airport Manager issue a notam on the status of the airport.  Notam 02/003 was 
subsequently issued closing the airport, and at the time of the accident the notam was still in 
effect.  In addition, at the time of the accident, runways 36 and 18 were marked with tires, 
painted white, and arranged to depict an  X pattern at the approach/departure ends. The grass 
on the runway, as well as in the area around the X pattern had been freshly mowed.
WRECKAGE AND INPACT INFORMATION
The aircraft crashed about 700 feet off the departure end of runway 36 that it had 
departed from, slightly to the left of the runway centerline in a 358 degree magnetic bearing, in 
a lightly wooded area. The wreckage debris field began at about 500-feet from the end of the 
runway, at the beginning of the wooded area, and extended about 200 feet in a swath centered 
along the 358 degree magnetic bearing. Several trees along the debris swath were freshly 
broken, and others exhibited fresh angled cuts, with dark colored marks that were consistent 
with the paint color on the propeller. 
Examination of the aircraft showed that the main wreckage of the aircraft came to rest 
inverted, with the engine and propeller still attached to the airframe. The left wing was broken 
at the root but remained partially attached to the main wreckage at the aft spar.  The right wing 
and right horizontal stabilizer showed impact damage on their leading edges, and were 
completely sheared off at the roots, and lay detached close to the main wreckage. The fuel tanks 
were ruptured at the wing roots, but there was no fuel or smell of fuel in the area of the main 
wreckage. There also were no indications of fire. The empennage was bent slightly to the left, 
with compression buckling on the left side of the fuselage forward of the empennage. All 
components of the aircraft which were necessary to sustain flight were located in the 
immediate area of the main wreckage.
Examination of the flight control system revealed continuity of the system, which  was 
confirmed by tracing the cables to the flight control surfaces, or to the point where the control 
surfaces were sheared from the main fuselage. There were no separation points in the cables, 
other than at the separation point of the right wing, and the right horizontal stabilizer from the 
fuselage.  
Both seats were in place in the aft most position, and the flight instructor-rated 
passenger's seatbelt and shoulder harness were attached. The pilot's seatbelt and shoulder 
harness were unfastened and there were drag marks leading from the first pilot's cockpit 
position along the ground to a nearby house.
Examination of the propeller and spinner after recovery from the accident site showed 
that there was damage consistent with engine rotation at the time of impact. The propeller 
blades had some minor bending and chordwise scratching. The spinner was compressed and 
exhibited rotational crushing.
Examination of the engine assembly, and accessories were performed after recovery 
from the accident site. The engine was rotated by hand, and continuity was established with the 
crankshaft, camshaft, valve train, and accessory drive gears.  All cylinders produced 
compression.
No obstructions were found in the engine induction system. The cockpit carburetor heat 
control was found in the full on position, but the valve in the induction air box was in the cold 
position, and the control cables were distorted. 
Page 5 of 8MIA99FA208
The carburetor float and needle valve operated normally and all passages within the 
carburetor were clear, clean and unobstructed. The inlet and carburetor screens were clean and 
clear of obstructions. The carburetor, engine driven pump, boost pump and system hoses 
contained residual fuel, and the pump activated when operated by hand. The mixture control 
was set to rich, and the path from the mixture control to the fuel nozzles were unobstructed. 
The magneto switch was in the both position, and the switch operated normally.  Both 
magnetos were examined, and fired on all points. The magneto timing was checked, and found 
to perform to specifications. Each spark plug exhibited some wear and had combustion 
coloration varying from medium to dark brown, consistent with normal engine operation. In 
addition, the exhaust system was unobstructed, and showed no signs of leakage. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Postmortem examination of the flight instructor-rated passenger was done by Dr. 
Margarita Arruza, M. D., Deputy Chief Medical Examiner, Office of the Medical Examiner, 
Jacksonville, Florida, on August 2, 1999. The cause of death was attributed to multiple blunt 
force trauma.   Postmortem toxicology studies of specimens from the flight instructor-rated 
passenger was performed by the Medical Examiner. The specimens were checked for blood 
alcohol, urine drugs and blood carbon monoxide.  Five percent saturation carbon monoxide 
was detected in the blood, and caffeine was detected in the urine.
Forensic toxicology was also performed by the FAA Toxicology Laboratory, Oklahoma 
City, Oklahoma, on the flight instructor-rated passenger. The tests were negative for carbon 
monoxide, cyanide, ethanol, and drugs.
The pilot was admitted to the University Medical Center, Jacksonville Florida on August 
1, 1999, for medical treatment as a result of the accident.  Toxicological samples were not taken 
from the pilot by the hospital upon his admittance.
TEST AND RESEARCH
The information handbook for the Gulfstream American AA-1B Section 5 specifies that 
for takeoff at an altitude of 2000 feet, and a ambient temperature of 52 degrees Fahrenheit, a 
ground roll of 912 feet, and a total distance to clear a 50-foot obstacle of 1,810 feet is needed, if 
there is no wind.  The handbook specifies an increase in ground run of 7 percent for each 20 
degree Fahrenheit increment above standard temperature, as well as a power loss of 7 percent 
in the rate of climb, attributable to the presence of humidity. The flight information handbook 
does not address any penalties for takeoff from a grass strip.
The length of the grass strip at Hilliard Airpark is 2,490 feet.  The metar report for 
KJAX, the nearest reporting station at the time of the accident specified 95 and 77 degrees 
Fahrenheit for the temperature and dew point respectively. The reported surface wind 
direction at KJAX at the time of the accident was 270 degrees magnetic, and the velocity was 4 
knots.  Computed density altitude at the airport for the time of the accident was 2,500 feet.
ADDITIONAL INFOR MATION
The airplane wreckage was released to Mr. John M. Seldomridge, owner & operator of 
Seldomridge  Body Shop and Service Center on August 2, 1999.
Page 6 of 8MIA99FA208
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/02/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
207 hours (Total, all aircraft), 60 hours (Total, this make and model), 77 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Gulfstream American
Registration:
N9888L
Model/Series:
AA-1B AA-1B
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
AA1B-0600
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/07/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1560 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
19 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3682 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-235-C2C
Registered Owner:
KEVIN BRUCE MOORE
Rated Power:
Operator:
KEVIN BRUCE MOORE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8MIA99FA208
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
JAX, 30 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1155 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
150°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
3 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
35°C / 25°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (01J)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
FERNANDINA BCH, FL (55J)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1124 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
HILLIARD AIRPARK (01J)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
59 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2490 ft / 125 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JOHN       W LOVELL
Adopted Date:
11/02/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
JEFFREY L KENNEDY; MIAMI, FL
SUSAN M DILLON; ORLANDO, FL
EDWARD G ROGALSKI; BELLEVIEW, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8MIA99FA208
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
