Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Williamson, SC
Accident Number:
ERA13LA264
Date & Time:
06/01/2013, 1110 EDT 
Registration:
N3715K
Aircraft:
GLOBE GC-1B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of lift
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot performed a preflight inspection and engine run up with no anomalies noted. He 
noted the wind favored runway 10. He then taxied to the 2,400-ft turf runway, which had 50-ft 
tall trees located 1,000 ft from the departure end, and began the takeoff. When the airplane 
reached climb speed, the pilot lifted the airplane off the runway. He then realized that the 
airplane was not going to be able to climb above the trees located near the end of the runway. 
Therefore, the pilot decided to perform a precautionary landing in a nearby field. During the 
landing roll, the airplane struck a tree and incurred substantial damage. The pilot and pilot-
rated passenger, who were both airframe and powerplant mechanics, reported no preimpact 
mechanical malfunctions with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
The wind reported at an airport 10 miles north of the accident location and at other 
surrounding airports was such that the airplane would have experienced a 5- to 8-knot right-
quartering tailwind on runway 10 around the time of the accident. Density altitude was 2,307 
feet above mean sea level. 
It is therefore likely, that the airplane experienced a reduction in performance during takeoff 
due to the tailwind, density altitude, and the weight (within about 120 lbs of the maximum 
gross weight) at which the airplane was being operated.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s decision to takeoff with a quartering tailwind at high density altitude, close to gross 
takeoff weight, on a short turf runway with trees at the departure end. 
Page 2 of 8ERA13LA264
Findings
Aircraft
Climb rate - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Maximum weight - Not specified (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Tailwind - Contributed to outcome (Cause)
High density altitude - Contributed to outcome (Cause)
Tree(s) - Contributed to outcome (Factor)
Page 3 of 8ERA13LA264
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 1, 2013, about 1110 eastern daylight time, a Globe Swift GC-1B, N3715K, was 
substantially damaged during a collision with trees and terrain, while performing a 
precautionary landing in a field near Oakhill Airpark (SC82), Williamson, South Carolina. The 
certificated private pilot and pilot rated passenger sustained serious injuries. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight 
conducted under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The flight was originating at the 
time of the accident. 
According to the pilot, he performed a preflight inspection and engine run up with no 
anomalies noted. He noted the winds favored runway 10, back taxied to the runway, and began 
the takeoff. As the airplane reached climb speed, the pilot noted that the airplane operation 
"looked good." Then, he realized that the airplane would not be able to climb above trees near 
the end of the runway, therefore, he decided to perform a precautionary landing. The pilot 
landed the airplane in a field, and during the landing rollout the airplane impacted a tree.
According to the pilot rated passenger, during the takeoff and climb, the airplane engine was 
producing full power according to the engine instruments and engine sound. He also noted "no 
popping, rough running, or abnormal noises from the engine." The tail came up, and the mains 
left the ground in what appeared to him to be a normal departure. However, as the plane 
passed approximately 2/3rds of the usable runway the airplane was not gaining altitude at a 
normal rate and was not going to clear the trees. The pilot then aborted the "takeoff," throttled 
back, and brought the plane down in a field off the end of runway 10.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and pilot records, the pilot held a private 
pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land, and an airframe and powerplant 
mechanic certificate. His most recent application for a FAA third-class medical certificate was 
dated January 9, 2012. The pilot reported that he had accrued approximately 1068 total hours 
of flight experience, of which 65 hours were in the accident airplane make and model. 
According to FAA and pilot records, the pilot rated passenger held a commercial pilot 
certificate with ratings for airplane multi-engine land, airplane single-engine land, and 
instrument airplane. He also held a flight instructor certificate with ratings for airplane single-
engine and instrument airplane, and an airframe and powerplant mechanic certificate with an 
inspection authorization. His most recent application for a FAA second -class medical 
certificate was dated July 19, 2012. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
According to FAA and maintenance records, the airplane was manufactured in 1946 and was 
initially registered as NC3322K. Between the time it was manufactured to when it was involved 
in the accident, It was modified from its original configuration with numerous modifications 
including; modified landing gear doors, an increase in gross weight to 1,970 pounds, 
installation of control sticks, a sliding bubble canopy, Cessna 150 type seats, a revised occupant 
restraint system utilizing 4-point harnesses, A Piper type pitot tube, installation of a Lycoming 
Page 4 of 8ERA13LA264
O-360-A1A, normally aspirated,180 horsepower engine, and a Hartzell constant speed 
propeller.
The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on November 2, 2012. At the time 
of the inspection, the airplane had accrued 587 total hours of operation. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The recorded weather at Donaldson Center Airport (GYH), Greenville, South Carolina, located 
10 nautical miles north of the accident site, at 1050, approximately 20 minutes prior to the 
accident, included: winds 250 at 5 knots, 10 miles visibility, broken clouds at 2,300 feet, 
temperature 24 degrees C, dew point 18 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.16 inches of 
mercury.
Then at 1150, the recorded weather at GYH, approximately 40 minutes after the accident, 
included: winds 240 at 8 knots, 10 miles visibility, broken clouds at 2,700 feet, temperature 26 
degrees C, dew point 18 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.15 inches of mercury.
Examination of other surrounding airports also indicated that the reported winds about the 
time of the accident were coming from the southwest at 8 to 9 knots and that approximately 20 
minutes after the accident began to shift so that they were coming from approximately the 
south-southwest.
Approximately 2 hours after the accident, they began to gust and a pilot who departed the 
airport about that time, after the accident noted that the wind "had been changing directions 
all morning." In addition, when he departed the airport, he reported that his airplane 
"experienced–a severe change in wind direction on the takeoff roll therefore hurting [the] 
aircraft performance." 
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Oakhill Airpark was an uncontrolled private use airport. The field elevation was 837 feet above 
mean sea level (msl). It had one runway, oriented in a 10/28 configuration. Runway 10 was 
turf, in good condition. The total length was 2,400 feet long and 100 feet wide. Obstructions in 
the form of 50 foot tall trees existed 1,000 feet from the departure end.
Density altitude at the airpark at the time of the accident was approximately 2,307 feet msl.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
According to the pilot rated passenger the vertical impact in the field was "significant," and the 
forward momentum carried the airplane to a tree line where the airplane impacted the tree.
Examination of the airplane by a federal aviation administration inspector revealed that the 
fuselage and wings were substantially damaged. The engine was displaced up and to the right 
by 20 degrees from its normal orientation. The engine mounts were bent and broken, the 
firewall was wrinkled and exhibited tearing, the forward fuselage exhibited crush and 
compression damage, and the wings exhibited multiple areas of impact, crush, and 
compression damage. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Weight and balance calculations were performed using weight and balance documents that 
Page 5 of 8ERA13LA264
were submitted by the pilot, the weights of the occupants, and the reported amount of fuel at 
takeoff. Calculations revealed the airplane weighed about 1,850 pounds at takeoff. The 
manufacturer's maximum allowable gross weight was 1,970 pounds.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
FAA-H-8083-25A
According to The Pilot's Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge (FAA-H-8083-25A), density 
altitude is defined as pressure altitude corrected for nonstandard temperature.
Density altitude is an indicator of aircraft performance and the term comes from the fact that 
the density of the air decreases with altitude. A "high" density altitude means that air density is 
reduced, which has an adverse impact on aircraft performance. Published performance criteria 
in the Pilot's Operating Handbook (POH) are generally based on standard atmospheric 
conditions at sea level (59 degrees Fahrenheit or 15 degrees Celsius. and 29.92 inches of 
mercury). Therefore, an aircraft will not perform according to "book numbers" unless the 
conditions are the same as those used to develop the published performance criteria. For 
example, if an airport whose elevation is 500 MSL has a reported density altitude of 5,000 feet; 
aircraft operating to and from that airport will perform as if the airport elevation were 5,000 
feet.
A tailwind component can also affect takeoff and climb performance, as a tailwind component 
has almost 5 times the performance effect as a comparable headwind component. Therefore, 
taking off with a tailwind will significantly impair performance.
A change in an aircraft's weight also produces a twofold effect on climb performance. First, a 
change in weight will change the drag and the power required. This alters the reserve power 
available, which in turn, affects both the climb angle and the climb rate. Secondly, an increase 
in weight will reduce the maximum rate of climb, but the aircraft must be operated at a higher 
climb speed to achieve the smaller peak climb rate.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of lift (Defining event)
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 6 of 8ERA13LA264
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
44
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/05/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/21/2012
Flight Time:
1068 hours (Total, all aircraft), 65 hours (Total, this make and model), 778 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 14 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
GLOBE
Registration:
N3715K
Model/Series:
GC-1B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1408
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/02/2012, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1970 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
587 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-360 Series
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8ERA13LA264
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GYH, 956 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1050 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 2300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
252°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.16 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Williamson, SC (SC82)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Woodruff, SC (SC00)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1110 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Oakhill Airpark (SC82)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
837 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
10
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2400 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
34.585000, -82.341667 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd G Gunther
Adopted Date:
06/02/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven J Petrossian; FAA/FSDO; Columbia, SC
Publish Date:
06/02/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=87054
Page 8 of 8ERA13LA264
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
