Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Grand Ridge, FL
Accident Number:
MIA06FA039
Date & Time:
01/01/2006, 1900 CST 
Registration:
N442DH
Aircraft:
Robinson R44
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
Analysis 
The commercial pilot was ferrying a helicopter with two passengers/friends under Title 14, 
CFR Part 91 when the helicopter collided with trees and terrain in a wooded area at night, in 
instrument meteorological conditions.  Witnesses related that the helicopter had landed near a 
hotel and truck stop, and the pilot and passengers had inquired about renting rooms.  The pilot 
and passengers elected not to rent rooms, but walked to the truck stop and had a meal.  After 
the meal, the helicopter was seen departing to the south.  The helicopter did not arrive at its 
destination, and a search was initiated.  A witness in a car on a nearby freeway, about 6 miles 
from the truck stop, reported to the local sheriff's office three days after the accident, that he 
had seen an explosion south of the freeway the night of the accident.  Searchers located the 
helicopter in thick woods, in trees about 60 feet tall.  The wreckage was extensively 
fragmented, consistent with a high speed impact with the trees.  An on-site examination of the 
helicopter disclosed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical anomalies.  Weather in the 
vicinity at the time of the accident was reported as 300 feet overcast, visibility 1.75 miles in 
mist, with thunderstorms nearby.  The pilot did not have an instrument rating, and the 
helicopter was not equipped with instrumentation for flight into instrument meteorological 
conditions.  Toxicological samples from the pilot disclosed extremely high levels of 
methamphetamine.  Methamphetamine is a rarely prescribed drug, and its use is not approved 
for pilots.  Methamphetamine is highly addictive, and is most widely used as an illegal 
recreational drug.  The amount of methamphetamine in the pilot's system was approximately 
50 times higher than expected from a single dose of a prescription drug.  Use of 
methamphetamine can result in marked personality changes, psychosis, irrational and 
impulsive behavior, irritability, hyperactivity, and other symptoms.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's continued flight into known adverse weather, and his impairment, which resulted in 
an in-flight collision with trees and terrain during cruise flight.
Page 2 of 8MIA06FA039
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. OBJECT - TREE(S)
2. LIGHT CONDITION - NIGHT
3. (C) FLIGHT INTO KNOWN ADVERSE WEATHER - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) IMPAIRMENT(DRUGS) - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
----------
Occurrence #3: FIRE
Phase of Operation: OTHER
Page 3 of 8MIA06FA039
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2006, about 1900 central standard time, a Robinson R44 helicopter,  N442DH,  
registered to a private individual, was destroyed by impact and a postcrash fire when it collided 
with trees and terrain, about 6 miles south-southwest of Grand Ridge, Florida.  Instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed in the area at the time, and no flight plan was filed for the 
Title 14, CFR Part 91 ferry flight.  The helicopter was destroyed by impact and the postcrash 
fire.  The commercial pilot and two passengers were fatally injured.  The flight originated about 
5 minutes earlier, from a parking lot of a hotel near Grand Ridge, on Highway 69.
Witnesses reported to Jackson County Sheriff's Office that the helicopter landed in a parking 
lot of a hotel about 1800, and the occupants inquired at the hotel about the price of a room.  
After being told about the price, the occupants walked to a restaurant at a truck stop across the 
street from the hotel.  The occupants ate at the restaurant, and then went to the helicopter.  
The helicopter was seen departing south from the hotel parking lot.
A witness contacted the Jackson County Sheriff's Office on January 4th, between 1000 and 
1030 hours, and reported that on the day of the accident, about 1900, while driving on 
Highway I-10, he saw an explosion.  The witness pointed out the area where he saw the 
explosion, and the wreckage was located.
According to one of the three owners of the helicopter, it had been in Mississippi to provide 
hurricane relief, and the accident pilot was tasked with ferrying the helicopter from 
Mississippi, to North Palm Beach County General Aviation Airport, West Palm Beach, Florida.  
The owner said that on the day of the accident at an unknown time, the pilot contacted him and 
advised the flight was north of Pensacola, Florida.  The owner contacted the pilot between 1800 
and 1900 hours, and the pilot said he had landed near Tallahassee, Florida, due to adverse 
weather, and he would call before he left there.  The owner did not hear again from the pilot, 
and assumed he had spent the night near Tallahassee.  The next day, January 2nd, he 
attempted to contact the pilot, but was unsuccessful.  He knew the weather was bad, and 
believed the pilot spent the day in Tallahassee.  On January 3rd, when the pilot had not 
contacted him, he contacted the Cross City and Tallahassee Commercial airports to see if the 
pilot had landed there.  He also contacted Miami Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS) and 
inquired if there had been a flight plan or weather briefing.  He was advised there was no flight 
plan on file or a weather briefing.  He remained in contact with the Miami AFSS, and was 
advised on January 4th, that the wreckage was located.
INJURIES TO PERSONS
The pilot and two passengers, both neighbors/friends of the pilot, were fatally injured.
DAMAGE TO AIRCRAFT
The helicopter was destroyed by impact and a postcrash fire.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial helicopter certificate.  He did not have an instrument rating, or 
additional pilot certificates.  He was reportedly employed by a construction company as a 
Page 4 of 8MIA06FA039
helicopter pilot, and according to his last FAA application for a flight medical dated January 31, 
2005, he had acquired approximately 1200 helicopter flight hours.  Family members stated 
that he had accrued about 1,400 helicopter flight hours at the time of the accident.  No 
personal logbooks for the pilot were discovered during the investigation.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter was a 1994 model year Robinson R44.  It was equipped with four seats, 
including the pilot's station.  The helicopter was not certified for instrument flight, and did not 
have the basic instruments, such as an attitude indicator, for flight into instrument weather 
conditions. 
The last annual inspection was completed in February 2005, at a Hobbs meter reading of 1,299 
hours.  The last airframe/engine logbook entry was on July 29, 2005, with a Hobbs meter 
reading of 1347.9 hours.  No additional logbook entries were discovered or provided to the 
NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) during the investigation. 
 
METEROLOGICAL INFORMATION
An Aviation Routine Weather report (METAR) from the Marianna Airport, Marianna, Florida, 
about 10 miles west-northwest of the accident site at 1904, about the time of the accident, 
reported a 300-foot overcast ceiling, with 1.75 miles visibility in mist. Thunderstorms and 
lightening were reported to the southwest and north. 
COMMUNICATIONS
There were no known communications during the accident flight, either received from, or 
transmitted to the pilot, by any air traffic control facility or any other aircraft.  
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The onsite investigation began on January 5, 2006, about 1625.  Parties assisting the NTSB IIC 
were two FAA aviation safety inspectors from the Alabama Flight Standards District Office, and 
an investigator each from the helicopter and engine manufacturer.
The accident site was in a thick grove of approximately 60-foot tall trees, roughly 12-14 inches 
in diameter, about 576 feet south of the southbound lane of Highway I-10.  The elevation of the 
principally flat terrain was about 150 feet msl.  An initial impact scar was seen near the top of 
one damaged tree, about 40 feet above the ground, with impact marks at a descending angle on 
other trees along the crash path.  The crash path was oriented on a magnetic heading of 
approximately 020 degrees, and extended for about 140 feet to the final resting point.  An 
accident scene diagram is contained in the public docket of this report.
The cabin and fuselage section of the helicopter had sustained extensive 
damage/fragmentation during the impact and postcrash fire.
 
Examination of the engine, remaining flight controls and linkages, main rotor blades, rotor 
head assembly, blade grips, tail rotor blades, transmission, all drive train components, and 
fuselage structure, disclosed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical failures or malfunctions.  
Page 5 of 8MIA06FA039
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy on the pilot was conducted by the Chief Medical Examiner, Dr. Charles Siebert, 
District 14, 3737 Frankford Avenue, Panama City, Florida, 32405, on January 5, 2006.  The 
cause of death was listed as "Multiple Blunt Trauma."
Toxicological samples were harvested and analyzed at the University of Florida laboratories, 
and the FAA's Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI), Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. 
Results from the University of Florida disclosed the samples tested positive for a prohibited 
drug in the blood and bile, Methamphetamine, 0.92 mg/L. 
The CAMI results also tested positive for prohibited drugs:  Amphetamine 0.136 (ug/ml, ug/g) 
in blood; 0.808 (ug/ml, ug/g) in liver, and Methamphetamine 0.857 (ug/ml, ug/g) in blood, 
and 4.298 (ug/ml, ug/g) in liver.
Toxicological samples were also taken from both passengers, and tested by the University of 
Florida.  The samples from both passengers also tested positive for Methamphetamine.   
FIRE
There was a localized, postcrash fire that self extinguished.
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION
According to a witness at the Brewton Municipal Airport, the pilot landed to refuel the 
helicopter at the Brewton Airport about 1500 on the day of the accident.  The witness, who 
operated the fuel concession, said he commented to the pilot about the convective weather 
south of the airport, and asked the pilot what the weather was like along his proposed route.  
According to the witness, the pilot said he didn't care, as he could land anywhere, and wait out 
any bad weather.
The NTSB did not retain any parts or structure of the helicopter.  It was released to the owner's 
agent, CTC Services, on January 18.     
 
  
Page 6 of 8MIA06FA039
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
28, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1400 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1200 hours (Total, this make and model), 1300 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Robinson
Registration:
N442DH
Model/Series:
R44 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0098
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1299 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-540
Registered Owner:
Francisco Rodriguez
Rated Power:
205 hp
Operator:
Francisco Rodriguez
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8MIA06FA039
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KMAI, 110 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1904 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
300°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
1.75 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
100°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.98 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 19°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Mist
Departure Point: 
Grand Ridge, FL 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
North Palm Ba., FL (F45)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1855 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
30.667222, -85.060000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
12/20/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert L Bullock; FAA, Alabama FSDO; Vestavia Hills, AL
David Hargett; FAA, Alabama FSDO; Vestavia Hills, AL
Ken Martin; Robinson Helicopter; Torrance, CA
Edward Rogalski; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8MIA06FA039
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
