Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bullard, TX
Accident Number:
CEN17LA298
Date & Time:
08/01/2017, 1515 CDT 
Registration:
N8879S
Aircraft:
CESSNA 150F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel related
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
Following a full-stop landing and a back taxi to the runway, the flight instructor and a student 
pilot planned to conduct a soft-field takeoff to prepare the student for his private pilot test 
flight. Although there were no witnesses to the takeoff, an automobile dash camera video 
showed the airplane flying just above tree tops and then entering a right turn. During the turn, 
the left wing and the nose of the airplane dropped, which was consistent with a stall and an 
initial spin. The airplane then descended and impacted the ground. The available evidence did 
not indicate which pilot was flying the airplane at the time of the accident, but it is likely that 
the student pilot was flying at the time.
Postaccident examination of the airplane and engine revealed no anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation. The carburetor heat control was found in the off position, which 
was the correct position for takeoff. The temperature and dew point at the time of the accident 
were in a range of susceptibility for moderate icing at cruise power settings and serious icing at 
descent power settings. Although the airplane was at takeoff power when the accident 
occurred, a partial loss of engine power likely occurred due to carburetor icing, which might 
have accumulated while the airplane was operating at a lower power setting on the ground 
before the accident takeoff. The partial loss of engine power resulted in reduced airplane 
performance and the pilot's inability to maintain adequate airspeed, which then resulted in an 
exceedance of the airplane's critical angle-of-attack and a subsequent aerodynamic stall.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 6CEN17LA298
The partial loss of engine power due to carburetor icing and the pilot's inability to maintain 
adequate airspeed during the soft-field takeoff, which resulted in an exceedance of the 
airplane's critical angle-of-attack and an aerodynamic stall.
Findings
Aircraft
Angle of attack - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Effect on operation (Cause)
Page 3 of 6CEN17LA298
Factual Information
On August 1, 2017, about 1515 central daylight time, a Cessna 150F, N8879S, impacted terrain 
following a loss of control during initial climb after takeoff from runway 12 at the Tarrant Field 
Airport (6X0), near Mount Selman, Texas. The flight instructor received minor injuries and the 
student pilot received serious injuries. The airplane impacted nose down and received 
substantial damage to the forward fuselage and wings. The aircraft was registered to and 
operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part
 
91 as an instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which 
was not on a flight plan. The flight originated from Tyler Pounds Regional Airport (TYR), Tyler, 
Texas, about 1445.
The flight instructor reported that the flight was to prepare the student pilot for his private 
pilot test flight. They departed TYR and flew to 6X0, making one full-stop landing followed by 
a taxi back to the end of the runway for a soft-field takeoff. The flight instructor had no 
memory of the accident takeoff, although he surmised that there could have been a loss of 
engine power.
An automobile equipped with a dash camera, traveling south on highway 69, east of 6X0, 
captured the final moments of the flight including the impact. A review of the video, revealed 
the airplane entering the right frame of the video, just above tree top level. The airplane travels 
to the left and starts to make a right turn. The wing flaps were not fully retracted, but the 
amount of deflection could not be determined from the video. During the turn, the left wing 
and nose of the airplane drop, and the airplane descends into the ground. The airplane struck 
the ground just east of the highway in a left wing low, nose low attitude, coming to a rest facing 
north.
The airplane was removed from the scene, and a postaccident examination of the airplane 
under the supervision of Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors was conducted. The wings 
and empennage were removed during recovery. Many of the control cables were either cut or 
disconnected at various turnbuckles; however, flight control continuity was established from 
the cockpit to the flight control surfaces. The flap actuator position corresponded to a 10° flap 
deflection. Dirt type sediment was observed in the bottom of the fuel strainer bowl along with 
evidence of corrosion. Fuel system continuity was confirmed from each wing root to the fuel 
strainer and the fuel selector valve was in the on position. Each fuel tank finger screen was 
clear of debris. The carburetor heat control was found in the off position. Examination of the 
engine confirmed compression, valve action of all valves, and spark from both magnetos during 
engine rotation. The carburetor mounting flange was impact separated from the induction 
assembly. The carburetor remained attached to the separated flange and the mixture and 
throttle control cables remained attached to the carburetor. The throttle valve was observed in 
the full open position and the mixture was full rich. The accelerator pump did not spray fuel 
into the carburetor throat upon throttle actuation. Disassembly of the carburetor revealed dirt 
and sediment in the bowl, but no obstruction of the fuel metering port was observed. The 
accelerator pump had rust on its base. No anomalies were found with respect to the airframe or 
engine that would have precluded normal operation.
Page 4 of 6CEN17LA298
The temperature and dew point recorded at the Cherokee County Airport (JSO), about 14 miles 
south of the accident site were 23° and 21° Celsius, respectively. According to a carburetor icing 
probability chart published by Flight Safety Australia, the recorded temperature and dew point 
were in a range of susceptibility for moderate icing at cruise power settings and serious icing at 
descent power settings.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Fuel related (Defining event)
Loss of control in flight
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/06/2013
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/05/2016
Flight Time:
1900 hours (Total, all aircraft), 30 hours (Total, this make and model), 1440 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 36 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
35, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Lap Only
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/30/2016
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Page 5 of 6CEN17LA298
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N8879S
Model/Series:
150F F
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1965
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
15062179
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/01/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1601 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3558 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
O-200 SERIES
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
JSO
Distance from Accident Site:
14 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0815 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.04 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Tyler, TX (TYR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Tyler, TX (TYR)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1445 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
TARRANT FIELD (6X0)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
590 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
12
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2700 ft / 30 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Page 6 of 6CEN17LA298
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
32.094722, -95.289722
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John M Brannen
Adopted Date:
12/19/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Chris Wright; FAA - North Texas FSDO; Irving, TX
Henry Soderlund; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Nicole Charnon; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
12/19/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=95736
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
