National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Denver, CO
Accident Number: DEN04FA027B
Date & Time: 12/03/2003, 0555 MST
Registration: N340AE
Aircraft: Swearingen SA227-AC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The accident involved 2 Swearingen airplanes.
The pilot of the first airplane reported that he had taxied north for departure.
There were several company aircraft in front of him in line for departure so he came to a complete stop.
The pilot of the second airplane reported that he was also taxiing north for departure.
He had seen the lights from an aircraft holding short of runway 17R; however, he did not see the lights of the first airplane until it was too late.
The pilot of the second airplane reported he applied full brakes and used reverse thrust but was unable to avoid hitting the first airplane.
Both airplanes were substantially damaged.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the failure of the pilot of the taxiing aircraft to maintain clearance and adequate visual lookout for the stopped aircraft.
Findings Occurrence #1: COLLISION BETWEEN AIRCRAFT (OTHER THAN MIDAIR) Phase of Operation: TAXI - TO TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT OF OTHER AIRCRAFT 2.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT 3.
Neither the airline transport pilot in N60U, nor the commercial pilot in N340AE, were injured.
Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
Instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plans had been filed for the non-scheduled domestic cargo flights being operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 135.
Both flights were originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot of N340AE reported that he had taxied north on taxiway Mike (M) to the "M10" intersection.
There were several company aircraft in front of him in line for runway 17R.
He came to a complete stop behind a Cessna 404, remaining partially on the M taxiway.
The pilot of N60U reported that he was taxiing north on the M taxiway, en route to runway 8 for departure.
He had seen the lights from an aircraft holding short of runway 17R; however, he did not see the lights of N340AE until it was too late.
The pilot of N60U reported he applied full brakes and used reverse thrust but was unable to avoid hitting N340AE.
Both airplanes were examined at the scene.
N340AE, was turned to the right during the collision, entangling its empennage with N60U's empennage.
The outer 8 feet of N60U's right wing was severed.
The outboard 2 feet of the right propeller's blades showed chordwise scratches, torsional bends, and leading edge gouges and chips.
The airplane's empennage was crushed and bent.
The bottom empennage of N340AE was scraped and torn.
The airplane's left wing tip was bent upward, and showed skin wrinkles.
An 8-foot long, 2-foot wide section of the left outboard wing's trailing edge was torn out.
The airplane's empennage was crushed and bent.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial; Private Age: 26, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
