National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Oklahoma City, OK
Accident Number: FTW04LA031
Date & Time: 12/02/2003, 1430 CST
Registration: N815M
Aircraft: Cessna 310-H
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The 1,800-hour pilot stated that he turned final to Runway 17 and was at an altitude of 2,500 MSL, when the left engine lost power.
Approximately ten seconds later, the right engine lost power.
The pilot landed the airplane in a field with the landing gear up, approximately two miles north of his destination.
The main fuel tanks were visually inspected and found to be one-third to one-half full of fuel.
The auxiliary tanks were found to be empty.
The fuel selector valves were in the auxiliary position for both engines.
The pilot reported that he was distracted by weather and communications with Oklahoma City Approach Control, and forgot to switch tanks.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's mismanagement of the fuel by which he failed to position the fuel selector on the appropriate fuel tanks resulting in fuel starvation.
A contributing factor was the pilot's diverted attention.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM - STARVATION 2.
(C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 5.
The private pilot and his passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The cross-country flight originated from Mount Vernon Airport (MVN), near Mount Vernon, Illinois, at 1015.
The 1,800-hour pilot reported to a FAA inspector that he departed Springfield, Missouri, after making a fuel stop, at which time he filled all fuel tanks.
The pilot received visual flight rules (VFR) flight following enroute to HSD.
He flew for approximately one hour, while using fuel from the main tanks.
The pilot then switched to the auxiliary fuel tanks, and flew for another forty-five minutes and arrived in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
Oklahoma City Approach Control terminated radar services when the pilot reported the airport in sight.
The pilot turned final to Runway 17, approximately three miles north of the airport and lowered the flaps to fifteen degrees.
The pilot stated he was at an altitude of 2,500 MSL, when the left engine lost power.
Approximately ten seconds later, the right engine lost power.
The pilot landed the airplane in a field with the landing gear up, approximately two miles north of HSD.
Examination of the aircraft by an FAA inspector revealed wrinkling of the upper surfaces of both wings.
The main fuel tanks were visually inspected and found to be one-third to one-half full of fuel.
The auxiliary tanks were found to be empty.
The fuel selector valves were found in the auxiliary position for both engines.
The pilot reported that he was distracted by weather and communications with Oklahoma City Approach Control, and forgot to switch tanks.
The temperature was reported as 10 degrees Celsius, dewpoint as minus 4 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.12 inches of Mercury.
Despite several attempts, the pilot failed to return the completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2).
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
