National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Birmingham, AL
Accident Number: ATL04LA044
Date & Time: 12/02/2003, 1950 CST
Registration: N3056Q
Aircraft: Cessna 182-K
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The flight was uneventful until the approach to land at the destination airport.
When the pilot reduced engine power for the approach, the engine lost power and the throttle would not respond.
The pilot informed the control tower that he had a loss of power and proceeded to set up for an emergency landing.
The airplane clipped a tree top and went through a power line before touching down on the ground.
The airplane landed hard, the nose gear collapsed, and the left wing collided with a light pole.
Examination of the airplane found the left and right wings had spar and wing skin damage.
Examination of the engine found the throttle cable separated from the throttle body arm.
The throttle cable attaching bolt was still attached to the throttle body arm, the nut was missing and the bolt was not drilled for a cotter key.
Further review disclosed that Airworthiness Directive 86-24-07 and Cessna Information Letter SE79-6 had not been complied with when the engine assembly was recently installed during the annual inspection.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) MAINTENANCE,COMPLIANCE WITH AD - NOT COMPLIED WITH - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 2.
(C) THROTTLE/POWER LEVER,CABLE - DISCONNECTED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 4.
OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION Factual Information On December 2, 2003, at 1950 central standard time, a Cessna 182-K, N3056Q, registered to Cowarts Construction Company, and operated by the private pilot, collided with a power line and subsequently the ground while on approach to Birmingham International Airport, Birmingham, Alabama.
The flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91, and instrument flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight plan was filed.
The pilot and two passengers received minor injuries and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The flight originated from Salem Airport, Salem, Arkansas, on December 2, 2003, at 1700.
The pilot stated that the flight was uneventful until the approach to land in Birmingham.
The pilot pulled the manifold pressure to 12.5 inches to descend and added power to align with the glide slope, but the engine did not respond.
He then added full power, but still nothing happened.
The pilot informed the control tower that he had a loss of power and proceeded to set up for an emergency landing.
He stated the airplane clipped a tree top and went through a power line before touching down on the ground.
The pilot stated the airplane "landed hard," the nose gear collapsed, and the left wing collided with a light pole.
Examination of the airplane found the left and right wings had spar and wing skin damage, the right stabilizer and the bottom of the airframe sustained crush damage.
The nose gear was folded aft.
Examination of the engine found the throttle cable separated from the throttle body arm.
The throttle cable attaching bolt was still attached to the throttle body arm, the nut was missing and the bolt was not drilled for a cotter key.
Additionally, the examination of the throttle cable assembly revealed that Airworthiness Directive 86-24-07 and Cessna Information Letter SE79-6 had not been complied with when the engine assembly was recently installed during the annual inspection.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 2800 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 31.2 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 4264.8 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO470-F31B Registered Owner: Cowarts Construction Co.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
