National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Jamaica, NY
Accident Number: NYC04LA042
Date & Time: 12/02/2003, 1645 EST
Registration: N916CA
Aircraft: Canadair CL-600-2B19
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 45 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis The airplane was parked, and in the process of deplaning passengers when it was struck by an unoccupied belt loader.
The driver of the belt loader stated that she was maneuvering the belt loader when she fell off due to the gusty wind conditions.
The airplane was parked in a confined area of the ramp, which would have required tight turns to maneuver the belt loader.
The belt loader was equipped with an operational seat belt.
The operator did not require that seat belts be utilized when operating belt loaders.
Winds reported at the airport, about the time of the accident  were sustained at 25 knots, with 30 knot gusts.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: An encounter with an unoccupied belt loader, after the belt loader driver inadvertently fell to the ground while maneuvering.
Factors in this accident were the gusty wind conditions and the failure of the operator to require that persons operating belt loaders use seat belts.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: STANDING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) MISCELLANEOUS - INADVERTENT - DRIVER OF VEHICLE 3.
The certificated airline transport pilot, commercial co-pilot, a flight attendant, and 42 passengers were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan had been filed for the flight that departed Pittsburgh International Airport (PIT), Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The scheduled passenger flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
The airplane was parked, and in the process of deplaning passengers when it was struck on it's right side, by an unoccupied belt loader.
The driver of the belt loader stated that she was maneuvering belt loader when she fell off due to gusty wind conditions.
She was not injured.
Ground support services were provided for the airplane by Delta Airlines personnel.
According to Delta Airlines, the airplane was parked in a confined area of the ramp, which would have required tight turns to maneuver the belt loader.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, the belt loader was equipped with an operational seat belt.
Delta Airlines did not require seat belt usage for ground service equipment, except for forklifts and roadway vehicles.
The weather reported at the airport, about the time of the accident included sustained winds of 25 knots, with 30 knot gusts.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
