Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Rockwood, ME
Accident Number:
ERA10LA390
Date & Time:
08/01/2010, 1115 EDT 
Registration:
N369E
Aircraft:
CESSNA A185F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing gear not configured
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The amphibious float-equipped airplane departed from a paved runway for the flight, where a 
water landing on a lake was to be made. The pilot did not raise the landing gear after takeoff. 
Upon reaching the destination, the landing gear contacted the water during landing and the 
airplane abruptly nosed over. The airplane came to rest floating inverted, suspended by the 
floats. The month preceding the accident the pilot had several medical tests performed and was 
anticipating surgery for the removal of stomach cancer. While the pilot may have been having 
difficulty sleeping due to back pain or his impending surgery or possible chemotherapy, the 
investigation was unable to determine that fatigue was a factor in the accident. His toxicology 
results indicated recent use of diphenhydramine (an over-the-counter antihistamine) at levels 
that would have likely been impairing at the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to retract the landing gear prior to a water landing. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's impairment due to medication.
Findings
Aircraft
Gear extension and retract sys - Not used/operated (Cause)
Personnel issues
Forgotten action/omission - Pilot (Cause)
Prescription medication - Pilot (Factor)
Use of checklist - Pilot
Page 2 of 7ERA10LA390
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 2010, about 1115 eastern daylight time, a float equipped Cessna A185F, N369E, 
nosed over while landing on Moosehead Lake near Rockwood, Maine. The airplane had 
departed the Steven A. Bean Municipal Airport (8B0), Rangeley, Maine. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed. The certificated airline transport pilot 
was fatally injured and the passenger was uninjured. The airplane received substantial damage, 
The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91.
According to a statement given by the passenger to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector and the Maine State Police, just prior to the airplane making contact with the water, 
the pilot made a verbal expression and immediately after making contact with the water, the 
airplane went to the left and nosed over. She also informed the FAA inspector that they 
departed a paved surface at 8B0. The passenger reported to the Maine State Police that on the 
morning of the accident, the pilot "wasn't feeling well;" however, after breakfast "he was feeling 
much better and felt he was fine to fly." She also reported that "they had a normal flight" and 
the area of the accident was "the same area he always lands."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 64, held an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating for airplane 
multiengine land and type ratings for the Douglas DC 3, Grumman 1159, HS-125, and N-265. 
He also held a commercial pilot certificate, with ratings for airplane single-engine land, 
airplane single-engine sea, airplane multiengine sea, and rotorcraft-helicopter. His most recent 
FAA second-class medical certificate was issued on May 13, 2010, and at that time the pilot 
indicated 23,390 total hours of flight experience.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The airplane was manufactured in 1980 and was issued an FAA airworthiness certificate on 
February 6, 1980. The airplane's most recent annual/100-hour inspection was accomplished 
on January 14, 2010, at the time of the inspection the airplane had accrued 5,610.1 total hours 
and had indicated a tachometer time of 685.3 hours. 
The airplane was an all-metal, high-wing design with a Whipaire amphibious landing gear 
system installed. It was equipped with a Continental IO-520-D engine. According to aircraft 
logbook entries and FAA records, the amphibious landing gear system was installed on the 
airplane on May 23, 2000. The airplane would be equipped with either the Whipline 3450 
amphibious floats or skis depending on the time of year and the amphibious floats were re-
installed on the airplane on June 23, 2010. A main landing gear and a nose landing gear were 
installed in each float. The gear system was hydraulically actuated and driven by two electric 
hydraulic pumps. The selection of gear up or gear down was accomplished with a cockpit 
mounted selector handle. Gear position indicator lights were located on a panel beside the 
selector handle. There were four blue indicator lights, one for each gear, which illuminated 
when the landing gear was retracted for a water landing. There were four green indicator lights, 
one for each gear, which illuminated when the landing gear was extended for a runway landing.
Additionally, the airplane was equipped with a Lake and Air Amphibian Landing Gear Position 
Page 3 of 7ERA10LA390
Advisory System. The system consisted of an air data computer and an annunciator 
light/pushbutton mounted on the instrument panel. It sensed landing gear position and 
airspeed and provided advisories to the pilot visually through the amber "GEAR ADVISORY" 
annunciator light and aurally through the airplane audio system. The system is designed to 
turned on automatically upon receiving normal electrical power. 
METEORLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1056 recorded weather observation at the Greenville Municipal Airport (3B1), Greenville, 
Maine, located approximately 15 miles to the southeast of the accident location, included calm 
wind, temperature 20 degrees C, dew point 11 degrees C; altimeter 30.09 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT
The accident airplane was examined by an FAA inspector at the accident site. According to 
pictures provided by the FAA, the outboard section of the left wing beginning about mid-span 
was bent in the positive direction approximately 15 degrees. The floats remained attached at all 
fittings; no punctures or damage was observed to the floats. The left float was buckled, and all 
four of the landing gear wheels were in the down or extended position. 
According to an FAA inspector and a representative from Cessna Aircraft, the engine and 
cylinders were drained, the magnetos were removed and reinstalled, and the damaged left wing 
was removed, by a local mechanic. The mechanic stated that the engine had been ran using the 
right fuel tank and it ran well all the way to full power. The mechanic also stated that the 
electric landing gear motor was not functional, but he was able to pump the gear up and down 
using the hydraulic hand pump. Power was re-applied to the aircraft after all non-gear warning 
system circuit breakers and switches were pulled or turned off. Four green lights were observed 
on the landing gear control panel indicating the gear was down and locked. The yellow 
illuminated "Gear Advisory" warning annunciator was pushed and held in for at least 5 seconds 
in unsuccessful attempts to initiate a system self test. According to Wipaire, Inc., the test 
should provide audio voices, but only static could be heard through the over-head speaker, 
headphones, and internal audio panel speaker. Eventually, the audio panel circuit breaker 
tripped, which concluded further testing using aircraft power.
The gear advisory warning box was removed from the pilot's side kick panel and the 
potentiometer controlling the airspeed at which the audible gear warning is heard was set to 
the number 8 setting which corresponds to 78 KIAS. The gear warning box cover was removed 
to facilitate photo documenting the position of the potentiometer and corrosion was noted to 
two of the power transistors and a diode on the circuit board. The gear advisory system that 
was installed on the airplane was designed to function without input from the pilot. During 
takeoff and climb, as the airspeed of the airplane increased through a predetermined threshold 
value, the system would arm automatically. As the airplane slowed for landing and the airspeed 
decreased through the same predetermined threshold value, the annunciator light would have 
began blinking and one of the following messages would have been heard over the audio 
system "GEAR IS UP FOR WATER LANDING," " GEAR IS DOWN FOR RUNWAY LANDING," 
or "CHECK GEAR." These advisories are designed to continue until the pilot canceled them by 
pressing the annunciator light.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
A postmortem examination of the pilot was performed by the State of Maine, Office of the 
Chief Medical Examiner. The cause of death was reported as drowning.
Page 4 of 7ERA10LA390
The FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute performed forensic toxicology on specimens from 
the pilot. The report stated that no carbon monoxide, cyanide, or ethanol was detected.  170.28 
ug/ml, ug/g Acetaminophen was detected in the urine and 9.503 ug/ml, ug/g was detected in 
the blood, 0.05 ug/ml, ug/g Dihydrocodeine was detected in the urine, Diphenhydramine was 
detected in the urine and 0.091 ug/ml, ug/g was detected in blood, 0.138 ug/ml, ug/g 
Hydrocodone was detected in urine, 0.074 ug/ml, ug/g hydromorphone was detected in urine, 
Losartan, Norprophoxyphene, were detected in the blood, Losartan, Quinine, and 0.131 ug/ml, 
ug/g Norpropoxyphene were detected in the urine.
According to medical records obtained by the Safety Board, on July 19, 2010, the pilot had a 
biopsy completed on several small ulcers and was diagnosed with stomach cancer. On July 30, 
2010 he had a scan performed and no metastatic disease was found and that surgery would be 
scheduled. Earlier in the month the pilot had been hospitalized for pancreatitis and had an 
electrocardiography (EKG) completed, with normal results. Other medical records indicated 
that the pilot had been experiencing back pain.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The seat belts were examined by an FAA inspector and a representative from Cessna Aircraft, 
in an attempt to determine if the pilot was utilizing his restraint. Crease marks were observed 
in the belt webbing at the location of the buckle on the passenger's seat belt. Crease marks were 
observed in the same location on the pilot's seat belt in addition to lengthwise creasing of the 
shoulder harness and stretching of the webbing near an area of abrasion on the lap belt. Both 
seats remained intact and attached to the seat rails and could be moved freely along the rails 
after fully disengaging the locking pins. The pilot's seat was equipped with an auto-tensioning 
belt style secondary seat stop and the unit functioned normally as the pilot's seat was moved 
fore and aft along the seat rail. 
Both doors operated normally and could be latched and re-opened. No impact damage was 
noted to the glareshield or instrument panel with the exception of the landing gear switch. 
The tubular steel cross braces that run diagonally across the windshield were intact and no 
impact damaged was noted; however, the pilot's side cross brace was bent aft approximately 
mid position, approximately where one might place a hand to help reposition the seat or pull 
themselves forward or upward. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to the FAA Seaplane, Skiplane, and Float/Ski Equipped Helicopter Operations 
Handbook, FAA-H-8083-23 (Chapter 6, Seaplane Operations-Landings), "In Seaplanes 
equipped with retractable landing gear (amphibians), it is extremely important to make certain 
that the wheels are retracted when landing on water. Wherever possible, make a visual check of 
the wheels themselves, in addition to checking the landing gear position indicators. A wheels-
down landing on water is almost certain to capsize the seaplane, and is far more serious than 
landing the seaplane on land with the wheels up..."
Page 5 of 7ERA10LA390
History of Flight
Initial climb
Landing gear not configured
Landing-flare/touchdown
Landing gear not configured (Defining event)
Nose over/nose down
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine 
Sea; Single-engine Land; Single-
engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/13/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 23390 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N369E
Model/Series:
A185F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18504000
Landing Gear Type: 
Amphibian
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/14/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5610 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-D
Registered Owner:
POINT GROUP LLC
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ERA10LA390
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GNR, 1401 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
15 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1056 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
151°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.09 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Rangeley, ME (8B0)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Rockwood, ME 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
45.692778, -69.771389 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Shawn Etcher
Adopted Date:
10/17/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Dennis P Tremblay; FAA/FSDO; Portland, ME
Publish Date:
10/17/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=76811
Page 7 of 7ERA10LA390
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
