The airplane was departing for a skydiving flight. During rotation, the jump door opened, 
which was located on the right side of the airplane. The pilot said that he was not concerned 
with the door, which would not have critically impacted the airplane's performance; however, 
an experienced parachutist attempted to secure the door to the point where he was partially 
outside of the airplane. The pilot attempted to stop the parachutist and became distracted, 
which resulted in the airplane veering left toward trees while flying at a low airspeed. The 
airplane subsequently struck a stand of trees and impacted the ground. The airplane came to 
rest inverted in a wooded area, with the roof of the cabin and empennage separated. 
Examination of the airplane did not reveal any mechanical malfunctions and the pilot reported 
that the airplane performed as expected, without any mechanical issues. One of the occupants 
noted that the jump door was checked prior to takeoff and appeared to be secured. The jump 
door separated during the accident and was found in the latched position. The jump door and 
surrounding structure were distorted due to impact damage.
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control due to his diverted attention, which resulted in a 
collision with trees during the initial climb after takeoff. Contributing to the accident was the 
passenger's attempt to secure the jump door after it opened during takeoff.
On August 1, 2010, about 1420 eastern daylight time, a Cessna A185F, N4976E, operated by 
Frontier Skydivers, Inc., was substantially damaged when it impacted trees, during the initial 
climb after takeoff from Hollands International Airport (85N), Newfane, New York. The 
certificated commercial pilot and four passengers sustained minor injuries. One passenger was 
killed. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the local 
skydiving flight that was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91.
During a telephone interview, the pilot reported that he had completed seven or eight 
uneventful flights prior to the accident. A jump instructor was on board the accident flight, 
with a student and a videographer; and two additional "experienced" jumpers. The two 
jumpers intended to exit the airplane at an altitude of 5,000 feet, and the parachute instructor 
intended to conduct a tandem jump with the student from an altitude of 12,500 feet. 
The flight departed from runway 25, a 2,875-foot-long, 75-foot-wide, turf runway. The airplane 
accelerated and lifted off normally; however, during rotation the jump door opened, which was 
located on the right side of the airplane. The pilot said he was not concerned with the door, 
which would not have critically impacted the airplane's performance. One of the experienced 
parachutists attempted to secure the door, and the pilot yelled at him to stop. The parachutist 
continued to attempt to secure the door to the point where he was partially outside of the 
airplane. The pilot physically grabbed the parachutist and tried to pull him back into the 
airplane. During this time, the pilot became distracted, which resulted in the airplane veering 
left toward trees, while flying at a low airspeed. The airplane subsequently struck a stand of 
trees and impacted the ground. 
The airplane came to rest inverted in a wooded area, with the roof of the cabin and empennage 
separated. 
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector and a 
representative from the airframe manufacturer did not reveal any mechanical malfunctions. In 
addition, the pilot reported that the airplane performed as expected, without any mechanical 
issues. 
The inspector noted that the jump door, which was hinged to open upward, was separated and 
in the latched position. The jump door and surrounding structure were distorted due to impact 
damage. 
The videographer noted that the door was checked prior to takeoff and appeared to be secured. 
The airplane had been operated for about 55 hours since its most recent annual inspection, 
which was performed on July 1, 2010. 
 
The pilot reported 3,985 hours of total flight experience, which included 559 hours in the same 
make and model as the accident airplane. His most recent FAA second-class medical certificate 
was issued on April 27, 2010.
The reported weather at an airport located about 12 miles southwest of the accident site, at 
1353, was: wind from 110 degrees at 3 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; few clouds at 4,800 
feet, scattered clouds at 12,000 and 25,000 feet; temperature 28 degrees Celsius (C); dew point 
16 degrees C; altimeter 29.98 inches of mercury.
