Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
DES MOINES, IA
Accident Number:
CHI97LA097
Date & Time:
04/01/1997, 1824 CST 
Registration:
N9004W
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28-235
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that about 40 minutes after takeoff the tachometer started surging. The oil 
pressure gauge dropped to zero and the engine started knocking.  The engine seized and the 
pilot landed the airplane in a soy bean field. During landing rollout the airplane hit some large 
ruts which collapsed the landing gear.  The engine examination indicated the number six 
connecting rod had failed and knocked a hole in the top of the crankcase. The number three 
upper piston pin plug had deteriorated and was contaminating the engine with aluminum 
metal.  The oil filter was opened and evidence of aluminum metal contamination was found.  
The cam shaft and tappets indicated various stages of spalling.  Rust was noted inside all 
cylinder walls and all the connecting rods had surface rust on them.  In addition to the 
separated number six connecting rod, the number four and five connecting rods were blued 
and not free to move. The pilot reported that the oil filter was not opened during the oil 
changes to inspect for metal contamination.  The pilot was unaware that the engine oil filter 
indicated that the oil system was contaminated with metal particles. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
oil contamination and starvation due to the inadequate maintenance inspection of the 
pilot/owner. Factors included the deterioration of the piston pin plug, the connecting rod 
failure, and the unsuitable terrain for landing. 
Page 2 of 6CHI97LA097
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CONNECTING ROD - FAILURE
2. (F) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,BEARING - MELTED
3. (F) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,OTHER - DETERIORATED
4. (C) LUBRICATING SYSTEM - CONTAMINATION
5. (C) LUBRICATING SYSTEM - STARVATION
6. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: COMPLETE GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
7. TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
8. (F) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6CHI97LA097
Factual Information
 On April 1, 1997, at 1824 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-235, N9004W, sustained 
substantial damage during a forced landing due to loss of engine power near Des Moines, Iowa.  
The commercial pilot was not injured.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight departed Morning Star 
Airport, Des Moines, Iowa, on a local flight.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no 
flight plan had been filed.
The pilot reported that he had preflighted the airplane thoroughly before departure.  After 
takeoff he climbed to about 2,500 feet mean sea level (msl) and was at cruise power with the 
propeller set at 2,300 rpm.  About 40 minutes after takeoff, the tachometer went from 2,300 
rpm to 2,600 rpm, and then down to 2,200 rpm.  The pilot reported that the engine sounded 
"okay," with no backfiring, mis-firing, or rough running of any kind.  He pulled the carburetor 
heat, checked magnetos, fuel switches, and set the mixture to rich.  He reported that he saw the 
oil pressure gauge read zero about 30 seconds before he made the decision to land in a field for 
a forced landing.  The engine was knocking and it seized before the pilot landed the airplane in 
a soy bean field.  During landing rollout the airplane hit some large ruts which collapsed the 
landing gear.  
The engine and engine logbooks were examined.  It was determined that the engine was a 
remanufactured engine that had been installed on the airplane in 1980.  The engine had about 
600 hours total operating time since being installed on the airplane.  The pilot reported that 
one of the reasons he had purchased the airplane was because the engine was a low time 
engine.
The engine examination revealed that the number six connecting rod had separated and 
knocked a hole in the top of the crankcase.  During the engine teardown, it was determined 
that the number three upper piston pin plug had been deteriorating and contaminating the 
engine with aluminum metal.  The oil filter was opened and evidence of aluminum metal 
contamination was found.  The oil pressure screen was inspected for contamination and it had 
some metal particles in the screen.  The cam shaft and tappets indicated various stages of 
spalling, some advanced.  Rust was noted inside all cylinder walls and all the connecting rods 
had surface rust on them. The number six connecting rod was black in color, and the number 
four and five connecting rods were blued and not free to move.  The number five connecting 
rod bearing was burnished and heat distressed.  
The pilot reported that the airplane was flown about 75 hours a year.  Oil was changed on the 
airplane about three times a year.  The oil filter was not opened during the oil changes to 
inspect for metal contamination.  The pilot reported that he was unaware that the engine oil 
filter indicated that the oil system was contaminated with metal particles.
Page 4 of 6CHI97LA097
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/22/1996
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1568 hours (Total, all aircraft), 848 hours (Total, this make and model), 1508 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N9004W
Model/Series:
PA-28-235 PA-28-235
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-10585
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/24/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
70 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2321 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-540 B4B5
Registered Owner:
WILLIAM B. SEVENBERGEN
Rated Power:
235 hp
Operator:
WILLIAM B. SEVENBERGEN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI97LA097
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DSM, 990 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1854 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
15°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (Y76)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1730 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JIM          SILLIMAN
Adopted Date:
09/05/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
EUGENE   LAWSON; DES MOINES, IA
GREG   ERIKSON; WAYNE, IL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI97LA097
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
