National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Sedalia, MO
Accident Number: CHI01LA194
Date & Time: 07/02/2001, 1859 CDT
Registration: N902GH
Aircraft: Houston Challenger II
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The two seat experimental amateur-built airplane was destroyed when it impacted trees located near the southwest perimeter fence about 900 feet west of the approach end of runway 5.
The aircraft wreckage pattern was oriented to the southwest.
A witness reported that the airplane "ran like new" when it departed.
Witnesses near the airport reported seeing the airplane flying low, heading north, and then making a wide right turn to the southwest before impacting the trees.
One witness said the engine sputtered twice before impacting the trees.
Another witness said he heard the engine quit and saw the propeller stop.
He reported the engine started again and the airplane turned back toward the airport before crashing into the trees.
The pilot had a total of 100 flight hours.
A witness reported the pilot had purchased the airplane within the last year and had flown it about 2 hours, but not at all within the last 3 or 4 months.
The airplane did not have a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) registered "N" number painted on the airplane.
No data plate or serial number was found on the airplane.
According to FAA records, an Airworthiness Certificate was never issued for the accident airplane.
A witness reported he had flown the airplane and that it had a severe yaw problem and he was afraid to fly in it again.
He reported the pilot fabricated and installed "stab fins" on the tip of each horizontal stabilizer, and a large trim tab on the rudder.
The witness also stated the pilot removed the doors to the airplane because he had been told it would help eliminate the yaw problem.
The witness reported the accident flight was the first flight the pilot had taken with the doors removed.
An examination of the airplane revealed no preexisting anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the unsuitable terrain encountered during the forced landing.
Additional factors were the pilot's lack of experience in the type of airplane, the loss of engine power for undetermined reasons, and the trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(F) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 3.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
The private pilot was fatally injured.
The experimental airplane had departed from the pilot's private airstrip about 1854.
The intended destination was DMO.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
A witness, who was a friend of the pilot, reported that he and the pilot had been doing minor repairs and maintenance on the airplane prior to the flight.
He reported the pilot decided to fly the airplane to DMO, but he advised against it because of the high wind speeds.
The witness reported that the airplane "ran like new" when it departed for DMO.
Witnesses who were located near the airport reported seeing the airplane flying low, heading north, and then making a wide right turn to the southwest before impacting the trees.
One witness said the engine sputtered twice before impacting the trees.
Another witness said he heard the engine quit and saw the propeller stop.
He reported the engine started again and the airplane turned back toward the airport before crashing into the trees.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION The pilot was a private pilot with a single engine land rating.
He held a Third Class Medical Certificate that was issued on September 25, 2000.
The pilot reported his total flight time was 100 hours during his last medical examination.
A witness reported the pilot had purchased the airplane within the last year and had flown it about 2 hours, but not at all within the last 3 or 4 months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION The airplane was a single engine experimental amateur-built Challenger II.
The airplane seated two and had a maximum gross weight of 800 pounds.
The engine was a 52 horsepower Rotax 503 engine.
The pilot had purchased the airplane within the previous year.
There were no maintenance records available and the flight hours on the airplane and engine are unknown.
The two seat experimental airplane did not have a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) registered "N" number painted on the airplane.
No data plate or serial number was found on the airplane.
According to FAA records, an Airworthiness Certificate was never issued for the accident airplane.
A witness reported he had flown the airplane and that it had a severe yaw problem and he was afraid to fly in it again.
He reported the pilot fabricated and installed "stab fins" on the tip of each horizontal stabilizer, and a large trim tab on the rudder.
The witness also stated the pilot removed the doors to the airplane because he had been told it would help eliminate the yaw problem.
The witness reported the accident flight was the first flight the pilot had taken with the doors removed.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS At 1853, the observed weather at DMO was: winds 120 degrees at 7 knots, sky clear, visibility 10 sm, temperature 28 degrees C, dew point 23 degrees C, altimeter 30.10.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION The airplane impacted trees on the southwest corner of the DMO airport, and was about 900 feet west of the approach end of runway 5.
The aircraft wreckage pattern was oriented to the southwest.
The airplane impacted the tress approximately 20-25 feet above the ground and it remained lodged in the tree branches.
Aircraft parts were found 50 feet in front of the airplane wreckage.
An examination of the airplane revealed flight control continuity.
The engine inspection revealed the two stroke Rotax engine exhibited continuity and cylinder compression.
Fuel was found in the carburetors.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Heckart Gillespie Funeral Home, Sedalia, Missouri.
A Forensic Toxicology Fatal Accident Report was prepared by the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute.
The results were negative.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION The FAA was a party to the investigation.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
