National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Chitina, AK
Accident Number: ANC01LA080
Date & Time: 07/01/2001, 1500 AKD
Registration: N5429D
Aircraft: Beech H35
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The certificated private pilot said that the purpose of the flight was to show his friend some Alaskan scenery, in an area of mountainous, snow-covered terrain.
As the flight progressed, the wind increased, and a strong downdraft caused the airplane to descend rapidly.
The pilot applied full engine power in an attempt to climb, but the airplane continued to descend, rapidly lost airspeed, and subsequently collided with an area of snow-covered terrain.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions.
Factors associated with the accident are variable winds, and a downdraft.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - VARIABLE WIND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - DOWNDRAFT 3.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED Factual Information On July 1, 2001, about 1500 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Beech H35 airplane, N5429D, sustained substantial damage when it struck mountainous terrain, about 20 miles southwest of Chitina, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The certificated private pilot, and the one passenger aboard, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Cordova Municipal Airport, Cordova, Alaska, about 1420.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB investigator-in-charge on July 2, the pilot related that he and a friend were flying from Cordova, at 6,000 feet mean sea level, en route to a private airstrip located near Palmer, Alaska.
He added that the purpose of the flight was to show his friend some Alaskan scenery.
He said he thought the winds were fairly calm as he approached an area of mountainous, snow-covered terrain.
While in level, cruise flight, he said the wind increased, and a strong downdraft caused the airplane to descend rapidly.
He said he applied full engine power in an attempt to climb, but the airplane continued to descend, rapidly lost airspeed, and subsequently collided with an area of snow-covered terrain.
The pilot noted that the airplane was damaged so severely that it may not be repairable.
The pilot stated that there was no preaccident mechanical problems with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
