National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ellinwood, KS
Accident Number: CHI01LA195
Date & Time: 07/02/2001, 0930 CDT
Registration: N4549E
Aircraft: Air Tractor AT-401
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The airplane contacted a guy wire and collided with the terrain during an aerial application flight.
The pilot reported he saw the poles during the aerial application flight.
He reported he knew that there would be wires in the area so he swung out wide during a turn to look for the wires.
The right wing contacted a guy wire during the turn.
The airplane then settled into the sunflower crop.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot failed to see and avoid the guy wire during an aerial application flight.
A factor associated with the accident was the guy wire.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - WIRE,STATIC 2.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The commercial pilot flying the airplane was not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 137 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The pilot reported he departed the Ellinwood Municipal Airport at approximately 0900 central daylight time.
The pilot reported he saw the poles during the aerial application flight.
He reported he knew that there would be wires in the area so he swung out wide during a turn to look for the wires.
The right wing contacted a guy wire during the turn.
The airplane then settled into the sunflower crop.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 38, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 6000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 150 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3138 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: R-1340-AN-1 Registered Owner: Ellinwood Flying Services, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
