National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Willow, AK
Accident Number: ANC01LA079
Date & Time: 07/02/2001, 0645 AKD
Registration: N4989A
Aircraft: Cessna 180
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The certificated private pilot stated that about 15 minutes after departure, while in level, cruise flight, the engine began to run rough, so he elected to make a precautionary landing on a remote lake.
After landing, while taxiing to shore, flames erupted from under the engine cowling, and quickly spread throughout the cabin of the airplane.
The pilot was unable to bring the fire under control, and was eventually forced to abandon the airplane, and swim to shore.
An FAA inspector examined the airplane at the accident scene, and reported that the fire totally consumed the main fuselage, engine nacelle, and both inboard portions of the wings.
He added that the engine eventually fell into the water, but was later recovered.
The inspector reported that due to the substantial amount of fire damage, he was not able to discern the origin of the fire.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A fire of undetermined origin, following a precautionary landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FIRE Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 2.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED Factual Information On July 2, 2001, about 0645 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Cessna 180 airplane, N4989A, was destroyed by fire following a precautionary landing at a remote lake located about 2 miles north of Houston, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The solo certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at Willow Lake, Willow, Alaska, about 0630.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator- in-charge on July 2, the pilot stated that about 15 minutes after departure, while in level, cruise flight, the engine began to run rough.
He said that he elected to make a precautionary landing on a remote lake to investigate the engine problem.
After an uneventful landing and while taxiing to shore, flames erupted from under the engine cowling, and quickly spread throughout the cabin of the airplane.
The pilot was unable to bring the fire under control, and was eventually forced to abandon the airplane, and swim to shore.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector, Anchorage Flight Standards District Office, examined the airplane at the accident scene on July 5.
The FAA inspector reported that the fire totally consumed the main fuselage, engine nacelle, and both inboard portions of the wings.
He added that the engine eventually fell into the water, but was later recovered by the insurance adjuster during the recovery efforts.
The inspector reported that due to the substantial amount of fire damage, he was not able to discern the origin of the fire.
The pilot did not submit a Pilot/Operator report (NTSB form 6120.1/20).
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 50, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
