National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lake Minchumina, AK
Accident Number: ANC01LA081
Date & Time: 07/02/2001, 0850 AKD
Registration: N401LC
Aircraft: Lockheed L-382G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The crew of the arriving cargo flight flew over the airport to inspect the runway conditions, and subsequently elected to use runway 20, a 4,200 feet long, 90 feet wide, gravel runway.
The crew noted that the runway surface had a number of frost-heaves that had developed during the past winter.
During the initial landing touchdown, the airplane "skipped" as the main wheels touched on the crest of one of the frost-heaves.
The airplane became airborne, floated slightly, touched again about 750 feet beyond the approach end of the runway.
During the second landing flare, the main landing gear wheels touched on the downhill side of a second frost-heave, which allowed the tail of the airplane to contact the gravel runway.
The captain characterized the second touchdown as within acceptable limits, but with a slightly nose high attitude.
A postflight inspection by the crew discovered a 4 feet by 2 feet puncture on the belly of the airplane, just forward of the main cargo door.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The flight crew's improper recovery from a bounced landing.
Factors associated with the accident were the selection of an unsuitable landing area, and a rough/uneven landing surface.
Findings Occurrence #1: DRAGGED WING,ROTOR,POD,FLOAT OR TAIL/SKID Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 2.
(F) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - FLIGHTCREW 3.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - FLIGHTCREW Factual Information On July 2, 2001, about 0850 Alaska daylight time, a Lockheed L-382G airplane, N401LC, sustained substantial damage during landing at the Lake Minchumina Airport, Lake Minchumina, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as an instrument (IFR) cross-country cargo flight under Title 14 CFR Part 121, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was registered to, and operated by Lynden Air Cargo LLC.
The crew of the airplane, consisting of the captain, first officer, flight engineer, and a load master, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an IFR flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Ted Stevens International Airport, Anchorage, Alaska, about 0800.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator- in-charge on July 2,  the director of operations for the operator reported the airport has a gravel runway that is oriented on a 020/200 degree heading.
He added that the captain flew over the airport to inspect the runway conditions, and subsequently elected to use runway 20.
He said that the runway is 4,200 feet long, 90 feet wide, and that the gravel runway had a number of frost-heaves that have developed during the past winter.
The director of operations said that the captain was making an approach to runway 20, and on initial touchdown the airplane "skipped" as the main wheels touched down on the crest of one of the frost-heaves.
He said that the airplane became airborne, floated slightly, and then touched down about 750 feet beyond the approach end of the runway.
During the second landing flare, the main landing gear wheels touched on the downhill side of a second frost-heave, which allowed the tail of the airplane to contact the gravel runway.
The captain characterized the second touchdown as within acceptable limits, but with a slightly nose high attitude.
After touchdown, the captain lowered the nose of the airplane, brought the engines into reverse, and completed the landing.
After landing rollout, the airplane was taxied to parking.
A postflight inspection by the crew discovered a 4 feet by 2 feet puncture on the belly of the airplane, just forward of the main cargo door.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 37, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
