National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: AUGUSTA, ME
Accident Number: IAD98LA019
Date & Time: 01/02/1998, 1415 EST
Registration: N9912L
Aircraft: Cessna 172P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
 Analysis Snow and ice obstructed the taxiway lines.
The pilot was taxiing using a row of hangars to his right side to assist in judging the distance from parked airplanes on his left.
Focusing right and left, both the pilot and the pilot rated passenger did not notice the vehicle parked in front of the hangars.
The pilot applied the brakes, and the airplane impacted the vehicle with the right wing.
No mechanical problems were found with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The inadequate lookout of the pilot in command.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
OBJECT - VEHICLE 2.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On January 2, 1998, about 1415 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172P, N9912L, was substantially damaged as it collided with a parked vehicle while taxiing at the Augusta State Airport, Augusta, Maine.
The certificated private pilot and the pilot rated passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions existed and no flight plan was file for the ferry flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The airplane, registered to the Civil Air Patrol (CAP), Maxwell AFB, Alabama, departed the Northern Maine Regional/Presque Isle Airport, Presque Isle, Maine, at 1230.
The pilot reported that it snowed the previous day, and residual snow and ice were obstructing the taxiway lines.
The pilot recalled that as he was taxiing, he used a row of hangars to his right to assist in judging the distance from parked airplanes on his left.
Focusing their attention right and left, both the pilot and the passenger stated that they did not notice the vehicle parked in front of the hangars.
The pilot applied the brakes, and the airplane impacted the vehicle with the right wing.
The Federal Aviation Administration Inspectors examined the airplane on January 7, 1998.
The examination revealed damage to the right wing spar, and upgraded this incident to an accident.
No mechanical malfunctions were found with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 59, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
