National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WESTPORT, OK
Accident Number: FTW98LA085
Date & Time: 01/02/1998, 1640 CST
Registration: N201LG
Aircraft: Mooney M20J
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis After an uneventful 50-minute cross-country flight, the pilot entered the landing pattern and observed the windsock indicating winds from 190 at 10-15 knots.
After a normal downwind, base, and final approach, and about 160 yards down the runway, the aircraft was about to touch down when it started to veer to the left.
The pilot attempted to stabilize directional control by applying right rudder and adding power.
A gust of wind then 'lifted the right wing to a 20 degree' bank and turned the aircraft further to the left, which aligned the nose of the airplane toward some tree tops.
Subsequently, the airplane impacted the trees, and settled to the ground, upright, and nose low.
The pattern was flown with 1/2 flaps selected on base and full flaps on final.
The pilot said that the winds at the accident site were from 190 degrees at 12 knots, gusting to 15 knots.
Reported winds, 28 miles east of the accident site, were from 190 degrees at 16 knots, gusting to 25 knots.
Inspection of the wind sock showed that it was functioning properly.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for the existing wind conditions.
A factor was gusty winds.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On January 2, 1998, at 1640 central standard time, a Mooney M20J airplane, N201LG, registered to and operated by the pilot, collided with trees following a loss of control while landing on runway 21 at Keystone Airpark, Westport, Oklahoma.
The aircraft was substantially damaged and the private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
No flight plan was filed and visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, which originated from Poteau, Oklahoma, at 1550.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that after an uneventful 50 minute cross country flight, he entered the landing pattern at Keystone and observed the windsock which indicated winds from 190 at 10 to 15 knots.
He reported that, after a normal downwind, base, and final approach, he crossed the threshold and approximately 160 yards down the runway, the aircraft was about to touchdown when it started to veer to the left.
The pilot attempted to stabilize directional control by applying right rudder and adding power.
He stated that, a gust of wind then "lifted the right wing to a 20 degree" bank and turned the aircraft further to the left, which aligned the nose of the airplane toward some tree tops.
Subsequently, the airplane impacted the trees, and settled to the ground, upright, and nose low.
Examination of the wreckage by an FAA inspector revealed that the fuselage and empennage were buckled, and the right wing was separated at the root.
The pilot flew the standard VFR pattern with 1/2 flaps selected on base and full flaps on final.
He reported the winds at the accident site to be from 190 degrees at 12 knots, gusting to 15 knots.
The reported winds at Tulsa, Oklahoma, located about 28 miles east of the accident site, were from 190 degrees at 16 knots, gusting to 25 knots.
Inspection of the wind sock after the accident showed that it was intact and functioning properly.
Examination of the aircraft by an FAA inspector after the accident did not reveal any preexisting control system anomalies that could have contributed to the accident.
The pilot did not report any control problems with the aircraft during the flight.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 61, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
