National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: EVERGLADES CITY, FL
Accident Number: MIA98LA050
Date & Time: 01/02/1998, 1354 EST
Registration: N757VT
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that during the approach phase, there was a moderate crosswind (approximately 10 knots) from the east.
He corrected for the crosswind by banking the aircraft into the wind.
He further stated, that shortly before the runway threshold, a gust of wind from the west raised the aircraft's wing.
He tried to take corrective action using rudder and aileron.
The aircraft banked to the right, and the pilot tried to pull up as the aircraft went into a nose down attitude.
The pilot was not able to fully recover from the sudden change in the aircraft's attitude.
As a result of this, the aircraft hit the ground with the nosewheel, and the nosewheel separated from the aircraft.
The propeller, and later the cowling, hit the runway.
According to the airport manager, the pilot had called on the UNICOM frequency and asked for current weather.
The airport manager advised the pilot of a '15 to 20 knot crosswind,' based on his observation of the airport windsock.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions and failure to properly flare the airplane, which resulted in a hard landing and overload failure of the nose gear.
The unfavorable wind conditions were related factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - VARIABLE WIND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 4.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(C) FLARE - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 6.
LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR - OVERLOAD Factual Information On January 2, 1998, about 1354 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N757VT, registered to Ormond Beach Aviation Inc., operating as a 14 CFR Part 91, personal flight, crashed while landing at the Everglades Airpark, Everglades City, Florida.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The pilot and one passenger were not injured.
The flight originated from Ormond Beach, Florida, at 1100.
According to the pilot, "...during the approach phase there was a moderate crosswind (approximately 10 knots) from the east."
He stated that to correct for the crosswind he "banked the aircraft into the wind."
The pilot further stated, "...at or shortly before the runway threshold a gust from the west raised the aircraft's wing.
I tried to take corrective action using rudder and aileron.
The aircraft banked to the right and I tried to pull up as the aircraft went into a nose down attitude.
I was not able to fully recover from the sudden change in the aircraft's attitude and as a result of this the aircraft hit the ground with the nosewheel.
As the speed of the aircraft was still relatively high...the nose wheel was separated from the aircraft and the propeller and later the cowling hit the runway.
After approximately 300 feet the aircraft came to a stop."
According to the airport manager, the pilot of N757VT called on the UNICOM frequency and asked for current weather.
The airport manager advised the pilot of a "15 to 20 knot crosswind," based on his observation of the airport windsock.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 1675 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 42 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 7841 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: O-235-L2C Registered Owner: ORMOND BEACH AVIATION INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
