National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WINTERSET, IA
Accident Number: CHI98LA077
Date & Time: 01/02/1998, 1500 CST
Registration: N8350Z
Aircraft: Piper PA-34-220T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said that during a straight-in approach to the airport, he kept the airspeed at 110 knots, because the ride was very rough.
The airplane's airspeed crossing the runway threshold was 100 knots.
The airplane touched down about 1,000 feet down the runway.
The pilot said that when he applied brake pressure, he noticed that he had no pressure on the left brake pedal.
The pilot said that he pumped the pedal three times, and then reapplied the brakes.
The airplane was now three quarters of the way down the runway.
Just before reaching the displaced threshold, the pilot said that the airplane swerved to the right.
The pilot swerved the airplane to the left in hopes of turning onto the grass.
The airplane slid sideways in the grass crashing into a fence and coming to rest in a ditch.
Examination of the runway revealed tire marks beginning a third of the way down from the approach end, and running evenly down the runway until departing the prepared surface.
Tire impressions in the grass continued from the end of the runway, veering left, and ending at the spot where the airplane came to rest.
Examination of the wreckage revealed no anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot misjudging his airspeed on final approach, resulting in a long touchdown and insufficient distance to stop on the remaining runway available.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DISTANCE/SPEED - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
OBJECT - FENCE 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On January 2, 1998, at 1500 central standard time (cst), a Piper PA-34-220T, N8350Z, operated by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when on landing roll, the airplane departed the end of the runway, rolled through a ditch and impacted into a fence.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
No flight plan was on file.
There were no injuries reported by the pilot or the two passengers on board.
The cross- country flight originated at Harrison, Arkansas, at 1330 cst, and was en route to Winterset, Iowa.
In his written statement, the pilot said that he established the airplane on a 6 and 1/2 mile straight-in approach to the airport.
He said that the ride was very rough and that he kept the airspeed at 110 knots.
Crossing the approach end of the runway, the pilot said that his airspeed was 100 knots.
The pilot said that he "used up about 1,000 feet to negotiate the landing."
As the pilot began to apply brake pressure, he noticed that he had no pressure on the left brake pedal.
The pilot said that he pumped the pedal three times, and then reapplied the brakes.
By this time, the airplane was three quarters of the way down the runway.
Just before reaching the displaced threshold, the pilot said that the airplane swerved to the right.
The pilot said that he swerved the airplane to the left in hopes of turning onto the grass.
The airplane began to slide sideways in the grass crashing into a fence and coming to rest in a ditch.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who examined the wreckage at the scene, found the airplane resting upright in a field approximately 75 feet off the departure end of runway 32 at Winterset-Madison County Airport, Iowa.
Tire marks were observed beginning approximately a third of the way down from the approach end of the runway, and ran evenly down the runway centerline until departing the prepared surface.
Tire impressions in the grass began at the end of the runway and veered to the left, ending at the spot where the airplane came to rest.
The outboard four feet of the airplane's right wing, including the right aileron and outboard edge of the right flap, were bent upward almost 90 degrees.
The right main landing gear was bent aft and broken.
The right propeller showed torsional bending and chordwise scratches.
The right stabilator and elevator were bent upward.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
No anomalies were found in the brakes, brake lines, master cylinders or brake pedals.
No fluid leaks were found in the system.
Examination of the engines, engine controls, and other airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 4570 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 69 Hours Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 4156 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: TSIO-360-KB1 Registered Owner: ROTOR AIR, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
