Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CHANDLER, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX98FA066
Date & Time:
01/01/1998, 1746 MST 
Registration:
N20118
Aircraft:
Cessna 172M
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Ground witnesses observed the aircraft flying at a low altitude in a straight and level attitude 
and collide with the power lines during dusk conditions.  They reported no mechanical 
problems with the aircraft prior to the collision and none were found during the postaccident 
examination. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's intentional flying at a low altitude and failure to see and avoid the power lines 
during dusk conditions. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DUSK
2. OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION
3. (C) ALTITUDE - LOW - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 2 of 6LAX98FA066
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 1998, at 1746 hours mountain standard time, a Cessna 172M, N20118, collided 
with power lines during cruise flight on the Gila River Indian Reservation near Chandler, 
Arizona.  The aircraft was destroyed during the impact with the power lines and subsequent 
collision with a barbed wire fence.  The pilot and one passenger sustained fatal injuries; the 
other passenger sustained serious injuries.  The aircraft was operated by Sunbird Flight 
Services in Chandler.  The pilot rented the aircraft for a local flight under 14 CFR Part 91 when 
the accident occurred.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a VFR flight plan was 
not filed.  The flight originated from Chandler at 1710.
There were two witnesses (a husband and wife) to the crash sequence.  The wife said she heard 
the airplane flying nearby.  She said the airplane was flying from west to east toward the 
mountain.  She stated that she thought the airplane was "extremely low" and said he (the pilot) 
was at the height of the power lines.  She thought that he better gain or lose altitude in order to 
miss the power lines.  She said he "didn't try to miss the power lines . . . I don't think he saw 
them."  She stated that the airplane hit the power line and there was an explosion and a flash of 
fire, followed almost immediately by a second explosion and flash of fire.  She said the airplane 
flipped over in the air and then the airplane "fell to the ground like a rock."  She called 911 for 
paramedics and the fire rescue squad.  She stated that it was "still light enough to see the power 
lines." 
The husband said he witnessed the airplane flying down the canal.  He said the airplane was 
flying "steady, straight and level but at an extremely low level."  He said the airplane was flying 
close to the fence, which ran parallel to the canal.  He said he thought the pilot would gain 
altitude to miss the power lines but he didn't.  He stated that the time of the crash was 1746, 
because the time clock in their shop was knocked off line from the power interruption.  
Another witness was interviewed by telephone on January 5, 1998.  She said she lived at the 
south end of a housing development, which backs up to the reservation.  She stated she was 
walking her dog on the reservation approximately 1740, when she saw an aircraft fly by.  She 
said the sun had set, and she looked to the west and observed a plane fly past her from west to 
east.  She said it sounded low, and she said she was surprised to see it at such a low level.  She 
said she watched it fly in a completely straight line until he was out of sight.  She estimated his 
height above the ground to be approximately "that of a tall palm tree."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot invited the female occupant to go flying with him, since according to her mother, she 
had an interest in becoming a pilot.  The female occupant reportedly invited the male observer 
to come along on the flight.  The Gila River Police Department identified occupant seating 
positions, with the assistance of the Gila River Fire Department.  According to their report, two 
male subjects were seated in the two front seats of the aircraft with the female. 
The pilot was issued his private pilot certificate on October 10, 1994.  His most recent second-
class medical certificate was issued on October 3, 1997, with the limitation that he must wear 
glasses for near and distant vision.  The pilot's personal flight records were reviewed.  
According to the information listed in his flight log, the pilot had accrued a total flight time of 
about 198 hours, with 135 hours of pilot-in-command time, and 46 hours in the Cessna 172.  
Page 3 of 6LAX98FA066
He completed a biannual flight review on January 20, 1997, in a Cessna 172.  The pilot had 
logged approximately 20 hours of night flight time; with 4 hours logged in the preceding 30 
days.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane had a 100-hour inspection on December 5,1997, at a tachometer time of 8,854 
hours.  The last annual inspection was performed on July 13, 1997, at a tachometer time of 
8,462 hours.  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
According to the Williams Gateway Airport, there was no unusual meteorological phenomena 
observed in the area at the time of the accident.  Additionally, neither eyewitness reported any 
unusual weather phenomena when they witnessed the accident.  
The Safety Board calculated the location of the Sun and Moon for the date/time of the accident 
site.  Civil twilight was observed on the accident date at 1801.  The angle of the sun was 
calculated to be -3.0 degrees below the horizon on an azimuth of 233.5 degrees.  The magnetic 
bearing of the aircraft wreckage was oriented on a bearing of 080 degrees.  The moon's altitude 
was calculated to be 33.5 degrees, with 13 percent illumination for the date of the accident.
During the examination of the wreckage, it was noted that there was a small hill located 
directly in front of the direction of travel.  
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
According to the Gila River Police Department report, they received a telephone call 
approximately 1750 to notify them of an airplane going down north of State Route 87 in the 
area of mile marker 155.  This is a farm area with the Central Arizona Project Flood Control 
Canal running through it from east to west.
The airplane was located on the edge of a field just south of the flood control canal.  One of the 
power lines that was down transverses the flood control canal north and south along Pear 
Road.  Portions of the aircraft skin, a left wingtip, navigation antenna, and vertical fairing were 
found at the bottom of the flood canal.
White paint transfer marks were found on the seven strand copper wires located on the ground 
about half way between the two poles.  According to the operator of the power lines, the tension 
strength was measured about 1,100 pounds.  The power lines were operated and maintained by 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, San Carlos Irrigation Project.  The bottom power line was a three-
strand copper wire and the top strand was made of aluminum.  According to the power 
company, the aircraft struck the copper wire, which was the conductor wire.  The height of the 
bottom strand was measured at 30 feet 8 inches from the ground, with the distance from the 
power line to the aircraft wreckage at 367 feet.  
The airplane's engine was examined on-scene.  The left magneto had separated from the 
accessory case mount.  The left magneto was free to rotate and spark was observed when 
rotated by hand.  The right magneto remained attached to the accessory case.  The carburetor 
received impact damage and was separated from the oil sump.  The throttle valve was noted in 
the closed position.  The mixture control lever on the carburetor was separated and the mixture 
control shaft was found about 1/3 rich.  Residual fuel was observed in the carburetor float 
bowl.  The bowl was clean; and fuel was found in the gascolator.  All spark plugs were removed 
Page 4 of 6LAX98FA066
and examined for wear.  Round shaped electrodes and a normal wear pattern was noted on the 
spark plug gaps.  All ignition wires were found attached to their respective spark plugs.  The 
vacuum pump remained attached to the accessory case and was free to rotate.
The propeller separated from the crankshaft flange and was located approximately 30 feet from 
the main wreckage.  The propeller displayed torsional bending, chordwise scratching, and 
leading edge gouges.  The propeller bolts remained with the propeller hub and displayed 
bending.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was conducted on the pilot by the Pima County Medical Examiner's office on 
January 2, 1998.  According to the autopsy report, the Medical Examiner listed the cause of 
death as multiple traumatic injuries.  The Medical Examiner retained tissue and fluid samples 
for toxicological examination.  The samples were submitted to the FAA Civil Aeromedical 
Institute (CAMI) in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  Separate toxicological studies were conducted 
by the medical examiner's office.  According to both toxicological studies, the pilot was negative 
for all screened drug substances.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Safety Board did not take custody of the wreckage.  It was last seen at the accident site 
under the protection of the local authorities.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/03/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
198 hours (Total, all aircraft), 46 hours (Total, this make and model), 135 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX98FA066
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N20118
Model/Series:
172M 172M
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
17261024
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/05/1997, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
75 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8929 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-E2D
Registered Owner:
PHILIP F. REMMEL
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
SUNBIRD FLIGHT SERVICES
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
IWA, 1380 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
15 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1745 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
170°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
30 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
, AZ (CHD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1710 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal, 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DEBORAH    L CHILDRESS
Adopted Date:
07/12/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
DEAN   HENNIES; SCOTTSDALE, AZ
JEFFREY R POSCHWATTA; KENT, WA
FRED   LEEPER; WICHITA, KS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
