National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Spearfish, SD
Accident Number: CEN13LA220
Date & Time: 04/04/2013, 1640 MDT
Registration: N525PW
Aircraft: Walker Phil RV-6A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While climbing through 6,000 feet, the engine suddenly lost power.
The pilot stated that, although he subsequently switched on the auxiliary fuel pump and ignition system, the engine did not restart; therefore, he executed a forced landing to a nearby pasture.
The nose landing gear collapsed during the landing, and the airplane came to rest inverted.
Examination of the automotive engine, which had been adapted for aviation use, found that the coil-distributor wire had loosened and was not connected to the coil.
It is likely that the wire came loose during flight, which rendered the automotive ignition system inoperative and caused the engine to lose power.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The coil-distributor wire loosening in flight, which rendered the ignition system inoperative and subsequently caused the loss of engine power.
Findings Aircraft Dist (ignition harness) - Not specified (Cause) Power plant - Failure (Cause) Factual Information On April 4, 2013, about 1640 mountain daylight time, an RV-6A airplane, N525PW, experienced a loss of engine power and conducted a forced landing near Spearfish, South Dakota.
The private rated pilot and flight instructor received minor injuries and the airplane was substantially damaged.
The airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that operated without a flight plan.
The flight originated from the Black Hills Airport Œ Clyde Ice Field, Spearfish, South Dakota, about 1630.
According to the pilot, he had recently purchased the airplane and was flying the airplane back to his home airfield.
After stopping at an en route airport for fuel, they departed, and were climbing through 6,000 feet when the engine suddenly lost power.
The pilot added that he switched on the auxiliary fuel pump and ignition system; however, the engine did not restart.
He then selected a pasture for the forced landing.
During landing, the nose gear collapsed and the airplane came to rest inverted.
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane on site and noted that the airplane™s fuselage and vertical stabilizer sustained substantial damage during the accident.
The airplane was equipped with an automotive Chevrolet 4.6L engine adapted for aviation use.
Further examination of the engine revealed that the carburetor™s air filter was dirty and partly clogged.
Additionally, a wire that runs from the coil to the distributor was found disconnected from the coil terminal.
The wire and distributor were the automotive type and had the traditional terminal male/female plug arrangement, without an additional locking mechanism.
