Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Watertown, WI
Accident Number:
GAA17LA090
Date & Time:
11/05/2016, 1500 CDT 
Registration:
N300KR
Aircraft:
PIPER PA28R
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The commercial pilot reported that he entered the downwind leg of the airport traffic pattern 
higher than pattern altitude to avoid a traffic conflict. While on downwind, he switched the fuel 
selector and turned on the electric fuel pump. As he turned from downwind onto the base leg of 
the traffic pattern, he reduced engine power to idle and initiated a glide toward the runway. On 
final approach, the pilot realized that the airplane was too low; he added engine power, but the 
engine "failed to respond." He cycled the fuel pump, the engine surged, and the airplane 
impacted treetops and landed short of the runway. The pilot further reported that, after 
landing, he taxied the airplane to the ramp, thus it is unlikely there was a fuel issue.
A postaccident engine examination and test run revealed no anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to attain a proper glidepath on approach for landing, which resulted in 
impact with trees. Contributing to the accident was a partial, temporary loss of engine power 
for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident examination did not reveal any 
anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. 
Page 2 of 6GAA17LA090
Findings
Aircraft
Aircraft power plant - Malfunction (Cause)
Descent/approach/glide path - Attain/maintain not possible (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6GAA17LA090
Factual Information
On November 5, 2016, about 1500 central standard time, a Piper Arrow II airplane, N300KP, 
had an engine hesitation when the pilot added power during short final approach to Watertown 
Municipal Airport (RYV), Watertown, Wisconsin. The airplane subsequently landed short of 
the runway. The airplane was registered to and operated by Wisconsin Aviation, Watertown, 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal local flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed. The commercial pilot was not injured. The airplane 
departed RYV about 1400 and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that upon returning to the airport, after a local flight, he heard another 
aircraft in the left traffic pattern; he remained high when he entered the downwind leg, because 
he had lost sight of the other aircraft. He switched the fuel selector to the left fuel tank and 
turned the electric auxiliary fuel pump on. He reported that to help locate the other aircraft, he 
"slipped" the airplane for "a while" by applying "left rudder only," but then realized that he was 
still too high. He reduced the power to idle and glided from the downwind position to final. On 
final, he saw the airplane was going to be too low so he added power, but the engine "failed to 
respond." The pilot cycled the fuel pump switch off then back on and the "engine surged". The 
airplane struck treetops, the engine "sputtered", and the airplane landed short of the runway. 
The pilot reported that after landing, the propeller continued to rotate and he switched the fuel 
selector to the right fuel tank. He reported that he taxied the airplane to the tarmac without 
further incident. 
The pilot reported that during his preflight inspection, he drained fuel from all the fuel drains 
and did not observe any contaminants or debris in the fuel samples. He also reported that both 
fuel tanks were nearly full when he departed.
The accident was not reported to the NTSB until 30 days after the accident, and the fuel 
quantity could not be verified.
During a postaccident engine and airframe examination at an aircraft maintenance facility, the 
engine was run and all systems operated normally. The engine ran on both the right and the 
left fuel tanks. A visual inspection of the engine and its systems showed no defects. 
In the Operating Tips section of the Piper Arrow II Pilot's Operating Manual, it states in part:
The shape of the wing fuel tanks is such that in certain maneuvers the fuel may move away 
from the tank outlet. If the outlet is uncovered, the fuel will be interrupted and a temporary 
loss of power may result. Pilots can prevent inadvertent uncovering of the outlet by avoiding 
maneuvers which could result in uncovering the outlet.
Extreme running turning takeoffs should be avoided as fuel flow interruption may occur.
Prolonged slips or skids which result in excess of 2000 feet of altitude loss, or other radical or 
extreme maneuvers which could cause uncovering of the fuel outlet must be avoided as fuel 
flow interruption may occur when tank being used is not full.
Page 4 of 6GAA17LA090
The Federal Aviation Administration published the Advisory Circular (AC) 90-66A. This AC 
discusses recommended traffic pattern practices at airports without operating control towers 
and states in part:
Arriving aircraft should be at the appropriate traffic pattern altitude before entering the traffic 
pattern. Entry to the downwind leg should be at a 45-degree angle abeam the midpoint of the 
runway.
It is recommended that airplanes observe a 1000-foot above ground level (agl) traffic pattern 
altitude. 
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern 
downwind
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Approach-VFR pattern final
Loss of engine power (partial)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Landing
Landing area undershoot
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
80, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/04/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/12/2015
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 4284 hours (Total, all aircraft), 100 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 5 of 6GAA17LA090
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N300KR
Model/Series:
PA28R 200
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1976
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28R-7635210
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/12/2016, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8021.8 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-C1C
Registered Owner:
WISCONSIN AVIATION-FOUR 
LAKES INC
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
WISCONSIN AVIATION
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Pilot School (141); 
Commuter Air Carrier (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Wisconsin Aviation
Operator Designator Code:
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KRYV, 820 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2055 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
142°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.24 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Watertown, WI (RYV)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Watertown, WI (RYV)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1400 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
WATERTOWN MUNI (RYV)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
832 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry; Soft
Runway Used:
23
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4429 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Full Stop; 
Straight-in; Traffic Pattern
Page 6 of 6GAA17LA090
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
43.170556, -88.720833 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Kathryn R Benhoff
Adopted Date:
05/01/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Mike Pieczynski; FAA; Milwaukee, WI
Publish Date:
05/01/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94471
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
