Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Dubois, WY
Accident Number:
CEN17FA035
Date & Time:
11/05/2016, 0756 MDT 
Registration:
N924WY
Aircraft:
STAMPER RV-10
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Part(s) separation from AC
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Flight Test
Analysis 
The private pilot was departing on a local flight in the experimental airplane that he had built 
when the right gull-wing cabin door rotated open upon liftoff. A witness saw the pilot reaching 
for the fully open door as the airplane continued to overfly the runway at a low altitude. The 
airplane subsequently entered an aerodynamic stall at a low altitude and descended into 
terrain about 1,675 ft past the end of the runway and 183 ft left of the extended runway 
centerline. A postimpact fire destroyed the airframe.
The right gull-wing cabin door was found in a ravine about 600 ft from the main wreckage. 
Although the door had separated from the fuselage while the airplane was in flight, there was 
no evidence that the door had struck any portion of the airplane. The door latch handle and 
associated latch pins were found in a partially secured position. A functional test of the door 
latch mechanism did not reveal any anomalies. Testing of the door latch indicator system was 
not possible due to extensive postimpact fire damage to the fuselage and instrument panel. 
Based on the witness description and the physical evidence, it is likely that the pilot failed to 
ensure that the right gull-wing cabin door was properly latched before takeoff. The pilot likely 
became distracted by the open door and, as a result, did not maintain adequate airspeed after 
takeoff, which resulted in the airplane exceeding its critical angle of attack and experiencing an 
aerodynamic stall at a low altitude.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed after becoming distracted by the opening of 
the gull-wing cabin door during takeoff, which resulted in the airplane exceeding its critical 
angle of attack and experiencing an aerodynamic stall at a low altitude. Contributing to the 
Page 2 of 9CEN17FA035
accident was the pilot's failure to ensure that the right gull-wing cabin door was properly 
latched before takeoff.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Angle of attack - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Passenger/crew doors - Incorrect use/operation (Factor)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Task monitoring/vigilance - Pilot (Cause)
Preflight inspection - Pilot (Factor)
Forgotten action/omission - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 9CEN17FA035
Factual Information
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Preflight or dispatch event
Takeoff
Part(s) separation from AC (Defining event)
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Post-impact
Fire/smoke (post-impact)
On November 5, 2016, about 0756 mountain daylight time, an experimental, amateur-built 
Stamper RV-10 airplane, N924WY, impacted terrain following a loss of control shortly after 
takeoff from the Dubois Municipal Airport (DUB), Dubois, Wyoming. The private pilot was 
fatally injured, and the airplane was destroyed. The airplane was registered to and operated by 
the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 (
CFR
) Part 91. Day visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local test flight, which 
was originating at the time of the accident.
A witness reported that he saw the airplane takeoff from runway 28 and that the airplane's 
right gull-wing cabin door rotated open upon liftoff. The witness saw the pilot reach for the 
fully open door with his right hand and heard a momentary reduction of engine power. He then 
saw the airplane descend momentarily before he heard an increase in engine power and saw 
the airplane level-off over the runway. He reported that the pilot continued to reach for the 
open cabin door as the airplane overflew the remaining runway about 35 ft above ground level. 
The witness then saw the airplane's left wing and nose drop suddenly, which he described as an 
aerodynamic stall. The airplane descended into terrain, and there was a large explosion upon 
impact.
Page 4 of 9CEN17FA035
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
44, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/17/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/17/2016
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1482.1 hours (Total, all aircraft), 30.6 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1.3 hours 
(Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the 44-year-old pilot held a 
private pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land, airplane single-engine sea, 
and instrument airplane. His most recent FAA second-class medical certificate was issued on 
September 17, 2015, with no limitations.
The pilot's flight history was established using his logbook. The final logbook entry was dated 
October 10, 2016, at which time he had accumulated 1,482.1 total hours of flight experience. 
According to his logbook, the pilot had flown 119.3 hours, 81.6 hours, 30.6 hours, and 1.3 hours 
during the year, 6 months, 90 days, and 30 days before the accident, respectively. There was no 
record that he had flown during the 24 hours before the accident. The pilot had logged 1.8 
hours in the accident airplane. His most recent flight review, as required by 14 
CFR
 61.56, was 
completed on March 17, 2016.
According to the company that insured the airplane, in October 2016, the pilot reported having 
a total flight experience of 1,500 hours of which 40 hours were in Van's Aircraft RV-6 airplanes 
and 4 hours were in Van's Aircraft RV-10 airplanes. The pilot reported having flown 2 hours in 
the accident airplane.
Page 5 of 9CEN17FA035
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
STAMPER
Registration:
N924WY
Model/Series:
RV-10 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2016
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
40146
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/23/2016, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2700 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
12 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
12 Hours at time of accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Aero Sport Power
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-D4A5
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The airplane, serial number 40146, was a single-engine, low-wing, monoplane of conventional 
aluminum construction. The airplane was powered by an experimental, 260-horsepower Aero 
Sport Power IO-540-D4A5 reciprocating engine, serial number 1542. The engine provided 
thrust through a constant-speed, three-blade, Whirl Wind Aviation 375RV composite 
propeller, serial number 375-106. The four-seat airplane was equipped with a fixed tricycle 
landing gear, wing flaps, and had a maximum allowable takeoff weight of 2,700 pounds.
The pilot had assembled the airplane from a kit purchased from Van's Aircraft. The airplane 
was issued a special airworthiness certificate on April 23, 2016. The airplane's hour meter was 
destroyed during the postimpact fire, which precluded a determination of the airplane's total 
service time at the time of the accident. According to available information, the airplane likely 
had accumulated 10 to 12 hours since receiving the airworthiness certificate and had not 
completed the Phase I flight test requirements. The last condition inspection of the airplane 
was completed on April 23, 2016. A postaccident review of available maintenance records 
found no history of unresolved airworthiness issues. The airplane had a total fuel capacity of 60 
gallons distributed between two wing fuel tanks. A review of fueling records established that 
the fuel tanks were topped-off before the accident flight.
The airplane was equipped with two upward-opening gull-wing cabin doors. Each door was 
affixed to the roof of the cabin with two steel hinge assemblies. The upper fuselage cabin and 
both doors were constructed of composite material. Each door lock assembly consisted of a 
rack and pinion latch mechanism, and two latch pins were set into the lower section of the door 
panel. Each door was locked by rotating a door handle affixed to the pinion gear, and as the 
gear rotated, the latch pins extended through a polyethylene pin block and into pin sockets 
recessed into the forward and aft cabin doorjambs. The doors were not equipped with an 
additional safety latch mechanism provided by the airframe kit manufacturer. Alternatively, 
the doors were equipped with an aftermarket center latch system, which consisted of a rotating 
semicircular cam that worked in conjunction with the rack and pinion latch mechanism. As the 
door handle rotated into a locked position, the center cam rotated against a polyethylene block 
Page 6 of 9CEN17FA035
installed in the lower doorjamb to provide an additional center latch point.
The gull-wing cabin doors were fitted with a latch indicator system supplied by the airplane kit 
manufacturer. The system consisted of four magnetic reed switches located near the doorjamb 
pin sockets. A cylindrical magnet was installed into the end of each latch pin, and the locations 
of the reed switches were adjusted such that they would activate when the latch pins extended 
into the doorjamb. The latch circuit was designed so that the instrument panel indicators 
extinguished when the latch pins were extended into the locked position.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DUB, 7299 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0755 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
97°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
0°C / -8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Dubois, WY (DUB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Dubois, WY (DUB)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0756 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
A postaccident review of available meteorological data established that day visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the accident site. At 0755, about 1 minute before the 
accident, the DUB automated surface observing system reported: wind 270° at 6 knots, 10 
miles surface visibility, a clear sky, temperature 0°C, dew point -8°C, and an altimeter setting 
of 30.29 inches of mercury.
Page 7 of 9CEN17FA035
Airport Information
Airport:
Dubois Municipal Airport (DUB)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
7297 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
28
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6700 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
DUB, a public airport located about 3 miles northwest of Dubois, Wyoming, was owned and 
operated by the Town of Dubois. The airport field elevation was 7,297 ft mean sea level. The 
airport had a single asphalt runway, runway 10/28, that was 6,700 ft by 75 ft. The airport was 
not equipped with an air traffic control tower.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
43.553611, -109.708611
The initial point-of-impact was in an open field about 1,675 ft past the runway 28 departure 
threshold and 183 ft left of the extended runway centerline. The debris path was 67 ft long 
oriented on a 210° magnetic heading between the initial point-of-impact and the main 
wreckage. A ground impact crater, containing propeller fragments, was located about 44 ft 
from the initial point-of-impact. The main wreckage consisted of the fuselage, wings, and 
empennage. The cabin, including the cockpit instrument panel, was destroyed during the 
postimpact fire. Both wings exhibited damage consistent with ground impact. The empennage 
was relatively undamaged. A flight control continuity check was not possible due to the extent 
of damage; however, all observed flight control separations were consistent with fire and 
impact damage.
The right gull-wing cabin door was found in a ravine about 600 ft northeast of the main 
wreckage. The door was located about 1,500 ft past the runway 28 departure threshold and 
200 ft right of the extended runway centerline. The door had separated from the fuselage 
hinges. There was no evidence that the door had struck any portion of the airplane after it 
separated. Before the door was recovered from the ravine, the door latch handle was observed 
to be about 20° from a vertical position or about 110° from the fully latched position. The 
forward and aft door latch pins were found extended about 1/8 inch outside the door. The 
curved portion of the semicircular center latch was found facing aft. A functional test of the 
door latch mechanism did not reveal any anomalies. The door latch handle rotated 180° 
between the open and latched positions. When the handle was in the latched position, the 
Page 8 of 9CEN17FA035
forward and aft door latch pins extended about 1 1/4 inches outside the door, and the curved 
portion of the semicircular center latch faced down. A functional test of the door latch indicator 
system was not possible due to the postimpact fire damage to the fuselage and instrument 
panel.
The engine remained partially attached to the firewall by its mounts. Internal engine and valve 
train continuity were confirmed as the engine crankshaft was rotated. Compression and 
suction were noted on cylinder Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 5 in conjunction with crankshaft rotation. 
Further examination of cylinder Nos. 4 and 6 revealed thermal damage to their valve springs 
that precluded compression. The engine was equipped with one traditional magneto and an 
electronic ignition system. The traditional magneto exhibited extensive thermal damage and 
could not be tested. The electronic ignition control module was not recovered and was likely 
destroyed during the postimpact fire. The upper spark plugs were removed and exhibited 
features consistent with normal engine operation. A borescope inspection revealed no 
anomalies with the cylinders, valves, or pistons. The propeller hub remained attached to the 
engine crankshaft flange. Two of the three composite blades were destroyed during the impact 
sequence. The remaining composite blade exhibited thermal damage from the postimpact fire.
Medical And Pathological Information
The Regional Medical Examiner's Office, Loveland, Colorado, performed an autopsy on the 
pilot. The cause of death was attributed to extensive thermal injuries and blunt force injuries 
sustained during the accident.
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicology tests on specimens obtained during the autopsy. The pilot's toxicology 
results were negative for carbon monoxide, ethanol, and all tested drugs.
Additional Information
A search of the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) accident database revealed 
another Van's Aircraft RV-10 airplane accident that involved an inflight separation of a gull-
wing cabin door. In this accident (NTSB identification number NYC07LA237), the airplane was 
established in cruise flight at an altitude of 4,500 ft mean sea level and an airspeed of 145 knots 
when the right cabin door began to vibrate. As the pilot reached to grip the door handle, the 
door opened upward and separated from the fuselage. The separated door subsequently 
impacted the right horizontal stabilizer. Although the pilot declared an emergency, he was able 
to maintain control of the airplane and make an uneventful landing at the departure airport. A 
search for the separated door was unsuccessful, and a postaccident examination of the airplane 
was inconclusive in determining the cause of the inflight door separation.
Page 9 of 9
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
08/15/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Joshua L Pritchard; Federal Aviation Administration, Denver FSDO; Denver, CO
Troy R Helgeson; Lycoming Engines; Milliken, CO
Publish Date:
08/15/2018
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94341
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
