National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Valdosta, GA
Accident Number: GAA17CA058
Date & Time: 11/05/2016, 1643 EDT
Registration: N2CH
Aircraft: BEECH 58TC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Fuel exhaustion
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot of the twin-engine airplane, he descended from 7,000 ft and leveled off at 3,000 ft. After leveling off, the fuel quantity indicators fluctuated then showed empty.
He recalled that, about 5 minutes after leveling off, the right engine began to run very roughly, so he enriched the right engine's mixture and activated the auxiliary fuel pump.
He added that, subsequently, "the right engine failed and the left engine simultaneously began losing power."
The pilot declared an emergency with air traffic control, began receiving vectors, and the left engine lost power.
The pilot pitched the airplane for best glide distance.
He selected the nearest suitable landing area, extended the landing gear and flaps, and landed the airplane in a field.
During the landing roll, he turned the airplane to the right to avoid a collision with obstacles, and the nose landing gear bounced several times and separated from the airplane.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage bulkheads, longerons, and stringers.
The pilot believed that, due to his failure to visually check the fuel level, he overestimated the amount of fuel on board.
The pilot reported that there were no preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to ensure that adequate fuel was onboard for the flight, which resulted in fuel exhaustion and the loss of engine power.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94347
