This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Cameron, NC
Accident Number: ERA17LA032
Date & Time: 11/01/2016, 1130 EDT
Registration: N139RD
Aircraft: BELL OH 58C
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
On November 1, 2016, about 1130 eastern daylight time, a Bell OH-58C, N139RD, operated by 
Helicopter Applicators Inc., was substantially damaged following a tailboom separation during 
the initial climb after takeoff in Cameron, North Carolina. The commercial pilot incurred 
minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 
planned local aerial application flight. The helicopter was operated under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 137. 
According to the pilot, he stated he flew earlier in the day at a different field, spraying a 
herbicide and made approximately 12 landings on a truck to refill the herbicide spray. He 
subsequently flew to a different field and sprayed one load of herbicide, landed and waited for 
the loading crew to arrive at the new field. Once the loading crew arrived and loaded the 
helicopter with 80 gallons (720 pounds) of herbicide, he took off and climbed to about 50 feet. 
Approximately 200 yards away, he heard a loud bang and the helicopter fell to the ground. 
According to a witness, the tailboom moved to the left and then went straight-up into the main 
rotor system. He further stated that the helicopter then fell straight down to the ground and he 
ran over to help the pilot out of the helicopter. He added that it looked like the tailboom 
became loose at the main frame attachment points. 
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the 
tailboom separated and made contact with the main rotor blades. 
The helicopter was retained for further investigation.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: BELL
Registration: N139RD
Model/Series: OH 58C NO SERIES
Aircraft Category: Helicopter
Amateur Built: No
Operator: HELICOPTER APPLICATORS
INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: Agricultural Aircraft (137)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: SOP, 461 ft msl
Observation Time: 1556 UTC
Distance from Accident Site: 8 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 16°C / 10°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 5 knots / , 70°
Lowest Ceiling: Overcast / 2500 ft agl
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.36 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Cameron, NC
Destination: Cameron, NC
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Minor
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude: 35.350833, -79.295833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Daniel P Boggs
Additional Participating Persons: Mike Foster; FAA; Greensboro, NC
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
