National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GRAND CANYON, AZ
Accident Number: LAX94LA067
Date & Time: 12/02/1993, 1100 MST
Registration: N94596
Aircraft: CESSNA 182Q
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot's statement, the aircraft ballooned on touchdown due to an excessive approach airspeed and the nose wheel came down hard on the second runway contact.
After a short stop at Grand Canyon, the pilot departed on a flight to Las Vegas, Nevada.
After arrival at Las Vegas, the pilot discovered the damage to the nose gear strut and firewall during a routine postflight inspection of the aircraft.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's use of an excessive approach airspeed and an improper bounced landing recovery technique.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - RUNWAY 2.
(C) AIRSPEED(VREF) - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On December 2, 1993, at 1100 hours mountain standard time, a Cessna 182Q, N94596, collided with the runway while attempting a landing at the Grand Canyon National Park Airport, Grand Canyon, Arizona.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The airplane was operated by Denver Air Center of Broomfield, Colorado, and was rented by the pilot for a personal cross- country flight.
The aircraft sustained substantial damage.
The certificated private pilot and his one passenger were not injured.
The flight originated from Page Municipal Airport, Page, Arizona, about 0930 on the day of the mishap.
According to the pilot's statement, the aircraft ballooned on touchdown due to an excessive approach airspeed and the nose wheel came down hard on the second runway contact.
After a short stop at Grand Canyon, the pilot departed on a flight to Las Vegas, Nevada.
After arrival at Las Vegas, the pilot discovered the damage to the nose gear strut and firewall during a routine postflight inspection of the aircraft.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
