National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SANTA PAULA, CA
Accident Number: LAX94LA063
Date & Time: 12/02/1993, 1615 PST
Registration: N89014
Aircraft: NORTH AMERICAN SNJ-5
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that while cruising at 3,800 feet mean sea level he suddenly detected a 'very strong smell of aviation gasoline and the engine stopped running.'
The pilot attempted to restart the engine, but was not successful.
The pilot further reported that he did not have sufficient altitude to glide to any airport, so he made an emergency landing in a nearby river bed.
During rollout, the airplane collided with vegetation.
An examination of the engine revealed it had stopped as a result of being flooded with excessive fuel.
The cause of the flooding related to the improper functioning of the carburetor's needle valve pin.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: was the failure of the needle valve pin assembly in the airplane's carburetor.
A factor which contributed to the accident was the lack of suitable terrain for the emergency landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CARBURETOR - FAILURE,TOTAL ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On December 2, 1993, at 1615 Pacific standard time, a North American SNJ-5, N89014, operated by the pilot, experienced a total loss of engine power during cruise flight at 3,800 feet mean sea level.
The pilot made a forced landing in a dry river bed about 2 miles east of Santa Paula, California.
During rollout, the airplane collided with vegetation and was substantially damaged.
Neither the certificated airline transport pilot nor passenger was injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local area personal flight.
The flight originated from Camarillo, California, on December 2, 1993, at 1545.
The pilot verbally reported to the National Transportation Safety Board that during the flight all systems appeared to operate normally, and the fuel and oil pressures were within normal operating limits.
Suddenly, he detected a "very strong smell of aviation gasoline and the engine stopped running."
The pilot stated that he attempted to restart the engine, but was not successful.
The pilot further reported that he did not have sufficient altitude to glide to any airport, so he made an emergency landing in a nearby river bed.
At the Safety Board's request, the airplane's carburetor was examined, and a written report was received from a Federal Aviation Administration certificated A & P mechanic.
The mechanic indicated that the engine stoppage had resulted from it having been flooded with excessive fuel.
The cause of the flooding related to the improper functioning of the carburetor's needle valve pin (see attached report for additional details).
The carburetor was identified by the pilot as follows:   Stromburg, model NAY 9E1; serial No.
5638362.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Flight Engineer Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
