Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Apalachicola, FL
Accident Number:
ERA14LA374
Date & Time:
08/01/2014, 1320 EDT 
Registration:
N5276U
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The commercial pilot reported that the accident flight was the first flight since maintenance 
was performed after water was found in the fuel system. The pilot performed a preflight, 
sumped the fuel tanks with no water noted, and conducted an engine run-up with no anomalies 
noted. After takeoff, the pilot performed one circuit in the traffic pattern, and, during the final 
approach, he chose to perform a go-around. He applied full throttle, and the airplane began to 
climb, but the engine then lost total power. He subsequently turned the fuel pump on, applied 
carburetor heat, and began to ﬁpumpﬂ the throttle. The engine started but then lost total power 
again. The pilot restarted the engine two more times, but, after it lost power again, he chose to 
perform a forced landing to a marsh, which resulted in substantial damage to the fuselage.
A postaccident examination of the engine confirmed engine continuity from the propeller 
flange to the engine™s accessory section, and an engine test run was performed with no 
anomalies noted. The left tank fuel line to the engine was found partially blocked with ﬁfreshﬂ 
sealant-type material. However, a review of the maintenance records found no entries 
indicating when the sealant was applied to the fuel tank. The fuel selector was found in the 
ﬁbothﬂ position. Given that the sealant was only partially blocking the fuel line and that both 
fuel tanks were feeding the engine, the blockage likely would not have affected the engine 
power.
Although the weather conditions were conducive to the accumulation of serious carburetor 
icing at glide power at the time of the accident and the total loss of engine power occurred after 
the engine had been operating at a low-power setting for the descent on final approach, the 
investigation could not determine whether carburetor ice caused the total loss of engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined during postaccident 
Page 2 of 6ERA14LA374
examination and testing.
Findings
Environmental issues
Wet/muddy terrain - Contributed to outcome
Conducive to carburetor icing - Decision related to condition
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6ERA14LA374
Factual Information
On August 1, 2014, about 1320 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172RG, N5276U, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing to a marsh following a total loss of engine power 
near Apalachicola, Florida. The commercial pilot incurred minor injuries. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight. 
The airplane was registered to a corporation and operated by C.A.M.S. Flight School, which 
was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The flight 
was originating from Apalachicola Regional Airport-Cleve Randolph Field (AAF), Apalachicola, 
Florida, at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot, he was told that he was going to pick up the airplane since it had come 
out of maintenance after water was found in the fuel. He performed a preflight, and noted a 
total of 33 gallons of fuel in the airplane's fuel tanks. The pilot sumped the fuel tanks without 
any water noted and performed an engine run-up without any anomalies noted. He performed 
a takeoff and one circuit in the traffic pattern. During the final approach he decided to perform 
a go-around and applied full power. The airplane began to climb, but soon after, the engine lost 
total power. He then turned the fuel pump "ON" and applied carburetor heat but the engine 
did not respond. He repositioned the throttle and then started "pumping it." Then, the engine 
started, maintained "full" rpm for less than a minute, and then lost total power again. The pilot 
performed the same procedure of "pumping" the throttle, the engine starting, and then losing 
total power two more times. After the third loss of total engine power, he elected to perform a 
forced landing to a marsh area. The airplane impacted the marsh area and came to rest in an 
upright position.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the airplane was issued a normal 
airworthiness certificate in February 1980. It was powered by a Lycoming O&VO 360 series, 
180-hp, engine. According to the pilot, the most recent 100-hour inspection was completed on 
March 17, 2014. At the time of the accident, the tachometer indicated that the airplane had 
accumulated 7,287 hours of time.
A review of recorded data from the AAF automated weather observation station, revealed at 
1253 the wind was variable at 4 knots, visibility of 10 miles, clear skies, temperature 28 degrees 
C, dewpoint 21 degrees C, and a barometric altimeter setting of 30.00 inches of mercury.
A postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that the airplane incurred substantial 
damage to both elevators and horizontal stabilizers. An undetermined amount of fuel was 
noted in both fuel tanks. The fuel selector valve, located in the cockpit, was noted in "Both" 
position. The engine remained attached to the fuselage through all engine mounts. One blade 
of the propeller was bent aft approximately 30 degrees and the other blade was not damaged.
The FAA inspector, who responded to the accident, stated that when the wings were removed 
to facilitate recovery, the left wing tank fuel line to the engine was partially blocked with a 
sealant type material. The sealant was "fresh" and photographic evidence showed that the 
sealant was neither weathered nor worn. Upon examining the maintenance records, there was 
no entry found that indicated when the sealant was applied to the fuel tank. In addition, no 
paperwork was produced that documented when the maintenance was performed to line the 
fuel tank with sealant.
A postaccident examination of the engine revealed that engine continuity was confirmed from 
Page 4 of 6ERA14LA374
the propeller flange to the accessory section of the engine by rotating the propeller by hand. 
The fuel screens were removed and no debris was noted. In addition, the engine was started 
and operated without any anomalies noted.
A representative of the manufacturer was contacted and stated that if a fuel line was partially 
blocked from one fuel tank, as long as the fuel selector valve was on "BOTH," the fuel flow 
would be sufficient enough to maintain engine power.
The carburetor icing probability chart from Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Special 
Airworthiness Information Bulletin (SAIB): CE-09-35 Carburetor Icing Prevention, June 30, 
2009, showed a probability of serious icing at glide power at the temperature and dew point 
reported at the time of the accident. In addition it stated that in order to prevent carburetor 
icing, a pilot should "Use carburetor heat on approach and descent when operating at low 
power settings, or in conditions where carburetor icing is probable."
According to the pilot operating handbook, both the descent and before landing checklist 
stated that the carburetor heat should be "ON" in order to prevent carburetor icing.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR go-around
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/28/2014
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
02/25/2012
Flight Time:
1264 hours (Total, all aircraft), 118 hours (Total, this make and model), 1227 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 84 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 39 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA14LA374
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N5276U
Model/Series:
172 RG
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
172RG0319
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/17/2014, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O&VO-360 SER
Registered Owner:
N5276U ENTERPRISE LLC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
C.A.M.S Flight School
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
AAF, 19 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
318°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Apalachicola, FL (AAF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Apalachicola, FL (AAF)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1310 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
APALACHICOLA REGIONAL (AAF)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
20 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Vegetation
Runway Used:
24
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5271 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6ERA14LA374
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
29.727500, -85.027222 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Heidi Moats
Adopted Date:
02/03/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Joseph Arvay; FAA/FSDO; Birmingham, AL
Publish Date:
02/03/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89787
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
