Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sedalia, MO
Accident Number:
CHI01LA194
Date & Time:
07/02/2001, 1859 CDT 
Registration:
N902GH
Aircraft:
Houston Challenger II
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The two seat experimental amateur-built airplane was destroyed when it impacted trees 
located near the southwest perimeter fence about 900 feet west of the approach end of runway 
5.  The aircraft wreckage pattern was oriented to the southwest.  A witness reported that the 
airplane "ran like new" when it departed.  Witnesses near the airport reported seeing the 
airplane flying low, heading north, and then making a wide right turn to the southwest before 
impacting the trees.  One witness said the engine sputtered twice before impacting the trees.  
Another witness said he heard the engine quit and saw the propeller stop.  He reported the 
engine started again and the airplane turned back toward the airport before crashing into the 
trees.  The pilot had a total of 100 flight hours.  A witness reported the pilot had purchased the 
airplane within the last year and had flown it about 2 hours, but not at all within the last 3 or 4 
months.  The airplane did not have a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) registered "N" 
number painted on the airplane.  No data plate or serial number was found on the airplane.  
According to FAA records, an Airworthiness Certificate was never issued for the accident 
airplane.  A witness reported he had flown the airplane and that it had a severe yaw problem 
and he was afraid to fly in it again.  He reported the pilot fabricated and installed "stab fins" on 
the tip of each horizontal stabilizer, and a large trim tab on the rudder.  The witness also stated 
the pilot removed the doors to the airplane because he had been told it would help eliminate 
the yaw problem.  The witness reported the accident flight was the first flight the pilot had 
taken with the doors removed.  An examination of the airplane revealed no preexisting 
anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 7CHI01LA194
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the unsuitable terrain encountered during the forced landing.  Additional factors were the 
pilot's lack of experience in the type of airplane, the loss of engine power for undetermined 
reasons, and the trees.
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: APPROACH
Findings
1. (F) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. (F) OBJECT - TREE(S)
3. (C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7CHI01LA194
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 2, 2001, at 1859 central daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Houston 
Challenger II, N902GH, was destroyed when it impacted trees located near the southwest 
perimeter fence of the Sedalia Airport (DMO), Sedalia, Missouri.  The private pilot was fatally 
injured.  The experimental airplane had departed from the pilot's private airstrip about 1854.  
The intended destination was DMO.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed. 
A witness, who was a friend of the pilot, reported that he and the pilot had been doing minor 
repairs and maintenance on the airplane prior to the flight.  He reported the pilot decided to fly 
the airplane to DMO, but he advised against it because of the high wind speeds.  The witness 
reported that the airplane "ran like new" when it departed for DMO. 
Witnesses who were located near the airport reported seeing the airplane flying low, heading 
north, and then making a wide right turn to the southwest before impacting the trees.  One 
witness said the engine sputtered twice before impacting the trees.  Another witness said he 
heard the engine quit and saw the propeller stop.  He reported the engine started again and the 
airplane turned back toward the airport before crashing into the trees.  
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was a private pilot with a single engine land rating.  He held a Third Class Medical 
Certificate that was issued on September 25, 2000.  The pilot reported his total flight time was 
100 hours during his last medical examination.  A witness reported the pilot had purchased the 
airplane within the last year and had flown it about 2 hours, but not at all within the last 3 or 4 
months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a single engine experimental amateur-built Challenger II.  The airplane 
seated two and had a maximum gross weight of 800 pounds.  The engine was a 52 horsepower 
Rotax 503 engine.  The pilot had purchased the airplane within the previous year.  There were 
no maintenance records available and the flight hours on the airplane and engine are 
unknown.
The two seat experimental airplane did not have a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
registered "N" number painted on the airplane.  No data plate or serial number was found on 
the airplane.  According to FAA records, an Airworthiness Certificate was never issued for the 
accident airplane.
A witness reported he had flown the airplane and that it had a severe yaw problem and he was 
afraid to fly in it again.  He reported the pilot fabricated and installed "stab fins" on the tip of 
each horizontal stabilizer, and a large trim tab on the rudder.  The witness also stated the pilot 
removed the doors to the airplane because he had been told it would help eliminate the yaw 
problem.  The witness reported the accident flight was the first flight the pilot had taken with 
the doors removed.   
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
At 1853, the observed weather at DMO was: winds 120 degrees at 7 knots, sky clear, visibility 
Page 4 of 7CHI01LA194
10 sm, temperature 28 degrees C, dew point 23 degrees C, altimeter 30.10. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted trees on the southwest corner of the DMO airport, and was about 900 
feet west of the approach end of runway 5.  The aircraft wreckage pattern was oriented to the 
southwest.  The airplane impacted the tress approximately 20-25 feet above the ground and it 
remained lodged in the tree branches.  Aircraft parts were found 50 feet in front of the airplane 
wreckage.  
An examination of the airplane revealed flight control continuity.  The engine inspection 
revealed the two stroke Rotax engine exhibited continuity and cylinder compression.  Fuel was 
found in the carburetors.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Heckart Gillespie Funeral Home, Sedalia, 
Missouri.  
A Forensic Toxicology Fatal Accident Report was prepared by the FAA Civil Aeromedical 
Institute.  The results were negative.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA was a party to the investigation.
Page 5 of 7CHI01LA194
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/25/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
100 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Houston
Registration:
N902GH
Model/Series:
Challenger II 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
CH20990W0560
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
503
Registered Owner:
Ralph A. Thomas
Rated Power:
52 hp
Operator:
Ralph A. Thomas
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7CHI01LA194
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DMO, 909 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1853 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.1 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 23°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Sedalia, MO (PVT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Sedalia, MO (DMO)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1854 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Sedalia Memorial Airport (DMO)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
909 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jim Silliman
Adopted Date:
06/18/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Jim Wesley; FAA; Kansas City, MO
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7CHI01LA194
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
