National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Floresville, TX
Accident Number: FTW04LA001
Date & Time: 10/02/2003, 1109 CDT
Registration: N301SX
Aircraft: Bratton Experimental Homebuilt
Swearingen SX300
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot of an experimental homebuilt single-engine airplane impacted the ground during a forced landing following a loss of engine power due to separation of a propeller blade.
The shank connecting the composite propeller to the hub was broken, and one of the three blades was missing from the hub.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The separation of one propeller blade while in cruise flight.
A factor contributing to the accident was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) PROPELLER SYSTEM/ACCESSORIES,HUB - FAILURE ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND 3.
The commercial pilot, who was the owner and operator of the airplane, and the passenger sustained serious injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The airplane departed the Corpus Christi International Airport (CRP) near Corpus Christi, Texas.
The flight's intended destination was the Gillespie County Airport (T82), near Fredericksburg, Texas.
The 4,000-hour pilot, who was the owner and builder of the airplane, reported to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector that the aircraft was powered by a 300-horsepower Lycoming IO-540 engine, which was driving a 3 bladed composite propeller.
According to information provided by the FAA inspector who responded to the accident site, one of the propeller blades came off while in cruise flight, and the pilot was able to shut the engine down.
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that the shank connecting the composite propeller to the hub was broken, and one of the three blades was missing from the hub.
The pilot/operator failed to provide the Safety Board with a completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB 6120.1/2) form.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 79, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Glider Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
