National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Shenandoah, IA
Accident Number: CHI04LA001
Date & Time: 10/02/2003, 2100 CDT
Registration: N3772D
Aircraft: Cessna 182A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Other Work Use
 Analysis The airplane sustained substantial damage when it impacted a ditch during an emergency landing following a loss of engine power.
The pilot reported that the engine "popped" twice and the airplane lost engine power.
The pilot attempted to restart the engine but was unsuccessful.
The pilot-rated passenger prepared for an emergency landing at the destination airport.
They realized the airplane would land short of the airport and prepared to "ditch."
The airplane touched down in a cornfield and subsequently impacted a ditch.
An FAA inspector examined the airplane subsequent to the accident and found five gallons of fuel in the left tank.
The fuel tank strainer and fittings were pulled from the right wing.
The strainer was destroyed, but had no signs of blockage previous to the accident.
No fuel was observed in the right tank or in the fuel inlet line of the carburetor.
The airframe and engine were examined and no anomalies were found.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Loss of engine power for an undetermined reason during cruise and the unsuitable terrain for landing encountered by the pilot.
The factors to the accident were the dark night, the corn crop, and the ditch.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - CROP 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On October 2, 2003, at 2100 central daylight time, a Cessna 182A, N3772D, piloted by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when it impacted terrain during a forced landing following a loss of engine power near Shenandoah Municipal Airport (SDA), Shenandoah, Iowa.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.
The commercial pilot reported minor injuries.
The pilot-rated passenger reported serious injuries.
The flight departed Coles County Memorial Airport (MTO), near Mattoon, Illinois, at 1820.
According to the pilot's written statement, during cruise flight at 6,500 feet mean sea level, the engine "popped" twice and lost engine power.
The pilot stated he tried to restart the engine several times.
He reported he "went through the flow checks and restart procedures all the way until impact never admitting to ourselves that the engine was not going to restart."
The pilot stated the pilot-rated passenger had SDA in sight and tried to make an emergency landing at the airport.
The pilot reported they realized they "were not going to make the airport about a quarter mile out and prepared to ditch."
The pilot reported they touched down in a cornfield and subsequently impacted a ditch.
The pilot stated that the nose, nose gear, and right wing were separated from the airplane.
The pilot also stated there was substantial damage to the cockpit, dash and windshield.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane subsequent to the accident.
The inspector reported the right wing was separated from the aft attach point, but not completely detached from the airplane.
Approximately five gallons of fuel was strained from the left tank.
The fuel tank strainer and fittings were pulled from the right wing.
The strainer was destroyed, but had no signs of blockage previous to the accident.
No fuel was observed in the right tank or in the fuel inlet line of the carburetor.
The fuel selector was on the left tank.
The airframe and engine were examined and no preexisting anomalies were found.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 22, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 2550 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 63 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3204 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-470L Registered Owner: Joe Stancil Jr.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
