National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: Clayton, GA
Incident Number: ATL04IA002
Date & Time: 10/02/2003, 1530 EDT
Registration: N2831D
Aircraft: North American T6G
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot during the approach to land the airplane touched down about 500 feet down runway 23 on the centerline.
As the tail lost lift and the tail wheel made contact with the runway, the airplane veered left of the centerline.
At 1900 feet, the airplane crossed from the south side of the runway over the centerline to the north side of the runway.
The airplane veered again to the left and departed the runway on the south side about 2,000 feet from the approach end.
The airplane came to rest perpendicular to the runway 2,144 feet from the approach end.
Examination of the accident on-scene found that the airplane departed the runway edge and proceeded down a fifteen-foot embankment and made contact with several large rocks, separating both main landing gear.
The airplane continued to rotate counter clockwise about 45-degrees and came to rest near trees.
Winds at the time of the accident were 100-degrees gusting to 15 knots.
Examination of the auto-locking feature for the tail-wheel found that the mechanism operated properly.
Tail wheel skid marks on the runway were clearly visible throughout the length of the loss-of-control sequence.
Tail wheel scuff marks were in line with the main landing gear and exhibited side-load scuffing consistent with the tail wheel being in the forward, locked position.
The scuffing was not consistent with a cocked tail wheel.
In addition, no evidence was identified indicating tail wheel tire sidewall or tread damage consistent with a cocked tail wheel.
No mechanical problem with the airplane was reported by the pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions that resulted in his failure to maintain directional control during landing roll.
A factor was  gusting tailwinds.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 4.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 5.
The personal flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot received minor injuries, and the passenger was not injured.
The airplane sustained minor damage.
The flight originated from a private airstrip in Griffin, Georgia, at 1430.
According to the pilot, he elected to land on runway 23 with a slight tail wind.
He said the winds were light and variable with occasional gusts.
The runway was a newly constructed concrete surface, which measured 5,000 feet by 50 feet.
The south side of the runway drops off approximately 20 feet from the runway edge into a 15-foot deep embankment.
The pilot stated that the airplane touched down about 500 feet down runway 23 on the centerline.
As the tail lost lift and the tail wheel made contact with the runway, the airplane veered left off the centerline.
At 1900 feet, the airplane crossed from the south side of the runway over the centerline to the north side of the runway.
The airplane veered again to the left and departed the runway on the south side about 2,000 feet from the approach end.
The airplane came to rest perpendicular to the runway 2,144 feet from the approach end.
Winds at the time of the accident were100-degrees gusting to 15 knots.
Examination of the accident on-scene found that the airplane collided was an embankment and several large rocks.
The examination also revealed that both main landing gear were separated from the airframe.
Examination of the auto-locking feature for the tail-wheel found that the mechanism operated properly.
Tail wheel skid marks on the runway were clearly visible throughout the length of the loss-of-control sequence.
Tail wheel scuff marks were in line with the main landing gear and exhibited side-load scuffing consistent with the tail wheel being in the locked position.
The scuffing was not consistent with a cocked tail wheel.
In addition, no evidence was identified indicating tail wheel tire sidewall or tread damage consistent with a cocked tail wheel.
No mechanical problem with the airplane was reported by the pilot.
**This narrative was modified on August 9, 2007.
** Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 80, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine Sea; Single-engine Land; Single- engine Sea Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 5300 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Pratt & Whitney ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: R1430 Registered Owner: Bowlin & Associates Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
