Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
TOWNSEND, TN
Accident Number:
MIA98FA038
Date & Time:
12/01/1997, 1634 EST 
Registration:
N9033Y
Aircraft:
Cessna C-182E
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to flight planning data found in the wreckage, the flight had departed Louisville, 
Kentucky for Gainesville, Florida. The airplane collided with terrain at the 4,300-foot level of a 
4,400-foot ridgeline about 22 miles southeast of Knoxville, Tennessee, about 1:45 hours later.  
Cloud condition for Knoxville at the time of the accident was, ceiling 3,200 agl, or 4,200 msl.  
The pilot was not IFR qualified, and when queried by the Green Bay AFSS briefer about his 
intentions in areas of cloudiness, he stated, 'probably stay below' the clouds. There was no 
radio or transponder contact with any ATC facility and no flight plan was filed. There was no 
evidence of any precrash malfunction found with the airframe, engine, or its components, 
either at the site or in subsequent teardown inspection. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's failure to maintain VFR flight conditions in a mountainous area resulting in inflight 
collision with rising terrain. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. TERRAIN CONDITION - RISING
Page 2 of 6MIA98FA038
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 1, 1997, about 1634 eastern standard time, a Cessna C-182E, N9033Y, 
registered to a private individual, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed about 
22 miles southeast of Knoxville's McGhee Tyson Airport into mountainous terrain within the 
Great Smoky Mountain National Park.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
closest reporting weather facility, and no flight plan had been filed.  The aircraft was destroyed, 
and the private-rated pilot was fatally injured. The flight last departed Louisville's Bowman 
Field about 1 hour 45 minutes before the accident.
Transcripts of conversations with a person identified as the pilot of N9033Y and Green 
Bay Automated Flight Service Station indicates the pilot planned to fly to Kissimmee, Florida, 
in time to attend a class on Monday, December 1, 1997.  The person had obtained two 
comprehensive weather briefings from Green Bay AFSS, one on Sunday evening, November 
30, 1997, at 1923 central standard time, that resulted in his canceling the flight for unsuitable 
weather, and the second briefing on Monday morning, December 1, 1997, at 0745, where the 
pilot mentions his intention to try to stay below the observed and forecast ceilings along his 
route of flight, (see comments at time, 1355:14 and time, 1359:47 on December 1, of AFSS 
briefing). Transcripts of Green Bay AFSS briefings are included in this report under Reports 
from Federal Agencies. 
The last fueling facility used by the pilot, Triangle Flying Service, at Louisville's Bowman 
Field, reported that N9033Y took aboard 37.8 gallons of 100 octane low lead fuel about 2 to 2 
1/2 hours before the accident.  The fixed-base operator, (FBO) had tested their fuel trucks and 
fuel pump for contaminants and water the morning of the accident with negative results.  (See 
fuel receipt, FBO daily fuel check report).
 N9033Y had no reported radio or transponder contact with any ATC facility.  There 
were no witnesses to the accident.  The Air Force Rescue Coordination Center received the first 
ELT resolution at 1706 eastern standard time.  The wreckage was found by Civil Air Patrol 
airborne search on December 2, 1997, at 0913. 
 PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot's logbook was recovered and showed a total flight time of 460 hours with no 
logged instrument time. The pilot had completed a biennial flight review on January 29, 1997, 
and had accumulated 8 hours in the past 90 days.  Flight hours accumulated on the accident 
day are not reflected.  FAA records show the pilot did not hold an FAA instrument rating.  
Additional information on the pilot is contained in this report on page 3, under First Pilot 
Information and in copies of the pilot's logbook pages, under Other Pertinent Forms and 
Reports.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
An annual inspection of the airplane had been accomplished and signed off the day of 
the accident.  Review of the aircraft logbook revealed a static air and altimeter check was 
performed on August 6, 1991. Additional information on the aircraft is contained in this report 
on page 2, under Aircraft Information and in copies of aircraft logbook pages under Other 
Pertinent Forms and Reports.    METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Page 3 of 6MIA98FA038
A day-hiker estimates he was 3 to 4 miles from the crash site at 1634, descending the 
mountain.  He recalls weather conditions at the start of his descent, (within 2 miles of the crash 
site and about 4,900 feet of elevation) to be,  prevailing visibility was 100 to 150 feet in dense 
fog, temperature was cold enough that some ice had formed on the trees, and there was no 
wind.  McGhee Tyson Airport's ceiling was 3,200 feet agl, or 4,200 feet msl, at the time of the 
accident.  Meteorological information is included in this report on page 3 under Weather 
Information and also under Factual Report of Meteorological Group Chairman.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane crashed in dense forest within the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, 
at the 4,300-foot level of a 4,400-foot elevation ridgeline that divides Tennessee and North 
Carolina.  The wreckage path is oriented on a heading of 170 degrees, about 20 to 25 degrees 
upslope at coordinates: N 35 degrees 33.94 minutes, W 83 degrees 46.14 minutes.  Initial 
impact was with trees that left most of the right wing and outer portion of the left wing lodged 
35 to 40 feet agl.  The main wreckage, consisting of engine, cockpit, inboard left wing, and 
empennage, impacted the ground about 125 feet from initial tree impact.  The propeller and 
spinner had separated and were found furthest along the wreckage path, left of centerline 
about 150 feet from initial impact.  The spinner exhibited severe counter-clockwise, (viewed 
from cockpit) rotational crushing.  One blade had reversed within the hub 180 degrees and 
showed chordwise striations with tip fracture.  The other blade exhibited slight forward 
bending along its total span.  A heavy layer of fine wood chips covered the entire site. 
 All airframe components were found in the immediate area.  Flight controls and 
airframe components showed no signs of precrash failure or malfunction.  Control integrity to 
all flight controls was established. The engine and its components showed no evidence of 
precrash failure or malfunction.  The magnetos were not recovered.  Compression and timing 
checks of each cylinder revealed no abnormalities.  Spark plug electrodes showed deposit 
coloration consistent with normal engine operation.  Disassembly inspection of the vacuum 
pump revealed a freely rotating driveshaft, and full integrity of the vanes and carbon block.  A 
certified repair station inspection, with NTSB oversight, of the aircraft's attitude indicator 
revealed no evidence of precrash mechanical failure or malfunction. 
A pencil flightlog showing the following waypoints was found in the cockpit: Capital 
Field, Wisconsin;  Anderson, Indiana;  Bowman Field, Kentucky;  Knoxville, Tennessee; and 
Gainesville, Florida. The pilot had written, "fill @ 718.3"(hours on tachometer) and "2:45 
inflight" adjacent to the entry labeled, "LOU-BOWMAN".
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on December 3, 1997, at the University of 
Tennessee's Medical Center, Knoxville, Tennessee, by Dr. Sandra K. Elkins, and revealed cause 
of death to be blunt force injuries.  No findings that could be considered causal were noted.  
Toxicological tests were conducted at the Federal Aviation  Administration Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The tests were negative for ethanol, carbon monoxide, 
basic, acidic, and neutral drugs.
TESTS AND RESEARCH 
The aircraft's LORAN navigation unit was read out at the manufacturer's facility, with 
FAA oversight, with these findings: "from" waypoint was Knoxville, "to" waypoint was 
Gainesville, Florida, "bearing to" was 171 degrees,  "distance to" was 360 NM, and "present 
Page 4 of 6MIA98FA038
position" was the crash site coordinates.  These figures were verified with a factory simulator as 
being correct.  A copy of the report is included under Reports from Federal Agencies.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The aircraft wreckage was released to Mr. Bob Jones, representing the operator's 
insurance company, on December 18, 1997.  All components retained by NTSB for further 
examination were returned to Atlanta Air Salvage, Griffin, Georgia, per instructions from Mr. 
Jones.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/24/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
460 hours (Total, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N9033Y
Model/Series:
C-182E C-182E
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18254212
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/01/1997, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4105 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-470-R
Registered Owner:
JEFFREY W. MANN
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
JEFFREY W. MANN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA98FA038
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TYS, 981 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
22 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1653 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
340°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3200 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
LOUISVILLE, KY (LOU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
GAINESVILLE, FL (GNV)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1450 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ALAN       C STONE
Adopted Date:
11/06/1998
Additional Participating Persons:
CRAIG   ROBERTS; NASHVILLE, TN
LEAH   RIDDLE; WICHITA, KS
GEORGE   HOLLINGSWORTH; RESTON, VA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA98FA038
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
