Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SEDONA, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX98FA050
Date & Time:
12/02/1997, 2200 MST 
Registration:
N301JL
Aircraft:
Mooney M20J
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The area forecast was for VFR to MVFR conditions with occasional visibility reducing to 3 to 5 
miles in mist.  The 700 mb (10,000 feet MSL) Constant Pressure chart depicted Flagstaff as 
having northwesterly winds of approximately 25 knots.  After checking the weather several 
times, the pilot departed Sedona (elevation 4,827 feet).  No flight plan had been filed for the 21 
mile northbound flight to Flagstaff. Dark night conditions existed at the time of the accident 
and there were no ground lights in the direction of flight.  After takeoff, the northbound aircraft 
struck the leeward side of a 6,100-foot ridge, about the 5,952-foot level, and at a point located 
along a direct route to Flagstaff.  The crash site was located bearing 019 degrees and 4.3 miles 
from the Sedona airport.  Given the wind and mountainous terrain in the area of the accident, 
the influence of such winds would result in downslope wind conditions over the accident site. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the failure of the pilot to maintain adequate terrain clearance during the climb.  Contributing 
factors were dark night conditions, mountainous/hilly terrain, and mountain wave weather 
conditions. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
2. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - MOUNTAIN WAVE
3. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY
4. (C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 2 of 6LAX98FA050
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 2, 1997, about 2200 hours mountain standard time, a Mooney M20J, N301JL, 
en route to Flagstaff, Arizona, collided with mountainous terrain after takeoff from the Sedona, 
Arizona, airport.  The aircraft was destroyed and the pilot and his passenger received fatal 
injuries.  The aircraft was being operated by the pilot/owner as a personal flight under 14 CFR 
Part 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations when the accident occurred.  The flight originated 
about 2158.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
An unidentified transient pilot reported to the airport manager that he had heard an aircraft 
climbing out about 2200 on December 2, 1997.  There were no other witnesses identified.
There were no ground-based lighting systems in the vicinity of the accident site.
The wreckage was spotted about 0835 the next morning by a resident with a telescope who 
subsequently reported it to the Sedona Fire Department. 
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the pilot did not receive a 
weather briefing.
PILOT INFORMATION
No pilot logbooks were available for review by investigators.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The aircraft was equipped with an S-Tech model 0110 autopilot and a Bendix/King model KLN 
90B GPS navigational system.  There was no retrievable memory available from either system.
Sheriff's deputies reported that the aircraft logbooks were given to an FAA inspector who made 
copies of selected entries.  The inspector reported that, according to the logbook entries, the 
aircraft was being maintained in an airworthy condition.  The sheriff reported that the 
logbooks were signed out of the evidence locker on December 17, 1997, by a person identified 
as the son of the pilot.
The aircraft logbooks were discarded by the pilot/owner's son after he received them from 
sheriff's deputies and before they could be reviewed by Safety Board investigators.  The FAA 
inspector did not retain the logbook copies he had made on the day of the accident.
The date, location, and amount of the last fuel purchase are unknown.
There was no evidence found to indicate that the aircraft was beyond gross weight or center of 
gravity limitations. 
METEORLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The area forecast for December 3, 1997, at 1145Z was for VFR to MVFR conditions with 
occasional visibility down to 3 to 5 miles in mist.
The 700 mb Constant Pressure chart for December 3, 1997, at 1200Z depicted the Flagstaff 
station model.  The indications were northwesterly winds of approximately 25 knots, a 
temperature of -9 degrees Celsius, and a dew point of -10 degrees Celsius at 10,000 feet msl. 
There was no moon illumination at the estimated time of the accident.
Page 3 of 6LAX98FA050
There was no FAA record of the pilot receiving a weather briefing, although friends of the pilot 
reported that he had checked the weather several times before departing.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
The accident site was located on the south side of an approximate 6,100-foot east-west ridge, at 
about 5,952 feet msl.  A GPS indicated the position was 34 degrees 54 minutes 18.9 seconds 
north latitude and 111 degrees 44 minutes 17.9 seconds west longitude. 
The accident site was on a 019-degree bearing, 4.3 miles from the Sedona airport.  The runway 
is oriented toward 03 and 21.  The Flagstaff airport is located on a 003-degree bearing, 21 miles 
from the Sedona airport.
An examination of the aircraft revealed that the right wing was separated, at the root, from the 
fuselage.  The right wing exhibited more leading edge crushing than did the leading edge of the 
left wing.  Control continuity was established to all flight control surfaces.  The nose of the 
aircraft was crushed aft to within 14 inches of the leading edge of the remaining wing.  The 
instrument panel was positioned in proximity to the back of the front seats.  There was 
evidence of oil-canning on the top and sides of the main fuselage.
The engine initially was found at the accident site shifted aft and separated from the airframe 
engine mounts.  There was evidence of impact damage on both the engine and engine 
accessories.  The oil sump/plenum with the attached fuel control servo was separated from the 
engine, as were the engine accessory case, magneto, fuel pump, vacuum pump, and propeller 
governor.  
An attempt to rotate the crankshaft by hand was unsuccessful.  There was a gouge across the 
No. 1 cylinder barrel that was consistent in size and orientation to that of a propeller blade.  
The piston faces were viewed, with the aid of a penlight, through the spark plug holes and 
appeared undamaged.  The rocker covers were removed and the valve components were 
visually inspected.  The connecting rods and crankshaft at the No. 3 and 4 cylinder positions 
were viewed through a hole in the rear of the engine case.  There was no evidence of 
mechanical malfunction visible.  The idler gears were missing from the accessory case and were 
not recovered from the site.  The crankshaft gear and dowel were secure and intact.
There was no evidence of metal contamination in the engine oil.  The oil pump was intact and 
contained residual oil.
The vacuum pump drive was intact; however, the vanes were found cracked and shattered.
Half of the 8 spark plug electrodes, 1 per cylinder, were undamaged.  According to the 
Champion Spark Plugs Check-A-Plug chart, AV-27, the undamaged electrodes displayed wear 
and coloration patterns consistent with normal operation.
The single drive dual magneto could not be functionally tested due to damage.  The impulse 
coupler drive was intact and secure on the shaft.
The fuel injection servo fuel flow divider was intact and secure at its mounting bracket.  Line 
continuity was established to each cylinder nozzle.  The No. 3 nozzle was separated.  The flow 
divider was disassembled and trace amounts of a fuel-like substance were noted.
The engine driven fuel pump was disassembled and examined.  There was no evidence of 
internal blockage or mechanical malfunction.
Page 4 of 6LAX98FA050
The exhaust system gas path coloration was light gray.  There was no evidence of internal 
obstructions when viewed through the ports of each pipe.
The two-bladed constant speed propeller was separated from the engine crankshaft.  A portion 
of the propeller hub remained attached to the propeller flange.  Both propeller blades' tips, 
though fractured, were found at the accident site.  The blades exhibited leading edge damage as 
well as chordwise scouring.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was conducted on December 4, 1997, by the Coconino Medical Examiner, with 
specimens retained for toxicological examination.  The toxicological test results were negative 
for alcohol and all screened drug substances. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The direct flight time from takeoff to impact was estimated by Safety Board investigators and 
the aircraft manufacturer's representative to have been approximately 3.0 minutes.  This was 
based on an average rate of climb of 980 fpm, an estimated gross weight of 2,517 pounds, 
surface winds from 130 degrees at 4 knots, a surface temperature of 43 degrees Fahrenheit, 
and an initial field elevation of 4,827 feet msl.  Under the stated conditions, the expected 
altitude gain would have been about 2,940 feet, or 7,767 feet msl.  These computations did not 
account for the potential effect of mountain wave conditions.  That altitude is 571 feet above the 
highest terrain depicted on the 60th edition of the Phoenix Sectional Aeronautical Chart, for 
the direct route of flight between Sedona and Flagstaff. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The ELT activated when slapped against the palm of the hand.
The aircraft wreckage was released to a representative of the registered owner on May 4, 1999.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/29/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3022 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX98FA050
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Mooney
Registration:
N301JL
Model/Series:
M20J M20J
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
24-0649
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2740 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1942 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-A3B6D
Registered Owner:
LAWRENCE JOHN GARNELLO
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
LAWRENCE JOHN GARNELLO
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SEZ, 4827 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2201 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
208°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 5000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
6°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (SEZ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
FLAGSTAFF, AZ (FLG)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2158 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     R CRISPIN
Adopted Date:
12/08/1999
Additional Participating Persons:
WILLIAM A PRATT; SCOTTSDALE, AZ
MARK W PLATT; VAN NUYS, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
