Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Jacksonville, OR
Accident Number:
WPR15LA032
Date & Time:
11/02/2014, 1456 PST 
Registration:
N1593M
Aircraft:
CESSNA T210M
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that, during cruise flight, the engine began running roughly with smoke 
developing inside the cabin, followed by oil covering the windshield. The pilot stated that the 
engine continued to run and that his attempts to increase the power setting resulted in severe 
shaking and more smoke. The pilot initiated a forced landing in a nearby field. During the 
landing roll, the nosewheel landing gear dug into mud, and the airplane subsequently nosed 
over.
Postaccident examination of the engine revealed that the Nos. 5 and 6 connecting rods were 
liberated from the crankshaft. The No. 6 connecting rod was thermally discolored and 
fractured, which was likely caused by oil starvation to the No. 6 connecting rod journal and 
bearing. The No. 5 connecting rod was also fractured; however, the connecting rod and bearing 
did not exhibit thermal discoloration or distress; the fracture likely resulted due to damage 
sustained when the No. 6 connecting rod fractured. The Nos. 1 and 2 connecting rods also 
exhibited thermal discoloration and distress, which likely resulted from the engine™s continued 
operation after the liberation of the No. 6 connecting rod.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power during cruise flight due to the failure of the No. 6 connecting rod, which 
resulted from oil starvation. 
Findings
Aircraft
Recip engine power section - Failure (Cause)
Oil - Fluid level (Cause)
Environmental issues
Wet/muddy terrain - Contributed to outcome
Page 2 of 6WPR15LA032
Factual Information
On November 2, 2014, about 1456 Pacific standard time, a Cessna T210M, N1593M, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power near 
Jacksonville, Oregon.  The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the 
provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The private pilot, sole occupant of 
the airplane, sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an 
instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the personal flight.  The cross-country flight 
originated from Grants Pass, Oregon, with an intended destination of Long Beach, California.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the pilot reported that during cruise flight at an altitude of about 12,900 feet 
mean sea level, the engine began to run rough with smoke developing inside the cabin, 
followed by oil covering the windshield.  The pilot stated that he observed the oil pressure 
gauge indicating 0, however, the engine continued to run, and that any attempt to increase the 
power setting resulted in severe shaking and smoke.  The pilot initiated a forced landing in a 
nearby field.  During the landing roll, the nosewheel landing gear dug into the mud, and the 
airplane subsequently nosed over.
Examination of the airplane by local law enforcement revealed that the right wing at the flap 
aileron junction was bent downward about 45 degrees.  Oil was observed on the windshield 
and surrounding the fuselage area.  The wreckage was recovered to a secure location for further 
examination.
The engine was removed from the airframe and sent to the facilities of Continental Motors, 
Inc., Mobile, Alabama, for further examination.  The engine was examined on March 3, 2015, 
by representatives from Continental Motors under the supervision of the NTSB IIC.  The 
examination revealed a large hole on the top left side of the crankcase over the number 6 
cylinder, and a smaller hole on the top right side of the crankcase over the number 5 cylinder.  
Visual inspection through each hole revealed that the number 5 and number 6 connecting rods 
were liberated from the connecting rod journals.  The engine was subsequently disassembled 
and inspected.
The crankcase halves remained secured to each other.  The main bearing saddles for the 
number 1 through number 3 bearings did not display any anomalies. The number 4 and 
number 5 bearing saddles displayed displaced material with the number 5 being the worst.  In 
addition, the oil feed hole for the number 5 bearing was obstructed by displaced saddle 
material.  The oil galleys on the cylinder 2, 4, and 6 side of the crankcase were free of debris, 
with the exception the hole at the number 5 main bearing.
The number 1 and 2 main bearings displayed normal wear and a few score marks consistent 
with hard-particle-passage. There was no sign of lock tab movement or lock slot elongation. 
The number 3 main bearing displayed wear and scoring that removed the babbit layer and 
displayed the copper underlay. There was no sign of lock tab movement or lock slot elongation. 
The number 4 main bearing was discolored black, heavily worn, and displaced in the saddle 
such that the bearing split line did not match up with the case half split line. There was no 
evidence of lateral lock slot elongation. The oil feed to the backside of the number 4 bearing 
was unobstructed. The number 5 main bearing was discolored black, heavily worn, and 
displaced in the saddle such that the bearing split line did not match up with the case half split 
line. There was no evidence of lateral lock slot elongation. The oil feed to the backside of the 
Page 3 of 6WPR15LA032
number 5 bearing was obstructed by displaced saddle material.
The crankshaft remained intact but displayed thermal distress at the number 1, number 2, and 
the number 6 connecting rod journals. The number 6 connecting rod journal was also 
mechanically damaged and the oil feed hole was no longer visible due to the displaced material. 
Additionally, the crankshaft's number 4 and number 5 main bearing journals displayed black 
thermal discoloration, along with material displacement at the number 5 bearing journal.  All 
of the crankshaft oil tubes were clear of debris with the exception of the number 6 connecting 
rod journal, which was mechanically damaged.
The number 1 connecting rod remained secured to the crankshaft and the piston pin; however, 
it displayed thermal discoloration and evidence of heat distress associated with a lack of 
lubrication. The oil feed to the number 1 bearing was clear of debris. The connecting rod 
bearing displayed evidence of thermal discoloration and heat distress associated with a lack of 
lubrication.
The number 2 connecting rod remained secured to the crankshaft and the piston pin; however, 
it displayed thermal discoloration and evidence of heat distress associated with a lack of 
lubrication. The oil feed to the number 2 bearing was clear of debris. The oil feed to the number 
2 bearing was clear of debris. The bearing displayed evidence of thermal discoloration and heat 
distress associated with a lack of lubrication.
The number 3 connecting rod remained secured to the crankshaft and piston pin. There were 
no signs of operational distress with the connecting rod.  The oil feed to the number 3 bearing 
was clear of debris. The connecting rod bearing displayed some wear, but did not show the 
signs of thermal distress or lack of lubrication as the others.
The number 4 connecting rod remained secured to the crankshaft and piston pin. There were 
no signs of operational distress with the connecting rod. The oil feed to the number 4 bearing 
was clear of debris. The connecting rod bearing displayed some wear, but did not show the 
signs of thermal distress or lack of lubrication as the others.
The number 5 connecting rod was fractured into four pieces, none of which displayed thermal 
discoloration; however, mechanical damage was evident on all of the components. The piston 
end of the connecting rod remained attached to the piston pin.  The oil feed to the number 5 
bearing was clear of debris. The number 5 connecting rod bearing was liberated along with the 
fractured connecting rod; however, the two bearing halves were located (one in the sump and 
one found outside the engine). The bearing was mechanically damaged but there was little-to-
no thermal distress noted on the bearing.
The number 6 connecting rod was fractured into five pieces, and all displayed thermal 
discoloration and mechanical damage. The piston end of the connecting rod remained attached 
to the piston pin. The oil feed to the number 6 bearing was mechanically damaged at the 
number 6 connecting rod journal; however, it was unobstructed at the number 4 main journal 
end. Remnants of the connecting rod bearing were found in the oil sump. The remnants were 
thermally discolored and distorted.
The internal configuration of two engine crankshaft oil tube assemblies for the number 5 and 6 
connecting rods was documented using radiographic images that were collected on May 4 and 
5, 2015, in Chicago, Illinois. A total of 360 computed tomography (CT) slice images were 
examined, processed, and analyzed by the NTSB to evaluate the component.   Review of the 
crankshaft oil tube assembly images determined that there was no indication of low or medium 
Page 4 of 6WPR15LA032
density material buildup on the interior of either the upper or lower oil tube assemblies, a 
medium density material buildup was noted in areas of the crankshaft outside of the oil tube 
assemblies, the lower oil tube assembly was deformed on one end, and the other end was 
completely blocked by high density material with a density similar to the density of the 
crankshaft material, and the upper oil tube assembly had a discontinuity in the wall area at one 
end of the tube assembly.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) 
Nose over/nose down
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
57
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/02/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/13/2014
Flight Time:
4300 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1300 hours (Total, this make and model), 4250 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 75 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N1593M
Model/Series:
T210M M
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
21061949
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/11/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3803 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
111 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5308.3 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520 SER
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
0 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6WPR15LA032
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KMFR, 1329 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0053 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
42°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
330°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.23 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Grants Pass, OR 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Long Beach, CA 
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1420 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
42.223611, -123.064444 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joshua Cawthra
Adopted Date:
11/05/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Dee Rice; Federal Aviation Administration; Hillsboro, OR
Nicole Charnon; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Jan Smith; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
11/05/2015
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90347
Page 6 of 6WPR15LA032
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
