The 266-hour private pilot attempted to land on runway 30 with the winds from 160 degrees at 
14 knots.  He stated that while retracting the flaps on the rollout " a right cross wind gust lifted 
my right wing," which lifted his right main gear off the ground. The pilot initiated corrective 
action to level the wings and applied additional right rudder to realign to the runway.  The pilot 
was unable to recover from the downwind landing and the airplane collided with a 3-foot wall 
following the loss of control.
The pilot's failure to compensate for the existing winds conditions.  A contributing factor was 
the prevailing tailwind.
On October 1, 2002, approximately 1745 central daylight time, a Maule M-7-235C single-
engine tailwheel equipped airplane, N4269B, was destroyed when the airplane impacted a wall 
during landing at the Twin Oaks Airport (T94), near San Antonio, Texas.  The instrument rated 
private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained minor injuries.  The airplane was 
registered to and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight 
plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The local 
flight originated from the Twin Oaks Airport, at 1715.
The 266-hour pilot reported on the Pilot/Operator Accident Report Form (NTSB Form 
6120.1/2) that he arrived at the airfield at approximately 1700 hours and observed the local 
weather and winds for approximately 10 minutes.  He stated that the winds appeared mild and 
variable from approximately 120 degrees at 7 knots. The pilot added "I did not observe any 
gusts throughout the observation period."
The pilot initiated a takeoff from runway 12, surveyed the conditions and proceeded to enter 
the traffic pattern to land on runway 30.  The pilot stated, "I conducted one pass over the 
runway to test the conditions and ascertained the wind conditions were mild, no turbulence."
During the landing on runway 30, the pilot reported touch-down at 62 mph with the tail wheel 
touching momentarily before the mains.  "There was a very small bounce and the mains settled 
to the ground."  While on roll out, with flaps retracted, the pilot stated, "A right crosswind gust 
lifted my right wing.  The lifting was rapid and intense, lifting the gear off the ground, with the 
tail still grounded."  The pilot initiated corrective action to level the wings and applied 
additional right rudder to realign to the runway.  The pilot was unable to recover.  The airplane 
veered left, exited the runway, crossed a drainage ditch, and impacted a three-foot wall.  The 
impact ruptured the engine oil pan and initiated an engine fire, which consumed the airplane.
Runway 30 was reported to be a 2,078-foot by 30-foot wide asphalt runway.  The pilot was 
reported to have accumulated a total of 33 hours in the same type and model of aircraft.
The weather at San Antonio International Airport (SAT), located approximately 2 nautical 
miles south (175 degrees) from T94, at 1803, reported few clouds at 4,100 feet, wind from 160 
degrees at 14 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, temperature 31 degrees Celsius, dewpoint 23, 
and barometric pressure of 29.89 inches of Mercury.
