The experimental amateur-built airplane received substantial damage during a forced landing.  
The instructional flight experienced a total loss of engine power during the eighth takeoff in a 
series of touch and go landings.  The airplane was climbing through 200 feet above ground 
level when the engine quit and a left 90-degree turn was executed so as to land in a grassy area.   
An engine restart was not attempted.  Examination of the wreckage confirmed flight control 
continuity, electrical continuity of the ignition system, engine continuity, and engine 
compression.  Fuel was found in both engine carburetors, oil was found within the engine, and 
coolant was present in the coolant tank.
The low altitude at which an undetermined loss of engine power occurred following takeoff.
On October 2, 2002, at 1912 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Tanner 
Kitfox, N633KF, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a takeoff from 
runway 03 (3,500 feet by 75 feet, asphalt) at Branch County Memorial Airport, Coldwater, 
Michigan.  The airplane experienced a total loss of engine power during climb.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 instructional 
flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The certified flight instructor (CFI) and pilot were 
uninjured.  The local flight originated at 1800.
The CFI stated that they were performing touch and go's and at 200 feet above ground during 
the eighth takeoff, there was a total loss of engine power.  They then made a left 90-degree turn 
to a grassy area without attempting to restart the engine.  He stated that the airplane impacted 
at a high sink rate.
Examination of the wreckage was performed by the Federal Aviation Administration.  The 
airplane was resting inverted about 220 feet west of the centerline and 300 feet from the 
approach end of runway 21.  Flight control continuity was confirmed.  The fuel shut off valve 
was in the on position.
The airplane was powered by a Rotax 582LC, serial number 3916612, engine with a total time 
since overhaul of 232.7 hours and 6 hours were since its last inspection.  The engine contained 
oil and coolant water was present in the coolant tank.  Fuel was present in the fuel tank and in 
both carburetor bowls.  The engine was rotated by hand and thumb compression and 
continuity were confirmed.  Electrical continuity of the engine was confirmed upon 
examination of the ignition system.  The spark plugs did not contain debris.
