During the aerial application flight, two fields were being sprayed from east to the west with a 
set of power lines running north and south between the fields.  The pilot would fly the airplane 
over the power lines and then descend to spray the field.  During the accident swath descent to 
spray the east field, the airplane struck the ground. The pilot and local authorities reported that 
the winds were "strong" from the southwest.  The weather observation facility, located 
approximately 22 nautical miles southwest of the accident site, reported the wind from 250 
degrees at 4 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, few clouds at 4,000 feet agl and a broken ceiling 
at 5,500 feet agl, temperature 31 degrees Celsius, dew point 22 degrees Celsius, an altimeter 
setting of 30.01 inches of Mercury, and towering cumulus clouds in all quadrants.
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control.  A contributing factor was the towering cumulus 
in all quadrants.
On October 2, 2002, at 1430 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-400, agricultural 
airplane, N155HF, sustained substantial damage following a loss of control during an aerial 
application flight near Marmaduke, Arkansas.  The airplane was owned and operated by Kuntz 
Aviation of Carthage, Mississippi, under Code of Federal Regulations Part 137.  The 
commercial pilot, sole occupant, received minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The flight originated at an 
unknown time.
The pilot and local authorities reported that the winds were "strong" from the southwest.  
During the aerial application entry to the cotton field a gust of wind struck the airplane and the 
airplane struck the ground.  Subsequently, the airplane skidded approximately 39 feet, the left 
main landing gear collapsed, and the airplane skidded an additional 366 feet before coming to 
rest upright in the cotton field.  The empennage separated from the airframe and the left wing 
was damaged.  
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Form (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) the operator reported 
that two fields were being sprayed from east to the west with a set of power lines running north 
and south between the fields.  The pilot would fly the airplane over the power lines and then 
descend to spray the field.  During the accident swath descent to spray the field,  the airplane 
struck the ground.    
At 1453, the weather observation facility at Jonesboro, Arkansas, located approximately 22 
nautical miles southwest of the accident site, reported the wind from 250 degrees at 4 knots, 
visibility 10 statute miles, few clouds at 4,000 feet agl and a broken ceiling at 5,500 feet agl, 
temperature 31 degrees Celsius (88 degrees Fahrenheit), dew point 22 degrees Celsius (71 
degrees Fahrenheit), and an altimeter setting of 30.01 inches of Mercury.  Towering cumulus 
clouds were reported in all quadrants.
