The airplane collided with the terrain following a loss of control while landing.  The pilot 
reported they approached the airport from the north for a landing on runway 18.  He stated the 
winds were fine until they were approximately one mile out from the airport at which time they 
became gusty.  The pilot reported he flew the approach with flaps down and at an airspeed of 
80 knots.  He reported that on touchdown, the airplane bounced and veered to the left.  He 
applied power to go-around; however, the airplane continued to veer left.  The left wing 
contacted the ground, and the airplane spun around coming to rest on a northerly heading.  An 
airport weather observation taken 10 minutes prior to the accident reported the wind condition 
as 240 degrees at 10 knots.
The pilot's inadequate compensation for wind, and his failure to maintain directional control.
On October 1, 2002, at 1040 central daylight time, a Mooney M20J, N22RJ, collided with the 
terrain following a loss of control while landing on runway 18 (3,899 feet by 150 feet, asphalt) 
at the Merrill C. Meigs Airport (CGX), Chicago, Illinois.  The private pilot and his pilot rated 
passenger were not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.  The flight originated from 
Madison, Wisconsin, at 1000.
The pilot reported they approached the airport from the north over Navy Pier.  He stated the 
winds were fine until they were approximately one mile out from the airport at which time they 
became gusty.  The pilot reported he flew the approach with flaps down and at an airspeed of 
80 knots.  He reported that on touchdown, the airplane bounced and veered to the left.  He 
applied power to go-around; however, the airplane continued to veer left.  The left wing 
contacted the ground, and the airplane spun around coming to rest on a northerly heading.
A weather observation taken at CGX, 10 minutes prior to the accident, reported the wind 
condition as 240 degrees at 10 knots.
