Arriving in the airport area, the pilot determined that the wind was favoring runway 06.  While 
on approach to runway 06, severe turbulence and a wind shift was encountered.  After crossing 
the threshold of the runway, the airplane appeared to be landing with a tailwind, and the pilot 
initiated a go-around.  During the go-around, as the pilot pulled back on the control yoke, the 
airplane continued to descend towards the ground.  The airplane struck a tree, touched down 
in a grass field located beyond the departure end of the runway, and came to rest upright.  The 
recorded weather at a nearby airport, about the time of the accident, included winds from 250 
degrees at 16 knots, gusting to 21 knots.
The pilot's inadequate in-flight evaluation of the landing facilities wind conditions, and 
inadequate airspeed resulting in a stall/mush.  A factor related to the accident was the tailwind 
condition.
On October 1, 2002, about 1050 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-181, N8071Z, was 
substantially damaged during a go-around from the Katama Airport, Edgartown, 
Massachusetts.  The certificated commercial pilot and passenger were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, upon arriving in the airport area, he determined that the wind was 
favoring runway 06; a 2,700-foot long, 50-foot wide, turf runway.  While on approach to 
runway 06, severe turbulence and a wind shift was encountered.  After crossing the threshold 
of the runway, the airplane appeared to be landing with a tailwind, and the pilot initiated a go-
around.  During the go-around, as the pilot pulled back on the control yoke, the airplane 
continued to descend toward the ground.  The airplane struck a tree, touched down in a grass 
field located beyond the departure end of the runway, and came to rest upright.
The pilot additionally reported he did not experience any difficulties with the engine or 
airframe during the flight.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed 
substantial damage to the lower empennage section of the airplane.  The examination did not 
reveal any mechanical anomalies with the engine or airframe. 
The recorded weather at a nearby airport, at 1053, included winds from 250 degrees at 16 
knots, gusting to 21 knots.  The recorded winds at 0953 were from 260 degrees at 12 knots, 
gusting to 19 knots.
