The pilot reported that due to the aircraft's configuration, she was unable to see the runway 
while on short final and in the flare.  The pilot intended to land as close to the numbers as 
possible.  The aircraft touched down short of the runway on the grassy embankment that 
descends below the runway elevation.  The aircraft bounced onto the runway, the landing gear 
collapsed and the aircraft slid on its belly to a stop.  A post-crash fire consumed the aircraft.
The pilot's failure to maintain the proper distance and altitude while on final approach which 
led to touching down short of the runway.  The pilot's restricted visual lookout was a factor.
On September 1, 2003, about 1115 Pacific daylight time, a Pitts S-2A, N5301W, registered to 
and operated by the pilot as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, touched down short of the runway 
at Stark's Twin Oaks Airpark, Hillsboro, Oregon, bounced once, collapsed the landing gear and 
slid to a stop on the runway surface.   Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time 
and no flight plan was filed.  The aircraft was subsequently destroyed by a post-crash fire.  The 
private pilot, the sole occupant, received minor injuries.  The flight departed from 
Independence, Oregon, about 45 minutes prior to the accident.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that a standard pattern was flown for an approach 
and landing on runway 02.  While on final approach, the pilot noted that the runway "looked 
very up sloped toward the north (far) end and it seemed short,"  therefore she intended to land 
as close to the numbers as possible.  The pilot reported that due to the aircraft's configuration, 
she was unable to see the runway while on short final and in the flare. 
The approach and landing was reported as normal until the aircraft touched down short of the 
runway edge on the grassy embankment that descends below the runway elevation.  The 
aircraft bounced onto the runway surface, the main landing gear collapsed and the aircraft slid 
to a stop on its belly.  The aircraft was on fire when the pilot exited the aircraft which was 
subsequently consumed. 
After the accident, two main landing gear impressions were noted in the grassy embankment.  
The aircraft came to rest about 125 feet from the runway edge and partially off to the right side 
of the runway.
