The pilot departed with about 15 gallons of fuel in the airplane, and flew for about 1 hour 15 
minutes, when the engine lost power, about 1 mile from the airport.  As the pilot prepared for a 
forced landing to a field, he noted the left fuel gauge read 1/8-full, and the right fuel gauge, 
indicated just less than 1/4-full.  During the landing rollout, the pilot applied right rudder to 
stay aligned with the field, and the airplane nosed-over.  An on-scene examination of the 
airplane revealed no pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.  During the recovery of the airplane, 
it was noted that "little" fuel was left in the fuel tanks; however, the fuel vent system consisted 
of drilled holes in the fuel tank caps, and the surrounding vegetation in the area of the fuel 
tanks appeared discolored and had an odor consistent with aviation fuel.  The engine was test 
run on the airframe, using its own fuel system.  It started and ran through various power 
settings for several minutes, with no abnormalities noted.  According to the Piper PA-18 
Owner's Handbook, the fuel consumption for the airplane was 9 gallons per hour.
Loss of engine power due to unknown circumstances.
On September 1, 2003, at 1830 eastern daylight time, N7615Z, a Piper PA-18-150, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing, following a loss of engine power in Midland, 
Virginia.  The certificated private pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the flight which originated at the Horse Feathers 
Airport (53VA), Midland, Virginia.  The local personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 
91.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that the accident flight was the airplane's first flight 
since the engine had undergone a field overhaul. 
According to the pilot, after flying for about 1 hour 15 minutes, while in cruise flight, the engine 
lost power.  The airplane was at an altitude of 1,600-1,700 feet msl, and about 1 mile from the 
departure airport.  As the pilot prepared for a forced landing, he realized that the airplane 
would not be able to make it to the airport, and he attempted a forced landing to a field.  The 
pilot extended full flaps while on final approach, and the airplane touched down at the mid-
point of the field.  During the landing rollout, the pilot applied right rudder to stay aligned with 
the field, and the airplane nosed-over.
The pilot reported that all preflight and in-flight engine indications appeared normal prior to 
the loss of engine power.  At the time of the power loss, the left fuel tank gauge indicated 1/8-
full, and the right fuel tank gauge, which had been selected for the entire flight, indicated just 
less than 1/4-full.  The pilot departed with approximately 15 gallons of fuel for the flight.
The on-scene examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector revealed no obvious pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.  The inspector was unable 
to visually inspect the fuel tanks due to the inverted position of the airplane; however, the 
surrounding vegetation in the area of the fuel tanks appeared discolored and had an odor 
consistent with aviation fuel.  During the recovery of the airplane, it was noted that "little" fuel 
was left in the fuel tanks; however, the fuel vent system consisted of drilled holes in the fuel 
tank caps.  
The engine was test run on the airframe, using its own fuel system.  The engine started and ran 
at various power settings for several minutes, with no abnormalities noted.
According to the Piper PA-18 Owner's Handbook, the fuel consumption for the airplane was 9 
gallons per hour.
Weather reported at the Manassas Regional Airport, located about 12 miles to the northeast of 
the accident site, at 1836, included wind from 160 degrees at 6 knots, 10 miles visibility, clear 
skies, temperature 82 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 73 degrees Fahrenheit, and barometric 
pressure setting of 30.08 inches Hg.
