Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Pawhuska, OK
Accident Number:
DFW05LA027
Date & Time:
12/01/2004, 1350 CST 
Registration:
N6300P
Aircraft:
Cessna P210N
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
The 4,000-hour pilot reported that during cruise flight, the engine lost power.  While 
descending, the pilot further stated that he disengaged the autopilot, advanced the mixture to 
full, cycled the fuel pump, and switched from the left to the right fuel tank, and "the engine 
momentarily gained power for a few minutes."  Subsequently, the engine lost power again and 
the pilot elected to land on a gravel road.  During the landing roll, the left main wheel 
separated, and the left main landing gear collapsed as the airplane came to rest in an upright 
position.  Prior to the recovery of the airplane, the Federal Aviation Administration inspector 
was able to start the engine using the right fuel tank.  The engine ran for approximately 10 
minutes with no abnormalities noted before the inspector shut the engine down using the 
mixture control.  During the recovery process, the inspector noted that approximately one 
gallon of fuel was drained from the left wing fuel tank and approximately 35 gallons of fuel 
were drained from the right wing fuel tank.  As stated in the FAA approved pilot's operating 
handbook, the unusable fuel quantity for both fuel tanks is one gallon.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's mismanagement of the fuel by his failure to adequately set the fuel selector position 
which resulted in fuel exhaustion and the loss of engine power.
Page 2 of 6DFW05LA027
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
2. (C) FUEL MANAGEMENT - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
4. OBJECT - OTHER
Page 3 of 6DFW05LA027
Factual Information
On December 1, 2004, approximately 1350 central standard time, a Cessna P210N single-
engine airplane, N6300P, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss 
of engine power near Pawhuska, Oklahoma.  The airline transport rated pilot, sole occupant of 
the airplane, was not injured.  The airplane was registered to Larson Implement, Inc., of Leeds, 
North Dakota, and operated by Silver Wings Aviation, Inc., of Santa Monica, California.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 positioning flight.  The cross-country flight originated from the Salina 
Municipal Airport (SLN), near Salina, Kansas, at 1300, destined for Tulsa, Oklahoma.  
 
The 4,000-hour pilot reported in the NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB 
Form 6120.1/2) that after departure from SLN during the climb to his intended cruising 
altitude, the engine began to "run rough."  As the engine continued to run rough, the pilot 
leaned the engine mixture while checking the cylinder head temperature, and "the engine 
seemed to smooth out."  
 
During cruise flight at an altitude of 7,500 feet mean sea level (msl), the pilot stated that "the 
engine failed," and he immediately disengaged the autopilot, advanced the mixture to full, 
cycled the fuel pump, and switched the fuel selector to the "fullest tank."  
 
Subsequently, the engine lost power again, and the pilot attempted to glide the airplane 
towards the Pawhuska Municipal Airport (H76).  After realizing he was unable to make it to the 
airport, the pilot elected to land on a gravel road.  During the landing roll, the left main wheel 
separated, and the left main landing gear collapsed as the airplane came to rest in an upright 
position.  
 
During a telephone interview with an NTSB representative, the pilot reported that after the loss 
of engine power, he switched from the left fuel tank to the right fuel tank and "the engine 
momentarily gained power for a few minutes."  
 
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who 
responded to the accident site, revealed that the left horizontal stabilizer was bent upward.  
Prior to the recovery of the airplane, the FAA inspector was able to start the engine using the 
right fuel tank.  The engine ran for approximately 10 minutes with no abnormalities noted 
before the inspector shut the engine down using the mixture control.  During the recovery 
process, the inspector noted that approximately one gallon of fuel was drained from the left 
wing fuel tank, and approximately 44 gallons of fuel were drained from the right wing fuel 
tank.
 
As stated in the FAA approved pilot's operating handbook, the unusable fuel quantity for both 
fuel tanks is one gallon.  A fuel receipt obtained from the Fixed Base Operator (FBO) at SLN 
Page 4 of 6DFW05LA027
indicated that the airplane was refueled with 34.5 gallons of 100 Low Lead aviation fuel prior 
to departure.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/04/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/15/2003
Flight Time:
4000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300 hours (Total, this make and model), 3500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N6300P
Model/Series:
P210N 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
P2100166
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/16/2004, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
7 Hours
Engines:
1 
Airframe Total Time:
2068.9 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-HCP
Registered Owner:
Lawson Implement Inc.
Rated Power:
325 hp
Operator:
Silver Wings Aviation
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6DFW05LA027
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PNC, 1007 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1452 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.11 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Salina, KS (SLN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Tulsa, OK 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1300 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
36.671667, -96.405556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Frank McGill
Adopted Date:
02/24/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Lawrebce G Smith; Federal Aviation Administration; Oklahoma City, OK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DFW05LA027
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
