This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Perryville, MO
Accident Number: CEN17LA252
Date & Time: 07/01/2017, 2036 CDT
Registration: N238BK
Aircraft: MESSERSCHMITT-BOLKOW-BLOHM
BK 117 B2
Injuries: 5 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Air Medical (Unspecified)
On July 1, 2017, about 2036 central daylight time, a Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm BK 117 B2, 
N238BK, helicopter, landed hard and rolled over during an emergency landing to a field near 
Perryville, Missouri. The pilot, three crew members, and a passenger received minor injuries, 
and the helicopter sustained substantial damage. The helicopter was owned and operated by 
Air Methods Corporation, doing business as Kids Flight, as a 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 
Part 135 medical flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, 
and a company visual flight rules flight plan was filed. The flight originated from the St. Francis 
Medical Center (MO50), Cape Girardeau, Missouri, about 2019 and was en route to the St. 
Louis Children's Hospital (2MU1), St. Louis, Missouri. 
The pilot reported that at 1901, he was notified by the Air Methods Communication Center 
(AirCom) concerning a flight request. The pilot accepted the flight and after ensuring all 
necessary requirements were completed, the flight departed at 1922 for MO50, which was 
approximately 50 nautical miles (nm) to the southeast. The pilot reported that the helicopter 
departed with 140 gallons of fuel in the main fuel tanks. The flight arrived at MO50 about 1949. 
About 2015, the medical crew arrived at the helicopter pad and loaded the patient on board the 
helicopter. About 2019, the helicopter departed for 2MU1, which was approximately 85 nm on 
a 338-degrees heading. The pilot reported that there was 110 gallons in the main fuel tanks. 
The pilot reported that after 15 minutes of flight, he scanned the instruments and gauges 
"noting that all systems were in the normal range and fuel was transferring from the main 
tank." He reported that the fuel level indication was approximately 95 gallons in the main 
tanks and the supply tanks were "just below the full indication," and that there were no 
illuminated lights on the warning/caution panel. The airspeed was 120 kts at an altitude of 
1,600 ft above mean sea level - about 1,200 ft above ground level (agl). 
The pilot reported that when the flight was about 5 miles north of Perryville, Missouri, the 
helicopter "experienced a sharp change in attitude yawing to the left with a hard-upward 
bump," followed by a change in the engine noise. He observed the N1 gauges both indicating 
below 40 per cent and decreasing. The No. 1 engine low warning light, the No. 1 generator light, 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
and the battery discharge warning lights were illuminated. He stated, "Suddenly the aircraft 
pitched nose up and rolled to the right. I could hear the rotor begin to deteriorate." He entered 
an autorotation by applying right forward cyclic and lowering the collective to full down. 
During the autorotative descent, he saw a power lines and a ditch which required him to 
change his flight path to land on the far side of the ditch. He flared the helicopter about 100 ft 
agl and the rotor rpm began to decay rapidly. He attempted to level the helicopter "as it began 
to fall through." The helicopter landed right skid low and the helicopter skidded for about 100 
ft. The main rotor blades hit the ground as the helicopter rolled onto its right side. Once the 
helicopter came to a rest, he pulled the power levers to the stop position. 
The pilot and flight crew, with the patient on a stretcher, egressed the helicopter. The pilot 
reported that he observed fuel draining in a solid stream from one of the drains on the belly of 
the helicopter. He re-entered the cockpit and turned off all electrical and fuel switches to 
minimize the risk of fire. 
At 1955, the surface weather observation at Hunter Field (SAR), Sparta, Illinois, located 15 nm 
northeast of the accident site, was: wind light and variable; 10 miles visibility; sky clear; 
temperature 26 degrees C; dew point 17 degrees C; altimeter 30.05 inches of mercury.
The National Transportation Safety Board is investigating the accident. Parties to the 
investigation include the Federal Aviation Administration, Air Methods Corporation, 
Honeywell, and the German Federal Bureau of Aircraft Accident Investigation, with Airbus as 
its technical advisor. 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: MESSERSCHMITT-BOLKOW-
BLOHM
Registration: N238BK
Model/Series: BK 117 B2
Aircraft Category: Helicopter
Amateur Built: No
Operator: AIR METHODS CORP
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As: Kids Flight
Operator Designator Code: Page 3 of 3CEN17LA252
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: SAR, 538 ft msl
Observation Time: 1955 CDT
Distance from Accident Site: 27 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 26°C / 17°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: Light and Variable / ,
Variable
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.05 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: Company VFR
Departure Point: Cape Girardeau, MO
(MO50)
Destination: St. Louis, MO (2MU1)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 4 Minor
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: 1 Minor
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 5 Minor
Latitude, Longitude: 37.841667, -89.807222 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): James P Silliman
Additional Participating Persons: Harvinder Pujji; FAA St. Louis FSDO; St. Anne, MO
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
