This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Catawba, WI
Accident Number: CEN17FA248
Date & Time: 07/01/2017, 0153 CDT
Registration: N2655B
Aircraft: CESSNA 421C
Injuries: 6 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On July 1, 2017, about 0153 central daylight time (CDT), a Cessna 421C multi-engine airplane, 
N2655B, impacted the ground after an uncontrolled descent and in-flight breakup near 
Catawba, Wisconsin. The commercial pilot and five passengers sustained fatal injuries, and the 
airplane was destroyed. The airplane was registered to Sky King Flying Service, Inc., 
Wilmington Delaware, and was operated by the pilot on a personal cross-country flight, which 
was conducted under the provisions of 14
 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91
.
 Dark night 
visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed in the area and an instrument flight rules 
(IFR) flight plan was filed. The flight originated about 0028 from Waukegan, Illinois, and was 
en route to Warroad International Memorial Airport (RRT), Warroad, Minnesota. 
According to family members, the intent of the flight was to fly to RRT, and then the 6 
occupants were to be picked up by a guide company for a fishing trip in Winnipeg, Canada. A 
flight plan found in the pilot's onboard flight bag showed documents pertaining to the flight to 
RRT.
According to Federal Aviation Administration air traffic control (ATC) and radar records, the 
airplane was flying about 10,000 feet mean sea level when the pilot queried the ATC controller 
about weather conditions in the vicinity. Preliminary radar data showed the airplane between 
10,000 and 10,500 feet in a slight left turn and then a descending right turn. After the right 
turn, radio contact was lost and the airplane descended rapidly. There were no distress calls 
from the pilot. According to preliminary weather data, the airplane was flying in VMC weather 
conditions when radar contact was lost. Search and rescue operations were started 
immediately after radar contact was lost.
The nearest weather reporting facility to the accident was located about 15 miles east of the 
accident site in Phillips, Wisconsin. Price County Airport (PBH) reported visual meteorological 
conditions in the vicinity of the accident. PBH METAR 010635Z AUTO 36003KT 10SM 
BKN006 14/14 A2986 RMK AO2 T01350135. Regional weather radar did not report any 
convection or thunderstorms coincident with the airplane's flightpath, or near to the flightpath. 
The accident site was located about 25 miles to the east of convective activity with no 
coincidental lightning.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
A person who was driving home from work reported that he heard engine noise, then did not 
hear engine noise, then heard engine noise again. He then saw what he thought were then 
lights of a airplane, and then the lights went out. Another witness (who did not see the 
airplane) reported that she heard a loud sound. Both witnesses were in the vicinity of the 
accident location about the same time the accident occurred. 
According to local authorities (Price County Sheriff Department), a call was received in their 
dispatch that an airplane was missing in the area. The sheriff dispatched personnel to the 
location, and some wreckage debris was found on Highway 111 near Catawba. The main 
wreckage was found in heavily wooded and muddy terrain, about 900 feet off the highway, at 
grid coordinates N45°33.3147' W090°29.6990'. Tree stands varied from 15-80 feet high with 
heavy brush and a small stream nearby. Emergency response was initiated and the NTSB/FAA 
were notified.
Initial examination and documentation of the accident site by the NTSB showed that the debris 
encompassed an area of about ¼ mile. Tree scars and ground impressions indicated that the 
main section of the fuselage impacted terrain in a nose-low attitude. The empennage was not 
attached to the fuselage and was located about 1,200 feet from the main wreckage. One of the 
engines was found in a 9-foot deep crater. Evidence at the accident site showed that the 
airplane had broken apart prior to impact.
The wreckage was recovered from the accident site and transported to a secure facility in 
Lakeside, Minnesota, for detailed examinations, which were conducted by the NTSB on July 3-
4, 2017. The engines were crated and shipped to Continental Motors, Mobile, Alabama, for 
examination at a later date.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CESSNA
Registration: N2655B
Model/Series: 421C C
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation: PBH, 1496 ft msl
Observation Time: 0135 CDT
Distance from Accident Site: 15 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 14°C / 14°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 3 knots / , 360°
Lowest Ceiling: Broken / 6000 ft agl
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.96 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: IFR
Departure Point: Waukegan, IL (UGN)
Destination: Warroad, MN (RRT)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Passenger Injuries: 5 Fatal
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 6 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude: 45.555278, -90.495000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Alexander Lemishko
Additional Participating Persons: Ray Yank; FAA FSDO; Milwaukee, WI
Henry Soderland; Cessna; Wichita, KS
Mike Counsel; Continental; Mobile, AL
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
