The multi-engine airplane rolled inverted and dove into the ground on a landing approach.  
According to witnesses, the airplane made two approaches to runway 23. During the first 
approach the airplane was observed, "fish tailing" while about 30' feet over the runway. The 
airplane appeared to regain control and continued flying over the runway until passing the air 
traffic control tower, at which time the airplane began a climbing left turn. The witnesses 
stated that they heard the pilot tell the air traffic controller that he was doing a go-around. The 
controller asked the pilot if he had problems with the sea fog. The pilot responded back to the 
controller "no that his left engine kept power up a little too much and would not come back." 
The witnesses observed the airplane circle the airport to the left, and watched it line up on 
runway 23 for the second time. The witnesses stated that as the airplane descended to the 
runway and without any indication of trouble, the airplane "climbed and rolled left, went 
inverted and nosed down into the grass to the left of the runway and burst into flames." 
Examination of the airplane, airplane systems, engines, and propellers found no abnormal pre-
impact conditions that would have interfered with the normal operation of the airplane. No 
recorded radar data for the flight was located that captured the airplane's two attempted 
landings. Information contained in the Super King Air 200 Pilot's Operating Handbook (POH) 
and FAA Approved Flight Manual (AFM) showed the stall speed with gear extended, 40-
degrees flaps, and zero bank angle as 84 knots Indicated Air Speed.
The pilot's failure to maintain control during landing approach for undetermined reasons.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 3, 2006, at 2045 eastern standard time, a Beech 200, N266EB, registered to 
Weekend Air Charter Services Inc., and operated by an individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight, crashed while on final approach to runway 23, at the Grand Strand Airport, 
North Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a 
visual flight rules flight plan was filed. The airline transport-rated pilot, and five passengers 
received fatal injuries and the airplane was destroyed. The flight originated from the Trenton 
Mercer Airport, Trenton, New Jersey on February 3, 2006, at 1900.
According to witnesses, the airplane made two approaches to runway 23. During the first 
approach the airplane was observed, "fish tailing" while about 30' feet over the runway. The 
airplane appeared to regain control and continued flying over the runway until passing the air 
traffic control tower, at which time the airplane began a climbing left turn. The witnesses 
stated that they heard the pilot tell the air traffic controller that he was doing a go-around. The 
controller asked the pilot if he had problems with the sea fog. The pilot responded back to the 
controller "no that his left engine kept power up a little too much and would not come back." 
The witnesses observed the airplane circle the airport to the left, and watched it line up on 
runway 23 for the second time. The witnesses stated, that as the airplane descended to the 
runway, and without any indication of trouble, the airplane "climbed and rolled left, went 
inverted and nosed down into the grass to the left of the runway and burst into flames." The 
witnesses told someone to call the fire department and they proceeded to the airplane to see if 
they could give assistance. When they arrived at the airplane, it was fully engulfed in flames.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
A review of information on file with the FAA Airman's Certification Division, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, revealed the pilot was issued an airline transport pilot certificate, for airplane single 
engine land, multiengine land, and a commercial pilots certificate for airplane single engine sea 
and multiengine sea. In addition, the pilot was issued a flight instructor certificate for airplane 
single and multiengine instrument airplanes. The pilot most recent second-class medical 
certificate was issued on May 11, 2005, with a restriction that he must wear corrective lenses. 
The pilot reported on his medical certificate application that his total civilian flight hours were 
3,400. The pilot's logbook was not located and was believed to have been in the airplane at the 
time of the accident.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
A review of information on file with the FAA Aircraft Registry, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 
revealed that N266EB, A Beach King Air BE200, Serial Number BB-266, was issued an 
airworthiness certificate on April 16, 1998.
A review of the airframe maintenance records revealed that the airplane was inspected under 
the current manufacturer's phase program per 14 CFR Part 91.409 (f) (3), Beech Super King 
Air 200 series inspection program. Phases 1, 2, 3, and 4 were complied with on October 13, 
2005, at a total airframe time of 8,154.9 hours and Hobbs time of 611.0 hours. The four phase 
inspections were performed by Air Wilmington, Inc. a FAA certified repair station, certificate 
number FFFR869D, located in Wilmington, North Carolina. In addition to the four primary 
phases, numerous other phase checks were performed, including number 35, power lever stop 
pin inspection, Raiseback 200 hour propeller inspection, and 400-hour fuel nozzle flow test. In 
addition, a Airworthiness Directive 2004-17-02, replacement of pedestal cross shaft bolts with 
drilled headed bolts per Beech Service Bulletin SB73-3634 was accomplished. In addition, 
during this time both the pilot's and copilot's altimeters and transponders were found to 
comply with 14 CFR Part 91.413 altimeter and transponder checks.
Maintenance records also indicated that on March 21, 2003, the left engine power cable was 
repaired when binding was observed at the push pull connection, at a total airframe time of 
7,880.2 and a Hobbs time of 339.6 hours. This work was performed by Segrave Aviation, Inc, 
certificated repair station number S8AR675W, located in Kinston, North Carolina.
A review of engine maintenance records revealed that the right engine, part number PT6A-41, 
serial number PCE80560, was overhauled in accordance with the Pratt and Whitney overhaul 
manual number 3021443, on April 25, 2002, by Dallas Airmotive, FAA certified repair station 
number QT2R121L. From the time of overhaul until the date of the accident, the engine under 
went scheduled inspection/maintenance checks, one on August 4, 2004 at 56.1 hours since 
over haul (SOH) and one on October 13, 2005 at 274.7 hours SOH. The records indicated that 
only routine maintenance was performed, including fuel nozzle flow test, internal turbine 
temperature calibration and compressor wash.
A review of engine maintenance records revealed that the left Pratt and Whitney engine, part 
number PT6A-41, serial number PCE80573, was overhauled by Daimler-Benz Aerospace, MTU 
Motor-und Turbine-Union Ludwigsfelde GmbH, a JAR 145.50 repair station, certificate 
number LBA.0003, on May 26, 1997. From the time of overhaul until the date of the accident, 
this engine had seen many shop visits. One on February 28, 1998- for a "C" flange spilt for Hot 
Section Inspection (HSI). One on June 18, 1999 for a Flight idle torque reset. One on 
September 26, 2000 for a "C" flange split for exhaust outlet repair. One on April 16, 2001 for a 
"C" flange split for T5 harness replacement. One on May 1, 2001 for a "C" flange split for Hot 
Section Inspection (HSI). One on August 26, 2003 for a Fuel Control Unit (FCU) and Fuel 
Pump change, and one on October 13, 2005 for a "C" flange split for T5 harness replacement.
A review of Propeller Maintenance records found that both propellers were overhauled by US 
Propeller and Accessories, Inc, Gibsonville, North Carolina, FAA certificated repair station, 
number YX4R690M, on April 18, 2002. Following overhaul both propellers were installed on 
the airplane by Raytheon Aircraft Services, FAA certificated repair station R14R104Y, on April 
23, 2002, airframe total time 7,807.2 hours. No other propeller maintenance was recorded 
after the April 2002 overhaul date.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The nearest weather reporting facility at the time of the accident was North Myrtle Beach, 
South Carolina. The 1953 surface weather observation was: clear of clouds, no ceiling, visibility 
7 statute miles, temperature 13-degrees Celsius, dew point temperature 13-degrees Celsius, 
wind 150-degrees at 6 knots, and altimeter 29.84. Night visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the airplane on-scene, found the empennage of the airplane upright resting 
against the airport perimeter fence. The cockpit area was destroyed by impact and fire. The 
right engine had separated from the right wing. The left engine remained partially attached to 
the left wing. Both propellers had separated from their engines and were observed imbedded 
into the ground forward of the cockpit area.
The airplane came to rest on airport property on a heading of 280-degrees, 634 feet to the left 
of the centerline of runway 23, and 950 feet from the approach end of runway 23. There was an 
impact crater made by the nose of the aircraft and flanked by two additional impact craters 
containing the propellers. A ground scar was observed in-line and to the right of the nose crater 
and propellers, made by the right wing. The right wing tip position light was found buried at 
the far end of this ground scar. The ground scars and impact craters showed that the airplane 
collided with the terrain in a steep nose down, slightly right wing low attitude.
The cabin back to the rear pressure bulkhead was partially consumed by post impact fire. Two 
seat frames were found outside and to the rear of the airplane. The cabin door was found intact 
and in the closed position. The interior of the door was damaged by post impact fire. Three seat 
frames were found separated from the airplane in the remnants of the cockpit area. Seven seat 
frames were observed along with a small divan in the forward right side of the cabin. It is not 
known what seats were occupied at the time of the accident. One seat belt, portions of two seat 
belt buckles and three shoulder harness reels were observed. All were damaged by post impact 
fire. The aft fuselage and empennage was partially separated aft of the rear pressure bulkhead, 
and came to rest atop the airport perimeter fence. The aft fuselage remained attached to the 
forward section by flight control cables, electrical wire bundles, and instrument airlines. The 
elevators and rudder were intact and remained attached to the respective stabilizers. The 
rudder trim and the left elevator trim remained intact and attached to the respective flight 
control. The right elevator trim remained attached to the right elevator but the control rod was 
separated, allowing the trim surface to rotate around and come to rest on top of the elevator. 
The leading edge of the right stabilizer was bent aft and down in a circular manner.
The majority of the right wing remained attached to the fuselage. The right wing was heavily 
damaged by impact forces and post impact fire. A portion of the outboard right wing partially 
separated at the aileron. The right aileron remained attached to the outboard section of wing. 
The outboard right wing section remained attached to the rest of the wing by the aileron 
control cables. The right wing tip was bent aft. The inboard right flap remained attached to the 
wing; the outboard right flap was destroyed by post impact fire. 
The left wing was heavily damaged by post impact fire from the wing root to the left engine 
nacelle. The left wing was bent up and aft along its length, outboard of the left engine nacelle. 
The left inboard and outboard flaps, left aileron and aileron trim tab remained intact and 
attached. Fuel caps were found intact and installed. The inboard right fuel cap and left fuel 
caps were removed and the o-rings were found intact. 
The right main landing gear piston, gear actuator and wheel assemblies were found separated 
from the airframe. The left main landing gear assembly remained partially attached in the left 
gear well. Measurements of the left and right main gear actuators indicate that the landing gear 
was extended at the time of the accident. The nose gear was found folded under the cockpit 
wreckage. 
Control cable continuity was established to all primary flight controls. Rudder and elevator 
control cables were traced to the cockpit area where they ended at the bellcrank attach fittings. 
The rudder and elevator bellcranks were not observed. The aileron cables were traced to the 
cockpit. One aileron cable was found separated in overstress approximately 2 feet from the 
control column. Aileron continuity was confirmed through the control column. The right 
inboard, and both left flap actuators were measured and indicate the flaps were extended at 35-
degrees at the time of the accident. The housing of the left outboard flap actuator was burned 
away and could not be measured. Aileron trim was determined to be approximately 5-degrees 
up (left wing up). Elevator trim was determined to be approximately 2-degrees up (nose down). 
Rudder trim was determined to be approximately 1-degree left (nose right). The left engine was 
found resting just forward of the left wing and the right engine was found approximately 10-
feet in front of the right wing in an upside down orientation. The engine mounting structure on 
the wing for both engines was melted. 
The left propeller was buried face down (propeller spinner imbedded into the earth) in mud 
approximately 1-foot into the ground. All 4-propeller blades were intact and remained attached 
to the hub. The propeller pitch feedback ring was visible and intact. The forward portion of the 
fractured engine propeller shaft was still attached to the propeller. With the propeller removed 
from the mud, examination of the spinner revealed no exit penetrations or holes, just impact 
damage and deformation, and examination of the propeller revealed that all four blades were 
intact with slight aftward bending. 
Examination of the left-hand propeller blades found slight aft bending and twisting toward low 
pitch. None had rotational scoring or significant leading edge damage. All the blades of the left-
hand propeller were at a blade angle position lower than the hydraulic low pitch (HLP) stop 
angle as evidenced by the extension of the pitch change rod, the position of the blade 
counterweights and the damage to the pitch change mechanism. The measured blade angle of 
the propeller was 70-degrees, a position 10-degrees from the HLP and 20-degrees from full 
reverse. No abnormal pre-impact conditions were found that would have interfered with 
normal operation of the left propeller.
The left engine was found resting on its bottom (6:00 o'clock position) closest to its normal 
installed location on the aircraft. The wing near the engine nacelle and the nacelle itself were 
fire damaged. The engine mounting structure had separated from the aircraft but was present 
around the engine. The lower engine cowling and air inlet were trapped under the engine while 
the upper cowling was missing. Molten silvery metal covered the top of the engine. The 
propeller shaft was fractured approximately 1-1/2 inch ahead of the reduction gearbox housing 
forward flange. The reduction gearbox appeared intact.
The propeller governor control cable was found attached to the propeller governor. The left 
exhaust stub was no longer attached and was found approximately 20 feet from the engine 
while the right exhaust stub was fractured and was located with the engine. The engine exhaust 
duct was buckled and fractured exposing the power turbine blades. All the power turbine 
blades were intact and remained installed in the power turbine disk. Circumferential rub marks 
were noted on the aft side of the blade roots and disk-fir-tree slots.
The wiring harness on the lower section of the engine was burned. The inlet screen was covered 
with molten silvery metal and was distorted. The accessory gearbox housing was melted and 
missing material exposing the internal gears and bearings. The fuel control housing was melted 
exposing the internal mechanism.
The left engine was disassembled for further examination. The examination found that the 
propeller shaft was fractured in bending about 1-1/2 inch ahead of the reduction gearbox 
(RGB) housing forward flange. The RGB housing was intact and the internal cavity contained 
residual oil. All of the internal mechanisms were oil wetted. All gears and bearings were intact 
and displayed no anomalies. The accessory gearbox (AGB) housing was largely fire consumed 
exposing the internal mechanisms. All the gearwheels and bearings recovered from the 
accessory gearbox were intact and displayed no anomalies. The compressor assembly, 
including the blades and shrouds, were intact and showed no indication of pre-impact distress. 
The compressor turbine assembly displayed no indication of pre-impact distress. The 
compressor turbine blades and compressor turbine vane ring and airfoils were intact. The vane 
ring inner drum displayed circumferential rubbing, and light frictional heat discoloration.
The power turbine housing was intact. All the power turbine blades were intact and remained 
installed in the power turbine disk. The power turbine section displayed rotational scoring on 
the inner and outer diameters throughout all the stages between the rotating wheels and 
stationary rings. The fuel control input shaft and the governor flyweights were exposed and did 
not display pre-impact damage. The input shaft bearing rotated and all its roller elements were 
present and not seized. The flyweight bearings were free to rotate. The drive splines of the fuel 
pump were intact. The torque limiter, overspeed governor, and propeller governor were 
disassembled and no abnormal condition was found. No abnormal pre-impact conditions were 
found on any part of the left engine.
The right propeller was buried face down in mud, approximately 2-feet into the ground. Two of 
the four propeller blades were not visible because they were imbedded beneath the ground 
while the tips of the other two blades were partially visible. Three curved-shaped ground scars 
were observed in the mud near the propeller. The upper and lower forward cowling panels, 
including the air inlet of the right engine, were found resting near the propeller. The forward 
portion of the fractured engine propeller shaft was still attached to the propeller. With the 
propeller removed from the mud, examination of the spinner revealed no exit penetrations or 
holes, just impact damage and deformation, and examination of the propeller revealed that all 
4 blades were intact and attached to the hub. Two consecutive blades exhibited "U" shaped 
bending in the direction opposite rotation and one blade was bent at the mid-span in the 
direction of rotation.
Examination of the right-hand propeller blades found large radius bending ranging from mild 
to severe with angles ranging from 20-degrees to 90-degrees. Two blades were bent in the 
direction of rotation and two were bent opposite direction of rotation. The two blades bent 
opposite to the direction of rotation indicate that they contacted the ground prior to the hub at 
an angle less than vertical. The two blades bent in the direction of rotation were likely bent due 
to contact with the ground after the propeller was stopped. All of the blades had a slight 
twisting towards low pitch. None had rotational scoring or significant leading edge damage. 
The blades of the right propeller were at different angles, at or beyond the feather position. 
There were no discrepancies found in the right propeller system that would have interfered 
with normal operation.
The right engine was found separated from the nacelle. Some of the engine mounting structure 
was still attached to the engine. The reduction gearbox housing and propeller shaft were 
fractured exposing the internal gearbox mechanism. The forward portions of the fractured 
gearbox housing and propeller shaft were still attached to the right propeller. The fracture 
surface of the propeller shaft exhibited 45-degree shear lips along with some localized blue 
discoloration. The oil transfer tube was also fractured.
The engine exhaust duct was buckled and fractured exposing the power turbine blades. All the 
power turbine blades were intact and remained installed in the power turbine disk. One 
exhaust stub was fractured. The inlet screen was dented but intact. The reduction gearbox oil 
supply and scavenged tubes were fractured. A heavy oil slick was observed on the ground near 
the engine. The accessory gearbox was fractured, exposing the internal gearing. The fuel 
control unit housing was fractured. The engine sustained very little fire damage.
The right engine was disassembled for further examination. The examination found that the 
propeller shaft was fractured in bending about 5 inches inside of the RGB housing forward 
flange. The RGB forward housing was fractured but the internal cavity contained residual oil. 
Additionally, there were puddles of oil directly beneath the gearbox at the accident site. All 
gears and bearings were intact and displayed no anomalies. There was no metallic debris found 
in the RGB. The AGB housing was fractured, exposing the internal mechanism. All the 
gearwheels and bearings recovered from the accessory AGB were intact and displayed no 
anomalies. The compressor assembly, including the blades and shrouds, were intact and 
showed no pre-impact distress. The compressor turbine assembly displayed no pre-impact 
distress. The compressor turbine blades and compressor turbine vane ring and airfoils were 
intact. The blade platforms and the disc hub spigot were circumferentially scored.
The power turbine housing was intact. All the power turbine blades were intact and remained 
installed in the power turbine disk. The power turbine section displayed rotational scoring on 
the inner and outer diameters throughout all the stages of the rotating wheels and stationary 
rings. The fuel control unit housing was fractured and could not be functionally tested. The 
propeller governor and the torque limiter were functionally tested and found to be within field 
adjustable limits. The overspeed governor could not be functionally tested but was 
disassembled and no abnormal condition was found internally. No abnormal pre-impact 
conditions were found on any part of the right engine.
See the Powerplants Group Chairman's Factual Report of Investigation for the complete report 
of these examinations.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Forensic Pathologist, Horry County Coroners Office, Conway, South Carolina, conducted a 
postmortem examination of the pilot on February 4, 2006. The reported cause of death was 
"multiple trauma and burns sustained in airplane crash." The Forensic Toxicology Research 
Section, Federal Aviation Administration, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed postmortem 
toxicology of specimens from the pilot. The results were negative for carbon monoxide, 
cyanide, ethanol, and drugs.
TEST AND RESEARCH
A cassette copy of air traffic control transmissions recorded at the tower at Grand Strand 
Airport was sent to the audio laboratory at the National Transportation Safety Board on June 
15, 2006. A sound spectrum study was completed on the recording to identify any background 
sound signatures that could be associated with the aircraft.
Because voice signatures tend to dominate the audio obscuring aircraft sound signals, the focus 
of the sound spectrum study was on the non-voice sections of the pilot's transmissions, such as 
pauses between words or after speaking, but before releasing the microphone key.
Examination of the recording found that because the signals were only present during the 
transmission from the accident aircraft, it was clear that the aircraft produced the signals, but 
the specific noise sources could not be determined. In consultation with Raytheon Aircraft, it 
does not appear that the signals evident in the transmissions correspond with known propeller 
rotational frequencies, engine signatures or aircraft aural warnings. A possible explanation for 
the signals could be undocumented noise from a fan or avionics in the cockpit, or electrical 
bleed-through or cross-talk interference within the communication system.
No recorded radar data for the flight was located that captured the airplane's two attempted 
landings. Information contained in the Super King Air 200 Pilot's Operating Handbook (POH) 
and FAA Approved Flight Manual (AFM) showed the stall speed with gear extended, 40-
degrees flaps, and zero bank angle as 84 knots Indicated Air Speed.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to Kern and Wooley LLP, on June 8, 2006.
