Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Crete, IL
Accident Number:
CHI05LA173
Date & Time:
07/01/2005, 1350 CDT 
Registration:
N997SA
Aircraft:
Robinson R22 Beta
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The helicopter sustained substantial damage following an in-flight fire, hard landing, and 
subsequent ground fire.  The pilot's accident report stated, "We were flying ... when I noticed 
clutch light on.  The light stayed on for longer than 7 [seconds] and my decision was to pull 
clutch circuit breaker to save other belt.  I took over the controls when the clutch light went on 
and I started to set my self up for emergency landing.  ... At the same time I noticed smoke 
inside the cockpit and the smoke was filling inside fast.  ... At about 1100 MSL I noticed low 
rpm light and horn went on, so I lowered the collective and entered autorotation.  ... We exited 
the aircraft and could see the flames above the belts about 3 feet tall."  Burnt pieces of 
alternator and drive belts were recovered from the site.  A separated section of a recovered 
drive belt measured about a foot in length.  The bottom quarter of the dipstick had oil on it 
when removed.  The oil cooler exhibited damage on its lower and inboard surfaces, along the 
aft edge.  The lower aft corner of the cooler was separated at its seam there.  A dark media 
covered the engine in the area adjacent to the oil cooler.  An oil like media was found on the tail 
rotor's guard and on the vertical stabilizer.  The tailcone was burned away at its forward end.  
No pre-impact failures of the flight control system were found.  The landing gear exhibited 
downward yielding.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The separation of the drive belt, during cruise, leading to the puncturing of the oil cooler and 
subsequent fire.  An additional cause was the pilot's restricted lookout during the emergency 
landing resulting in the hard landing.
Page 2 of 8CHI05LA173
Findings
Occurrence #1: FIRE
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) ROTOR DRIVE SYSTEM,MAIN ROTOR DRIVE BELT - SEPARATION
2. (C) LUBRICATING SYSTEM,OIL COOLER - PUNCTURED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - RESTRICTED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 8CHI05LA173
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 1, 2005, about 1350 central daylight time, a Robinson R22 Beta helicopter, N997SA, 
operated by Sun Aero Helicopters, Inc., sustained substantial damage following an in-flight 
fire, hard landing, and subsequent ground fire near Crete, Illinois.  The instructional flight was 
operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.  No flight plan was on file.  The instructor pilot and 
student pilot reported no injuries.  The local flight originated from the Lansing Municipal 
Airport (IGQ), near Lansing, Illinois, about 1330.
The pilot's accident report stated:
We were flying five nautical miles south of the Lansing 
(IGQ) Airport on 090 heading when I noticed clutch light 
on.  The light stayed on for longer than 7 [seconds] and 
my decision was to pull clutch circuit breaker to save 
other belt.  I took over the controls when the clutch 
light went on and I started to set my self up for 
emergency landing.  We turned 180 degrees to the right 
and as I was turning I was looking for the place to land.  
At the same time I noticed smoke inside the cockpit and 
the smoke was filling inside fast.  We were flying at 
about 1600 MSL [feet above mean sea level] at that point.  
When we were coming down the amount of smoke in the 
cockpit accumulated to degree that it was hard for us to 
see and breathe.  At about 1100 MSL I noticed low rpm 
light and horn went on, so I lowered the collective and 
entered autorotation.  At about 30 feet above ground I 
started to flare and at about 5 feet leveled off and 
pulled the collective to cushion the landing.  When I 
executed the collective pull the aircraft ascended 
slightly then the aircraft came down.  When we were on 
the ground I turned all switches and fuel valve off.  We 
exited the aircraft and could see the flames above the 
belts about 3 feet tall.
Page 4 of 8CHI05LA173
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with a helicopter rating and he held a flight 
instructor certificate for helicopters.  He held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) second-
class medical certificate issued on February 15, 2005, with no limitations.  He reported that he 
had accumulated 348 hours total flight time and 290 hours in the same make and model 
helicopter.  
The student pilot held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating.  He 
held a FAA third-class medical certificate issued in May 2005, with limitations for corrective 
lenses
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N997SA, serial number 1029, was a Robinson R22 Beta, two-place, two-bladed, single main 
rotor, single-engine helicopter, with a spring and yield skid type landing gear.  The primary 
structure of its fuselage was welded steel tubing and riveted aluminum sheet.  The tailcone was 
a monocoque structure consisting of an aluminum skin.  The instructor pilot reported that a 
Lycoming O-320-B2C, serial number L-15317-39A, engine rated at 160 horsepower, powered 
the helicopter.
Cooling is supplied by an engine-mounted fanwheel enclosed by a fiberglass scroll.  The scroll 
ducts cooling air to the engine-mounted shroud which in turn directs the air to the cylinders, 
external oil cooler, alternator, and main rotor gearbox.  Mounted on the engine crankshaft 
flange is the lower sheave and fanwheel.  Above the lower sheave is the clutch sheave.  Two vee-
belts are installed between the lower and clutch sheaves.  The external oil cooler is mounted 
adjacent to the lower sheave.
The instructor pilot reported that the last annual inspection was dated May 25, 2005.  The pilot 
reported that the helicopter had accumulated 48 hours of time since the last inspection and 
that it had accumulated 2,398 hours of total time.
The helicopter was overhauled by Helicopter Specialties, Inc., on February 21, 2005.  Logbook 
entries showed that the helicopter had accumulated 2,199.5 hours of total time.  The Hobbs 
meter was reported to have read 1,279.8 hours at that inspection.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1325, the recorded IGQ weather was: Wind 290 degrees at 8 knots gusting to 16 knots; 
visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition broken 5,000 feet; temperature 25 degrees C; dew 
point 13 degrees C; altimeter 29.86 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The helicopter came to rest in a field about 7.5 miles south of IGQ at latitude 41 degrees 25.823 
minutes N and longitude 87 degrees 32.598 minutes W.  Burnt pieces of alternator and drive 
belts were recovered from the site.  A separated section of a recovered drive belt measured 
about a foot in length.
Page 5 of 8CHI05LA173
A FAA inspector and representatives from the engine and helicopter manufacturer examined 
the wreckage.  The examination of the helicopter revealed that about the bottom quarter of the 
dipstick had oil on it when removed.  The oil cooler exhibited damage on its lower and inboard 
surfaces, along the aft edge.  The lower aft corner of the cooler was separated at its seam there.  
A dark media covered the engine in the area adjacent to the oil cooler.  An oil like media was 
found on the tail rotor's guard and on the vertical stabilizer.  The tailcone was burned away at 
its forward end.  No pre-impact failures of the flight control system were found.  The landing 
gear exhibited downward yielding.  The Hobbs meter was reported to have read 1,477.4 hours.  
The belt tension actuator, lower sheave, lower actuator bearing, and the starter ring had been 
removed prior to the examination and their alignment and tension settings could not be 
measured.
FIRE
The instructor and student observed flames about three feet tall above the drive belts.  The 
instructor tried to put out the fire with an extinguisher.  A local fire department was on-scene 
within five minutes and extinguished the fire.
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION
The parties to the investigation included the FAA, Robinson Helicopter Company (RHC), and 
Textron Lycoming.
The aircraft wreckage was released to a representative of the flight school.
Subsequent to the accident, a representative of the helicopter manufacturer stated:
Robinson Helicopter now allows the use of three different types 
of oil cooler[s] on the R22 helicopter.  Two of these coolers [are 
Part numbers A649-1 and A649-2].  The third oil cooler [is Part 
number C649-1].  The C649-1 oil cooler has been delivered as 
standard equipment on R22 helicopters Serial Number 2571 
and on.  The C649-1 oil cooler is of a substantially different 
design from the [other two] oil coolers.  It is believed to be more 
robust and resistant to seam compromise (leading to leakage) 
from contact with other objects.  RHC is phasing out the A649-2 
oil cooler on the R22 helicopter by purging in-house stock of 
these oil coolers, requiring all factory overhauled aircraft be 
changed to the C649-1 oil cooler, and revising the R22 Parts 
Catalog to reflect the C649-1 oil cooler only.  In addition, the parts 
catalog and maintenance manual will be revised so that R22's 
overhauled in the field will also get a C649-1 oil cooler as part of 
Page 6 of 8CHI05LA173
the overhaul kit.
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
30, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/01/2005
Flight Time:
348 hours (Total, all aircraft), 290 hours (Total, this make and model), 260 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 120 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Page 7 of 8CHI05LA173
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Robinson
Registration:
N997SA
Model/Series:
R22 Beta 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1029
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1370 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
48 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2398 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-B2C
Registered Owner:
Sun Aero Helicopters Inc.
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
Sun Aero Helicopters Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
IGQ, 620 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1325 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 5000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 16 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.86 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
CHICAGO, IL (IGQ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1330 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
In-Flight and On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.432778, -87.781667
Page 8 of 8
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Edward F Malinowski
Adopted Date:
05/30/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Thomas Duellman; Federal Aviation Administration; West Chicago, IL
Greg Erikson; Textron Lycoming; Wayne, IL
Ken Martin; Robinson Helicopter; Torrance, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
