While returning from a flight at about 600-800 feet above ground level, the engine lost power.  
The pilot autorotated the helicopter to a median between a highway.  During the event, the 
tailboom was severed.  Post accident inspection of the engine and subsequent engine test cell 
run did not find evidence of a mechanical failure or malfunction.
Loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
On January 3, 2002, approximately 1450 mountain standard time, a Hughes 369D helicopter, 
N8393F, being operated by the Montana State Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks on a 
public-use aerial deer count flight, experienced a loss of engine power at approximately 600 
feet above ground level while en route to Bert Mooney Field, Butte, Montana.  The commercial 
pilot-in-command executed an autorotation to a forced landing on the median of Interstate 
Highway 90 (I-90) about 5 miles west of Butte.  The pilot and one mission crewmember (a 
wildlife biologist)  were not injured, but the helicopter was substantially damaged when its tail 
boom separated during the forced landing.  Instrument meteorological conditions (ceiling 
1,200 feet overcast, visibility 3/4 statute mile in light snow and mist) were reported at Butte at 
1453.  A company flight plan was in effect for the flight.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that the wildlife survey flight lasted about 1 hour and 
30 minutes.  The flight was returning to Butte, when the engine "failed."  The pilot autorotated 
the helicopter to the medium of the interstate in a tail low attitude.  The helicopter spun 
around 180 degrees after landing which during the event, the tail boom was severed.  The pilot 
reported that there were no unusual indications that preceded the engine out; the engine anti-
ice was on for the entire flight; the fuel ice filter was installed and operational; the intake filter 
"clogged" warning light was operational and the cabin heat was on medium setting.  The pilot 
also stated that when the engine failed, he recalled that the engine out light and the auto re-
ignition light illuminated.
The helicopter was in cruise flight at about 100 knots and about 600 to 800 feet above ground 
level.  The pilot reported at the time, that the visibility was one-and-a-half to two miles 
visibility with light snow falling.
Investigators from the FAA, Boeing Helicopters (current holder of the Hughes 369D type 
certificate), Rolls-Royce USA (formerly Allison Engines), and the Montana State Department 
of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks examined the helicopter at the facilities of the Montana State 
Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks on January 8, 2002.  These investigators determined 
that an adequate quantity of fuel was aboard the helicopter at the time of the accident.
The engine was transported to Rolls-Royce, Indianapolis, Indiana, for examination and test 
run.  On February 12, 2002, in the presence of a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector.  
The inspector reported that after the engine was removed from the crate, it was visually 
examined for damage.  The inspector reported no discrepancies or damage was evident.  The 
engine was then prepared for a test cell run.  The engine was then started and warmed up.  
After warm-up, the engine was put through a normal acceptance test run and all parameters 
were checked and recorded.  The inspector reported that, "At the high and mid cruise 
horsepower (HP) settings, the engine was slightly below the HP that Rolls-Royce would accept 
for a NEW engine."  No other discrepancies were noted.  (See attached Rolls-Royce engine 
report).
