According to the Captain, during the first phase of pushback, everything appeared normal. The 
first and second officers were completing the engine start check and the airplane was being 
pushed back from the gate when the airplane came to a stop. The tug operator stated that 
during pushback, the airplane nose wheel hit a patch of ice. As he applies brakes to stop the 
tug,  the airplane began to slide. Unable to stop the movement, the tug driver jumped from the 
tug to avoid getting caught between the tug and airplane. The tug came to rest lodged under the 
fuselage of the airplane creating a 10-inch by 14-inch hole in the underside of the fuselage 
breaking two stringers.
The tug driver's failure to maintain control of the airplane during pushback resulting in the tug 
colliding with the airplane.   A factor was ice on the ramp.
On January 2, 2002, at 2120 eastern standard time, a Boeing 727-200, N262FE, owned and 
operated by Federal Express, collided with an airport tug during pushback for takeoff at the 
Greenville-Spartanburg Airport in Greenville, South Carolina.  The domestic cargo flight was 
operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 121 with an IFR flight plan. Instrument 
weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airline transport pilot and first 
and second officers were not injured nor was the tug driver, however the airplane received 
substantial damage. 
According to the Captain, during the first phase of pushback, everything appeared normal. The 
first and second officers were completing the engine start check and the airplane was being 
pushed back from the gate when the airplane came to a stop. The tug operator stated that 
during pushback, the airplane nose wheel hit a patch of ice. As he applied brakes to stop the 
tug, the airplane began to slide. Unable to stop the movement, the tug driver jumped from the 
tug to avoid getting caught between the tug and airplane. The tug came to rest lodged under the 
fuselage of the airplane creating a 10-inch by 14-inch hole in the underside of the fuselage. The 
examination of the airframe revealed that two stringers on the bottom side were damaged. .
Witnesses stated that after deicing the airplane, the tug operator began to pushback the 
airplane. The parking area was clear of ice but the ramp was slick. The tug operator parked the 
airplane on the taxi line at a 90-degree angle from the tug and engaged the brakes.  According 
to the operator, "due to the ice on the ramp, the momentum of the tug caused the tug to slide 
into the airplane."
