Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Darby, MT
Accident Number:
WPR13LA178
Date & Time:
04/02/2013, 1100 MDT 
Registration:
N369HW
Aircraft:
MD HELICOPTER 369A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Hard landing
Injuries:
1 Serious, 3 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that he purchased the turbine-powered helicopter about 5 weeks before the 
accident and departed from his private airstrip for a brief local personal flight. During the 
approach for landing, when the helicopter was about 200 to 300 ft above ground level (agl), he 
added some power, and the engine responded normally. Shortly thereafter, he conducted a 
height-velocity check with satisfactory results. The pilot then slowed the helicopter to a 
descending hover with the engine running at an unspecified speed above flight idle. The pilot 
stated that, when the helicopter was about 10 ft agl, he increased the throttle setting, but the 
engine did not respond. He added collective to slow the descent, but the helicopter landed 
hard. 
Postaccident on-scene examination and system testing did not reveal evidence of any 
mechanical anomalies that would have resulted in a loss of engine power. The engine was 
tested in its as-removed condition and satisfactorily met all operational test and power 
calibration criteria with no anomalies or deficiencies noted. Review of the helicopter 
manufacturer's operating manual revealed that, during all phases of normal flight, the throttle 
should be in the full open (normal) position and should not be moved by the pilot. With the 
throttle in the full open position, a governor automatically increases and decreases engine 
power to maintain rotor rpm as the pilot raises and lowers the collective. According to the 
manufacturer, when the throttle is not in the full open position, the governor will not maintain 
rotor rpm, and full power will not be available. The pilot™s statement that he increased the 
throttle setting about 10 feet agl indicates that he was manipulating the throttle contrary to the 
operating manual procedures, and this is likely the reason he was unsuccessful in stopping the 
helicopter™s descent. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to arrest the landing descent due to his incorrect use of the throttle, which 
Page 2 of 8WPR13LA178
resulted in a hard landing.
Findings
Aircraft
Personnel issues
Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause)
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Use of policy/procedure - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 8WPR13LA178
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 2, 2013, about 1100 mountain daylight time, a McDonnell Douglas 369A helicopter, 
N369HW, was substantially damaged during a hard landing on private property in Darby, 
Montana. The owner-pilot received serious injuries, and his three passengers received minor 
injuries. The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) flight plan was filed for the flight.
According to the pilot, he departed from his ranch/airstrip with his son-in-law and two 
grandchildren, and they flew about 1/2 hour on a local sightseeing flight. Near the end of the 
flight, during the approach for landing, when the helicopter was about 200 to 300 feet above 
ground level (agl), the pilot added some power, and the engine responded normally. Shortly 
thereafter, he conducted his "60-60" check, which assured that the helicopter was at 60 mph at 
60 feet agl. The pilot then stopped the helicopter's forward velocity, and began descending 
vertically, with the engine running at a speed above idle. At an altitude of about 10 feet agl, the 
pilot increased the throttle setting, but the engine did not respond. He realized that they would 
then land hard, so he added collective to slow the descent. The helicopter impacted the ground; 
the tail rotor, tail boom, and all main rotor blades separated from the helicopter. The left skid 
partially collapsed; the helicopter remained upright, but leaning to the left. There was no fire, 
and all four occupants exited the helicopter.
The helicopter was recovered and stored in the pilot's hangar for examination.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held multiple ratings and certificates, including airline transport pilot and rotorcraft-
helicopter. His most recent FAA second-class medical certificate was issued in May 2012.
Despite multiple requests, the pilot did not provide a completed NTSB Form 6120.1,
"Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report."
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
FAA information indicated that the helicopter was manufactured in 1970, originally as a 
Hughes Helicopter OH-6 for the US military. It was issued an FAA "Standard Airworthiness 
Certificate" in the "normal" category as a McDonnell Douglas Helicopter Incorporated 369A in 
March 2006. The pilot purchased the helicopter in late February 2013.
The helicopter was equipped with an Allison (Rolls-Royce) 250-C20C series turbine engine. 
Maintenance records indicated that the engine was converted from an Allison T63-A720 to the 
M250-C20C in March 2006, when it had a total time (TT) of 1,757.8 hours. The records 
indicated that no recent heavy maintenance or component changes had been accomplished. 
The engine's most recent inspection was completed on February 26, 2013, at an engine TT of 
1,901.9 hours.
Page 4 of 8WPR13LA178
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1100 automated weather observation at 6S5, located about 18 miles north of the accident 
site, included winds from 050 degrees at 5 knots, visibility 10 miles, temperature 10 degrees C, 
dew point 0 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 30.08 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The helicopter came to rest about 100 yards to the west of the pilot's hangar, in the pilot's 
landing zone, which was a turf field. The approximate site geographic coordinates were 45° 55' 
56" North, 114° 07' 15" West, at an elevation of 4,000 feet above mean sea level. The helicopter 
remained upright, but leaned significantly to the left, which permitted the main rotor blades to 
contact the ground. The helicopter sustained significant damage, but remained upright. There 
was no fire.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
On-Site Examination
On April 9, 2013 the wreckage was examined on-scene by personnel from the FAA, McDonnell 
Douglas Helicopter, and Rolls-Royce. It had been recovered from the landing zone to the pilot's 
hangar.
The helicopter was situated upright on a trailer. The left landing gear was fractured and the 
lower left forward fuselage was damaged in the area of the landing gear strut attachment. The 
right skid remained intact. Impact damage was also noted to the engine left clam shell door. 
The aft top of the pylon displayed evidence of main rotor blade contact. The tail boom 
separated just forward of the horizontal/vertical fins, and damage was consistent with main 
rotor blade strikes.
The tail rotor gearbox remained attached to the aft segment of the tail boom/empennage 
section, but both tail rotor blades had fracture-separated just outboard of the root fittings. The 
tail rotor hub had separated from the tail rotor gearbox, and was not recovered. All four main 
rotor blades separated from the main rotor head, fracturing at the hub and tearing all "TT" 
(Torsion-Tension) straps. Three of the four blades remained in one piece from root to tip. The 
fourth blade had fractured into two pieces at approximately mid-span. All four blades 
displayed aft bending from root to tip. The damage to the main rotor hub, main rotor blades 
and tail rotor assembly was consistent with a power-on condition at the time of the main and 
tail rotor blade strikes.
The engine remained securely attached to the airframe, in its normal installed position. No 
visible impact damage to the engine was noted. A visual and tactile examination of all engine 
pneumatic, fuel and oil lines was conducted; all "B" nuts and associated fittings were found to 
be at least finger tight. Oil and fuel line interface connections between the engine and airframe 
were examined; all were found to be at least finger tight, with no evidence of leakage.
A vacuum check of the fuel system was conducted in accordance to Rolls-Royce OMM 
specification. The system held the required pressure for longer than the test-specified 2 
minutes, which satisfied the criteria for a successful ("pass") leak check. The fuel tank was then 
partially drained of fuel. Approximately 10 gallons were removed from the tank, and additional 
Page 5 of 8WPR13LA178
fuel was noted to remain in the tank.
The engine was removed from the airframe. Manual rotation of the N1 drive train confirmed 
that the drive train was free and continuous from the starter generator pad to the compressor. 
Manual rotation of the N2 drive train confirmed that it was free and continuous from the 
power take-off gear to the No. 4 power turbine wheel.
The engine was sent to Rolls-Royce Indianapolis for operational testing.
Engine Operational Testing
On May 21, 2013 "Run as Received" testing was conducted on the subject engine at Rolls-Royce 
Indianapolis, Indiana. Testing was conducted to the new engine specifications in Rolls-Royce 
Production Test Specification 795.
The engine was removed from the container and placed onto an engine stand for preparation 
and pre-run examination. Nothing was discovered during the examination that would preclude 
operational testing. The engine was placed into the test cell, where test cell instrumentation 
and control links were affixed to it. The engine started successfully within the specification 
time- and temperature-limits, and it stabilized at ground idle power. The engine was run at idle 
until it warmed up, and all vibration measurements remained within specification limits. The 
engine was accelerated to flight idle power, and then cycled through a series of timed 
accelerations and decelerations. The accelerations, decelerations, and governor droop checks 
were all within allowable limits. The engine was then operated and allowed to stabilize at six 
discrete power settings for power calibration purposes; the engine performed within 
specification at all six of those test points. At the conclusion of testing, the engine was shut 
down normally. A total test run time of 2 hours 15 minutes was accomplished.
Normal Operating Procedures
The twist-grip throttle control, integrated into each collective pitch stick, is a three-position 
device. The three positions are cut-off, idle, and normal. "Cut-off" is used to shut down the 
engine, "idle" is used for on-ground operation, and "normal" is used for all flight operations. 
During all operations, the main rotor speed, designated "NR," is automatically held constant by 
the engine and its control system.  During all phases of normal flight, the pilot never 
manipulates the throttle; engine power is indirectly controlled via the collective pitch system, 
and to a much lesser extent, via the N2 governor. With the throttle in the "normal" position, 
the pilot can control engine N2 speed, through a very limited range, by the N2 governor switch. 
N2 speed is set to 101 percent for engine runup, takeoff, and all flight conditions except hover. 
The designated hover N2 speed is 103 percent. According to the manufacturer, when the 
throttle is not in the full open position, the governor will not maintain rotor rpm, and full 
power will not be available.
Page 6 of 8WPR13LA178
History of Flight
Landing-flare/touchdown
Abnormal runway contact
Hard landing (Defining event)
Landing gear collapse
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
67
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/08/2012
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MD HELICOPTER
Registration:
N369HW
Model/Series:
369A 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
201374
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/26/2013, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison Rolls Royce
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
C250
Registered Owner:
Pending
Rated Power:
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8WPR13LA178
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
K6S5, 3644 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
18 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1100 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / Unknown
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
10°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Darby, MT (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Darby, MT (NONE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Private Property (NONE)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
4104 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
3 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 3 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
45.932500, -114.120556 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael C Huhn
Adopted Date:
05/13/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Bryan Hanson; FAA FSDO; Helena, MT
John Hobby; McDonnell Douglas Helicopter; Mesa, AZ
David Riser; Rolls-Royce; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
05/13/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86582
Page 8 of 8WPR13LA178
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
