A flight school Cessna 172N was destroyed during a departure collision with communication 
wires and terrain at Rialto, California, about 0023 hours.  The accident flight was returning to 
Hawthorne, California.  The pilot had obtained a standard weather briefing at 2319, for the 
return flight.  The pilot was advised of airmets for IFR ceiling and visibilities for his route of 
flight.  The airplane had been the subject of an Federal Aviation Administration ALNOT, issued 
at 2210, for failure to cancel an instrument flight plan with Southern California Tracon from 
Hawthorne to Rialto, an uncontrolled airport.  The pilot had obtained an FAA preflight weather 
briefing at 1551, for the flight to Rialto.  According to the instrument flight plan information, 
the estimated time of arrival at Rialto had been 1845.  Subsequently, the airplane was located 
at the Rialto airport parking ramp by county sheriff personnel.  The ALNOT was canceled at 
2240.  The operator stated that the pilot and passenger had flown to Rialto to visit with friends 
and were to return to Hawthorne.  The pilot was a flight instructor for the operator and was 
rated in airplane single engine land and instrument.  They reported that he had accrued 650 
total flight hours.  Radar data was obtained from Southern California Tracon and a plot was 
generated by a private vendor for Cessna Aircraft Company.  It shows the airplane circling back 
over the airport and heading northwest.  The highest altitude before coverage is lost is 1,700 
feet mean sea level.   
The pilot's intentional visual flight into instrument meteorological conditions.  Contributing to 
the accident was the pilot's improper weather evaluation and lack of total experience.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2001, about 0023 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna 172N, N739WE, operated 
by Security Aviation of Hawthorne, California, was destroyed during the collision sequence 
with communication wires and terrain at Rialto, California.  The commercial flight instructor 
rated pilot and passenger both received fatal injuries.  Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the personal flight operating under 14 CFR Part 91, and no flight plan was filed.  
The accident flight was destined for Hawthorne.
On March 31, 2001, the airplane had been the subject of a Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) alert notification (ALNOT), issued at 2210, for failure to cancel an instrument flight plan 
for a flight between Hawthorne and Rialto, California.  The Rialto airport is uncontrolled.  The 
pilot had obtained an FAA preflight weather briefing at 1551, for the flight to Rialto.  According 
to the instrument flight plan information, the estimated time of arrival at Rialto was 1845.  
Subsequently, the airplane was located at the Rialto airport parking ramp by San Bernardino 
County Aero Bureau personnel located on the airport.  The ALNOT was canceled at 2240. 
The pilot obtained a standard weather briefing for the return flight to Hawthorne at 2319.  He 
was advised of airmets for IFR ceilings and visibilities for his route of flight. 
The operator stated that the pilot and passenger had flown to Rialto to visit with friends and 
were to return to Hawthorne.  The pilot was a flight instructor for the operator and possessed 
airplane single engine land and instrument ratings.    
PILOT INFORMATION
On November 19, 1999, the pilot was issued a private pilot certificate at 113 total flight hours.  
On January 3, 2000, the pilot was issued an instrument airplane rating at 155 total hours, 
including 35 dual instrument hours. 
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
According to airplane logbook records, the last documented inspection occured on March 23, 
2001, as an annual inspection performed at 9,295 total flight hours.  The last recorded 
altimeter and static system tests required by FAR 91.411 and Part 43 appendix "E" was 
accomplished on June 4, 1999.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 2353, the Ontario International Airport, located 11 miles southwest of the accident site, was 
reporting: wind 240 degrees at 5 knots; visibility 2.5 statute miles; mist/light fog; overcast at 
700 feet; temperature 55 degrees Fahrenheit; dew point 55 degrees Fahrenheit; and the 
altimeter was 29.92 inHg. 
At 2353, the Riverside Municipal Airport, 11 miles south, was reporting: wind 290 degrees at 4 
knots; visibility 1.5 statute miles; mist/light fog; overcast at 300 feet; temperature 55 degrees 
Fahrenheit; dew point 55 degrees Fahrenheit; and the altimeter was 29.92 inHg. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was examined by the Safety Board investigator about 3 hours after the accident 
occured.  The weather was near total obscuration in fog and mist.
The wreckage was located about .80 mile northwest of the airport.  At the accident site, 
communications wires were severed from their poles that were 23 to 26 feet in height.  The 
communication service went off line at 0023.  The wires were strewn across Highland Avenue 
from the north to south.  Wreckage debris consisting of window Plexiglas, left flap section, 
window frame, and interior molding was scattered from the broken wires south.  The wreckage 
path was measured about 150 degrees over about 200 feet, missing power lines on the south 
side of Highland Avenue.
The left wing and lift strut were located within 26 feet south of Highland Avenue, with fire 
damage to the aft wing root section and flap.  The main wing spar carry through and cabin top 
skin were located about 58 feet south.
The fuselage, right wing, and empennage were located 192 feet south of Highland Avenue 
pointing about 100 degrees.  The entire cabin section from the firewall to aft of the baggage 
area and right wing root were destroyed by post accident fire damage.  
A propeller blade exhibited leading edge gouging, chordwise striations, and trailing edge "S" 
bending. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On April 3, 2001, the San Bernardino County Medical Examiner performed an autopsy on the 
pilot.  During the course of the procedure samples were obtained for toxicological analysis by 
the Federal Aviation Administration Civil Aeromedical Institute in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  
The results of the analysis were negative for carbon monoxide, ethanol, and drugs.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
On July 1, 2002, the wreckage was released to the insurance company representative for the 
owner.
Radar data was obtained from Southern California Tracon and a plot was generated by a 
private vendor for Cessna Aircraft Company.  A copy of the plot is attached to this report.  It 
shows the airplane circling back over the airport and heading northwest.  The highest altitude 
before coverage is lost is 1,700 feet mean sea level.
