The airplane sustained substantial damage on impact with trees and terrain during a forced 
landing following an in-flight loss of engine power on initial climb.  A post impact fire 
occurred. The pilot reported no injuries. The pilot stated, "I had just completed an annual 
inspection on it.  ... On Monday morning I drained the sumps did a full power run up and 
proceeded to take off on runway 36 for a local check flight.  Everything seemed normal until 
just after I rotated and cycled the landing gear.  A few seconds later I lost power.  I switched on 
the boost pump not normally used for take off, to no avail.  The stall warning horn activated 
and I came down in the trees off the north end of the airport.  I had a fire originating from the 
fuel line to the distrabution valve on top of the engine.  I exited the aircraft unhurt but 
neglected to turn off the master switch or the boost pump which was feeding the fire.  ... It 
seems like I lost fuel pressure from the line at the distrabution valve which did not come off but 
was leaking.  This caused the engine to quit."
The fuel starvation.  Factors were the loose line at the distribution valve, the inadequate annual 
inspection the owner/pilot mechanic performed, the unsuitable terrain the pilot encountered 
during the emergency landing after takeoff, and the trees.
On April 2, 2001, about 0840 eastern daylight time, a Meyers 200A, N495C, piloted by a 
private pilot, sustained substantial damage on impact with trees and terrain during a forced 
landing following an in-flight loss of engine power on initial climb out from Meyers-Diver's 
Airport, near Tecumseh, Michigan. A post impact fire occurred. The personal flight was 
operating under 14 CFR Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident. No flight plan was on file. The pilot reported no injuries. The local flight was 
originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated, "I had just completed an annual inspection on it.  On Friday I had taxied the 
airplane around [and] done a full power run up[.]  I then removed the cowling to check things 
over.  Everything seemed OK.  On Monday morning I drained the sumps did a full power run 
up and proceeded to take off on runway 36 for a local check flight.  Everything seemed normal 
until just after I rotated and cycled the landing gear.  A few seconds later I lost power.  I 
switched on the boost pump not normally used for take off, to no avail.  The stall warning horn 
activated and I came down in the trees off the north end of the airport.  I had a fire originating 
from the fuel line to the distrabution valve on top of the engine.  I exited the aircraft unhurt but 
neglected to turn off the master switch or the boost pump which was feeding the fire.  After 
evaluating the situation for safety I reentered the aircraft and turned off the master switch.  We 
were then able to put out the fire which was isolated to the top of the engine compartment.  It 
seems like I lost fuel pressure from the line at the distrabution valve which did not come off but 
was leaking.  This caused the engine to quit."
