The pilot was taking off with a 20-degree left crosswind at 9 knots, and did not use any 
crosswind takeoff technique.  During the takeoff roll, the left wing raised and right wing tip 
dragged on the ground.  The pilot applied full left aileron and right rudder; however, the 
airplane weather vaned into the wind.  As the airplane neared the edge of the runway, the pilot 
reduced the power, and the airplane nosed over.  The pilot stated that he could have prevented 
the accident by "use[ing] crosswind [takeoff] technique."
the pilot's failure to compensate for the wind conditions during takeoff, which resulted in a 
ground loop.
On April 1, 2001, at 1415 central daylight time, a Cessna 195B tail-wheel equipped airplane, 
N195S, was substantially damaged when it nosed over during takeoff from the Montgomery 
County Airport, Conroe, Texas.  The private pilot, who was the sole occupant and registered 
owner of the airplane, was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight 
plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The local 
flight was departing from the Montgomery County Airport at the time of the accident.  
According to a written statement provided by the pilot, he was taking off from runway 19.  He 
stated that the wind was from 170 degrees at 9 knots, and he did not use any "crosswind 
technique."  During the takeoff roll, the left wing raised and right wing tip dragged on the 
ground.  The pilot applied full left aileron and right rudder; however, the airplane weather 
vaned into the wind.  As the airplane neared the edge of the runway, the pilot reduced the 
power, and the airplane "immediately nosed down and landed on its back."
According to the pilot, the propeller, engine cowling, firewall, engine, fuselage, both wings, and 
the empennage sustained damage.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), under the section titled 
"Recommendation (How Could This Accident Have Been Prevented)," the pilot wrote, "use 
crosswind [takeoff] technique."
