The pilot was conducting touch and go landings and after his second landing he was executing 
the climb out phase of the procedure. During the initial climb , the pilot reported an 
unspecified engine problem. The airplane collided with the ground in a nose low attitude, and 
flipped inverted. Examination of the airframe and  failed to disclose any mechanical 
malfunctions or component failures. The engine operated normally up to 2000 rpm during the 
functional check. At the time of the accident conditions were favorable for the formation of 
carburetor ice.
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. Conditions for carburetor icing were 
present at the time of the accident.
On April 2, 2001, at 1715 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 182P, N21306, collided with the 
ground 1500 feet from the departure end of runway 27 at McCullum Field in Kennesaw, 
Georgia. The personal flight was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 
91, with no flight plan filed. Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The 
pilot received serious injuries at the time of the accident and the airplane was substantially 
damaged. The flight departed Kennesaw, Georgia, at 1714.
Reportedly, the pilot was conducting touch and go landings, and was executing the climb out 
phase of the procedure. According to air traffic control, during the initial climb out from 
runway 27, the pilot reported an unspecified engine problem. The airplane collided with the 
ground in a nose low attitude and flipped inverted.
Examination of the airframe  assembly failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction or 
component failure. Examination of the engine assembly disclosed that the fuel recovered in the 
carburetor bowl was brownish in color. The fuel grade and type was not determined. During 
the subsequent examination, necessary repairs were made to the engine assembly to facilitate a 
functional check. The engine operated normally up to 2000 rpm during the functional check. 
The engine ran smooth with no anomalies noted. The entire run was approximately ten 
minutes in duration. After the engine run-up, the oil sump was removed and inspected, and it 
was noted that there were pieces of metal  found in the sump. The pieces of metal were 
identified as the oil control ring expander coil. A review of recovered weather data showed that 
weather conditions at the time of the accident  were favorable for carburetor icing conditions.
Reportedly, the airplane had recently undergone a pre-purchase inspection. A review of the 
inspection findings showed that there were approximately 60 maintenance related write-ups 
which included water in fuel tanks. A review of the airplane and engine maintenance logs 
revealed that the engine had a total of 3,277 hours and 1,676.99 hours since the last major 
overhaul. The last annual inspection was completed on February 1, 2001 at 2463.2 airframe 
hours.  
The pilot was hospitalized after the accident and was placed in intensive care. On May 26, 
2001, the pilot passed as a result of the serious injuries sustained in the accident.
