The flight instructor was providing initial helicopter training to the student, a commercial pilot 
with fixed wing ratings.  The student, with the flight instructor "following closely" on the 
controls, was practicing approaches to a hover in an open field.  After several approaches, they 
decided to practice a steep approach.  About 600 feet above the ground the student began a 
stabilized approach at 40 knots indicated airspeed, and at a descent rate about 1,000 feet per 
minute.  He then brought the helicopter to a hover about 5 to 10 feet above the ground.  The 
helicopter hovered for between 5 and 15 seconds, before it "drop[ed] to the ground," and rolled 
onto its right side.  The flight instructor further reported that prior to the accident, the 
helicopter was operating with "no indication of [a] mechanical problem," and the engine 
seemed to be producing power normally.  A witness stated that as the helicopter got close to 
the ground, "it all of the sudden pitched nose down," and impacted the ground.  Examination 
of the wreckage revealed that both right landing gear struts fractured in ductile overload, 
consistent with a single impact.  Flight control continuity was established, with no anomalies 
noted.
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the helicopter and the flight instructor's inadequate 
supervision, which resulted in a hard landing and subsequent rollover.
On August 2, 2006, at 1320 eastern daylight time, a MD Helicopter Inc. 500N, N520AP, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted terrain during an uncontrolled descent, near 
Louisville, Kentucky.  The certificated flight instructor was not injured, and the certificated 
commercial pilot sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed for the local instructional flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the flight instructor, he was providing initial helicopter training to the student, a 
commercial pilot with fixed wing ratings.  The student, with the flight instructor "following 
closely" on the controls, was practicing approaches to a hover in an open field.  After several 
approaches, they decided to practice a steep approach.  About 600 feet above the ground, the 
student began a stabilized approach at 40 knots indicated airspeed, and at a descent rate about 
1,000 feet per minute.  He then brought the helicopter to a hover about 5 to 10 feet above the 
ground.  The helicopter hovered for between 5 and 15 seconds, on a northerly heading, before it 
"seemed to drop to the ground."  The flight instructor recalled that the helicopter dropped 
straight down, with no lateral movement, then rolled onto its right side.  The engine continued 
to run for about 10 seconds until it shut down.
The flight instructor further reported that prior to the accident, the helicopter was operating 
with "no indication of [a] mechanical problem," and the engine seemed to be producing power 
normally.  At the time of the accident, the winds were from the northwest at a velocity of about 
10 to 15 knots.
According to the student, they approached the field in a stabilized descent about 60 knots 
indicated airspeed.  He then arrested the descent, and entered a hover about 10 feet above the 
ground.  While stabilizing the hover, the student felt a sensation of descending very rapidly.  
The next thing he remembered, the helicopter was on its side, and the engine and rotor blades 
were coming to a stop.
Two witnesses observed the helicopter before and during the accident.  One witness reported 
seeing the helicopter as she drove on a road adjacent to the landing field.  She described that 
the helicopter looked like it was going to land "normally," but that as it got close to the ground, 
"it all of the sudden pitched nose down," and impacted the ground.  When asked if the 
helicopter had hovered or paused in the air, she stated that it continually moved forward and 
down during the approach, then "just hit the ground."
The other witness reported seeing the helicopter as it approached the field.  She stated that the 
helicopter descended, paused for a moment near the ground, then impacted the ground.
The flight instructor held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine 
land and rotorcraft-helicopter, and a flight instructor certificate with a rating for rotorcraft.  He 
reported 2,028 total hours of flight experience, 1,860 hours of which were in rotorcraft, and 
740 hours of which were in the accident helicopter make and model.
The student held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single and multiengine 
land, and instrument airplane.  He reported 345 total hours of flight experience, 5 hours of 
which were in rotorcraft, all in the accident helicopter make and model.
Representatives from the airframe and engine manufacturers, as well as a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector, examined the wreckage following the accident.  The helicopter 
came to rest on its right side, and both the right forward and rear landing gear struts were 
fractured about 14 inches from the fuselage.  Examination of the forward strut fuselage access 
hole revealed that it was elongated in the forward and aft direction.  There was damage to the 
right chin bubble and associated structure directly below the right side pedal assembly, and the 
pitot tube was bent slightly left and caked inside with mud.  All of the main rotor blades 
exhibited extensive damage consistent with ground contact, and there were several ground 
scars nearby that were of a similar width as the main rotor blades.  Flight control continuity 
was established, with no anomalies noted. 
Both portions of the front and rear fractured landing gear were removed and sent to a 
laboratory for further analysis.  No evidence of corrosion or fatigue was found on any of the 
fracture surfaces.  Examination of both the front and rear struts revealed that they exhibited 
signatures consistent with ductile overload during a single impact.
The weather reported at Bowman Field Airport (LOU), Louisville, Kentucky, located about 8 
nautical miles northwest, at 1253, included winds from 280 degrees at 9 knots, temperature 91 
degrees Fahrenheit, dewpoint 73 degrees Fahrenheit, and an altimeter setting of 30.02 inches 
of mercury.
