The airline transport certificated pilot was transporting passengers from a remote lake in a 
float-equipped airplane under Title 14, CFR Part 135.  He said that during takeoff he passed his 
predetermined point to abort the takeoff without becoming airborne, and felt that he had to 
proceed with the takeoff or hit the shoreline. The pilot said that he was able to become 
airborne, but struck the shore of the lake with the airplane's floats just after liftoff.  He stated 
that he was concerned about damage to the floats from the impact with the shore, and elected 
to land on a hard surface runway at the destination airport.  The float structure collapsed 
during landing, resulting in substantial damage to the fuselage.  There were no known 
mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident.
The pilot's failure to abort the takeoff at his predetermined reference point, which resulted in a 
collision with the shore during takeoff-initial climb, and structural damage to the airplane.
On August 1, 2006, about 1730 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped, de Havilland DHC-2 
Mk.1 airplane, N4040W, sustained substantial damage when it struck the shore during takeoff 
from a remote lake, about 50 miles south of Anaktuvuk Pass, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated by Brooks Range Aviation, Bettles, Alaska, as a visual flight rules (VFR) passenger 
flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The airline transport 
certificated pilot and the five passengers were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and company flight following procedures were in effect.  
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on August 1, the Bettles Airport manager said the float-equipped 
accident airplane landed on the hard-surfaced runway at Bettles.  The manager said the pilot  
told her that he had struck the shore during takeoff from a lake, and feared the floats would not 
support the airplane during a water landing, and elected to land on the hard-surface runway.  
The manager reported that during landing the float's supporting structure collapsed, and the 
airplane sat on its tail.
On August 3, the director of operations for the company told the IIC he believed that damage to 
the airplane was limited to the floats and support structure, however the airplane had been put 
back on wheels, and the airplane was being ferried to a repair facility to have the fuselage 
examined and repaired, if necessary.
On August 10, an FAA maintenance inspector who examined the repairs made to the airplane, 
told the IIC that an aft fuselage bulkhead had to be cut and spliced at the bottom, and that 
several additional fuselage stringers had to be cut and repaired, or replaced.
In a written statement to the NTSB dated August 27, the pilot wrote that he "hesitated" at the 
takeoff abort point long enough that he felt he had no choice but to continue the takeoff, and 
that the floats hit the bank just as the airplane became airborne.
