Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Kankakee, IL
Accident Number:
CHI03LA240
Date & Time:
08/02/2003, 1755 CDT 
Registration:
N15SA
Aircraft:
Enstrom F-28C
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Other Work Use - Sightseeing
Analysis 
The sightseeing aerial observation helicopter sustained substantial damage when the main 
rotor impacted the tail rotor drive shaft during a landing in a county fairground parking lot.  
The tail rotor drive shaft separated from the helicopter.  The tail rotor drive shaft impacted the 
rear window of a vehicle parked in the parking lot.  Three passengers reported minor injuries 
and the pilot reported that he was uninjured.  The pilot stated, "I made a stabilized steep 
approach to the landing area.  Once I detected the helicopter skids come in contact with the 
surface I lowered the collective at that moment the helicopter dropped and lunged forward.  
The landing site was a nearly level area with 2-3 inch tall grass."   Wind was 170 degrees at 7 
knots.  An on-scene examination of the helicopter detected no pre-impact anomalies.  The 
helicopter's flight manual stated, "The cabin interior is a full, three-place, side by side seating 
arrangement."   The helicopter's center of gravity range was 92.0 to 100 inches.  The operator's 
calculated center of gravity was 91.74 inches.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot misjudged flare which led to a hard landing.  Contributing to the accident was the 
pilot's failure to follow procedures/directives when he exceeded the airplane's weight and 
balance.
Page 2 of 6CHI03LA240
Findings
Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
1. (C) ROTOR SYSTEM,MAIN ROTOR BLADE - OTHER
2. (F) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - NOT FOLLOWED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) FLARE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - EXCEEDED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
5. OBJECT - VEHICLE
Page 3 of 6CHI03LA240
Factual Information
On August 2, 2003, about 1755 central daylight time, an Enstrom F-28C helicopter, N15SA, 
piloted by a commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage when the main rotor impacted the 
tail rotor drive shaft during a landing in a county fairground parking lot near Kankakee, 
Illinois.  The tail rotor drive shaft separated from the helicopter and impacted the rear window 
of a vehicle parked in the parking lot.  The aerial observation flight was operating under 14 CFR 
Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  No flight plan 
was on file.  Three passengers reported minor injuries and the pilot reported that he was 
uninjured.  The local sightseeing flight originated from the parking lot near Kankakee, Illinois, 
at time unknown and was returning to land at that parking lot when the accident occurred.
The pilot stated:
I was conducting helicopter rides at the fair ground.  I made a 
stabilized steep approach to the landing area.  Once I detected the 
helicopter skids come in contact with the surface I lowered the 
collective at that moment the helicopter dropped and lunged 
forward.  The landing site was a nearly level area with 2-3 inch 
tall grass.
An on-scene examination of the helicopter was performed.  The helicopter was found resting in 
a grass area roped off for landing.  The landing gear skid assemblies were not deformed.  No 
depressions were found in the grass area around the skids.  One rotor blade exhibited leading 
edge nicks and a red colored media transfer on its outboard section.  The push-pull tube for 
that blade was found with its rod end separated from its assembly.  The blade's drag link was 
found with one fork end fractured.  Control continuity was established from the cockpit to the 
other two blades.  The push-pull tube with the separation was observed to move in correct 
relationship to the movement of the cockpit controls.  The tail rotor drive shaft was found in 
the parking lot adjacent to the landing area.  The tail rotor drive shaft ends exhibited tears 
consistent with overload.  The tail rotor drive shaft's color scheme was red.  The rear section of 
the tail boom was found torn from its forward section about the splice joint aft of the 
stabilizer's carry through spar.  Both rudder cables were intact at the tail rotor gearbox 
assembly and moved in correct relationship to movements of the rudder pedals.  A deformed 
strobe light assembly was found on the ground.  The examination of the helicopter detected no 
pre-impact anomalies.
The helicopter operator supplied weight and balance data to the Federal Aviation 
Administration.  The helicopter's center of gravity range was 92.0 to 100 inches.  The 
operator's calculated center of gravity was 91.74 inches.
At 1803, the Greater Kankakee Airport, about two miles north of the accident site, near 
Kankakee, Illinois, recorded weather was: Wind 170 degrees at 7 knots: visibility 10 statute 
miles; sky condition clear; temperature 22 degrees C; dew point 20 degrees C; altimeter 29.90 
inches of mercury.
Excerpts from the helicopter's flight manual stated:
INTERIOR ARRANGEMENT
Page 4 of 6CHI03LA240
The cabin interior is a full, three-place, side by side seating 
arrangement with a spacious 61" width for maximum pilot and 
passenger comfort.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
44, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/17/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/02/2003
Flight Time:
1771 hours (Total, all aircraft), 125 hours (Total, this make and model), 1771 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 82 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 51 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 9 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Enstrom
Registration:
N15SA
Model/Series:
F-28C 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
469
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
3
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/05/2003, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
90.5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4915.7 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
HIO360E1AD
Registered Owner:
Hartford Holding Corp
Rated Power:
205 hp
Operator:
Spitfire Aerospace 
Technologies Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI03LA240
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
IKK, 630 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1803 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.9 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 20°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Kankakee, IL 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
GREATER KANKAKEE (IKK)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
630 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
3 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.071389, -87.846389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Edward F Malinowski
Adopted Date:
03/02/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Bob Donahue; Federal Aviation Administration; West Chicago, IL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI03LA240
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
