National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Marana, AZ
Accident Number: LAX01LA089
Date & Time: 02/01/2001, 1934 MST
Registration: N29KK
Aircraft: Arthur Dragonfly
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane had a total loss of engine power and the pilot made an emergency landing.
The airplane  was at a cruise altitude of 4,000 feet msl when the engine lost power.
The pilot said that he verified that the electric fuel pump switch was in the "on" position.
He then moved the fuel mixture control to the "full rich" position and engaged the starter.
After his unsuccessful attempts to start the engine, he made an emergency forced landing in open desert terrain.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A total loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Contributing to the accident was the rough/uneven terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN Factual Information On February 1, 2001, at 1934 hours mountain standard time, an amateur-built experimental Arthur Dragonfly, N29KK, lost engine power and made an emergency forced landing southeast of Marana, Arizona.
During the landing, the aircraft encountered rough terrain.
The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the certificated private pilot, the sole occupant, received only minor injuries.
The airplane was being operated by the pilot/owner as a personal flight under 14 CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.
The local flight originated from the Marana Northwest Regional Airport about 1910.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot told Safety Board investigators that he had been in cruise flight at 4,000 feet mean sea level when the engine quit.
He said that he verified that the electric fuel pump switch was in the "on" position.
He then moved the fuel mixture control to the "full rich" position and engaged the starter.
After his unsuccessful attempts to start the engine, he made an emergency forced landing in open desert terrain.
During the forced landing, the forward canard was damaged.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 43, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
