National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Albuquerque, NM
Accident Number: DEN01LA047
Date & Time: 02/03/2001, 2045 MST
Registration: N9447S
Aircraft: Beech V-35A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said that while taxiing at night towards a parking space, a marshaler redirected him to another parking space.
While changing from one space to the other, his airplane impacted a parked airplane.
The pilot stated that he did not see the parked airplane prior to the impact.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inattention during night taxiing, which resulted in his airplane impacting a parked airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
OBJECT - AIRCRAFT PARKED/STANDING 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT HANDLING - INATTENTIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
LIGHT CONDITION - NIGHT Factual Information On February 3, 2001, at approximately 2045 mountain standard time, a Beech V-35A, N9447S, was substantially damaged when it taxied into a parked airplane at Albuquerque International Airport, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
The private pilot and his two passengers were not injured.
The pilot was operating the airplane under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the night cross-country flight that originated from Deming, New Mexico, approximately 1 hour, 15 minutes before the accident.
No flight plan had been filed.
According to the pilot, while taxiing towards a parking space, he was directed by a marshaler to use another parking space.
While changing from one space to another, his airplane impacted a parked Mooney.
The pilot stated that he did not see the parked Mooney prior to the impact.
The left wing of the accident airplane sustained an 8 by 12 inch hole in the leading edge near the pitot static tube.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 68, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
