National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Troy, MI
Accident Number: CHI01LA081
Date & Time: 02/03/2001, 1110 EST
Registration: N369ER
Aircraft: Cessna 172RG
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane veered into a snowbank after touching down on the runway at approximately 27 knots above the stall speed with an 8 knot crosswind component.
The pilot stated that he probably had too much left airleron and not enough right rudder to keep centered on landing rollout.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the excessive touchdown airspeed and the directional control not maintained by the pilot.
The snow bank was a contributing factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(C) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOWBANK 2.
(C) AIRSPEED(VSO) - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personnel flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot reported no injuries.
The local flight originated from the Ann Arbor Municipal Airport, Ann Arbor, Michigan at 1050.
The pilot reported, "...At 7D2, I was on a normal 1 1/2 - 2 mile final approach for Rwy 27 with a 10 kt x-wind out of 210 degrees (approx).
Full flaps (30 degrees) were deployed and I touched down near threshold on runway centerline at about 65-70 knots.
I was holding left aileron and attempting to track rwy centerline with right rudder.
A few seconds after touchdown I found myself drifting to the left and left main gear wheel entered and became entrapped in adjacent 12-15 inch snowbank.
This caused the aircraft to veer counterclockwise to the left as in a ground loop and the nose entered and impacted the frozen snowbank bringing the engine/propeller to a sudden stop.
Final attitude was about 20 degrees nose down.
I probably had too much left aileron and not enough right rudder to keep centered on landing rollout or did not compensate for changing wind conditions fast enough.
There may have been some light gusts or wind shear due to adjacent structures.
In any event, not enough concentration".
The Oakland County Airport automated surface observing system, located approximately 13 nm on a 305 degree heading from7D2 record at 1053, wind 216 degrees at 8 knots.
The pilot reported a total flight time of 136 hours of which 53 were in the make and model of the accident airplane.
He had flown 33 hours in the previous 90 days.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
