National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: New Orleans, LA
Accident Number: FTW01LA067
Date & Time: 02/03/2001, 0910 CST
Registration: N190WC
Aircraft: British Aerospace HS.125-700A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot-in-command (PIC) stated that they were flying at 4,000 feet msl over Lake Pontchartrain when the flight crew heard a bang.
The pilots thought that they had experienced a bird strike, and they landed uneventfully at New Orleans.
Post flight examination of the left wing revealed that the left wing's fuel vent was blocked with duct tape, and the wet wing fuel tank had collapsed.
The fuel tank stringers and the wing ribs sustained structural damage.
The PIC stated that the fuel tanks had been repaired and pressure tested prior to the flight.
The PIC added that after the pressure test, the mechanic, who repaired the fuel tank, removed the tape from the right wing's fuel vent; however, both the mechanic and the flight crew failed to notice the duct tape over the left wing's fuel vent.
The flight crew stated that there were no streamers or markers present to indicate that the fuel tank vent was covered with duct tape.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot-in-command's inadequate preflight inspection, which resulted in a flight with a blocked fuel tank vent.
A contributing factor was maintenance personnel's failure to remove the tape covering the fuel tank vent following a pressure test.
Findings Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - NORMAL Findings 1.
(F) FUEL SYSTEM,VENT - BLOCKED(TOTAL) 2.
(F) MAINTENANCE,PRESSURIZING - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 3.
The airplane was registered to and operated by Walker Aviation, Inc., of Jackson, Mississippi.
The airline transport pilot-in-command (PIC), the airline transport second-in-command (SIC), and the jump seat passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 business flight.
The flight originated from Jackson, Mississippi, at 0830, and was destined for New Orleans.
During a telephone interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the PIC stated that they were flying at 4,000 feet msl over Lake Pontchartrain, Louisiana,  when the flight crew heard a bang.
The pilots thought that they had experienced a bird strike, and they landed the airplane uneventfully at New Orleans Lakefront Airport.
Post flight examination of the left wing revealed that the left wing's fuel vent was blocked with duct tape, and the wet wing fuel tank had collapsed.
The PIC stated that the fuel tanks had been repaired and pressure tested prior to the flight.
The PIC added that after the pressure test, the mechanic, who repaired the fuel tank, removed the tape from the right wing's fuel vent; however, both the mechanic and the flight crew failed to notice the duct tape over the left wing's fuel vent.
The flight crew stated that there were no streamers or markers present to indicate that the fuel tank vent was covered with duct tape.
According to one of the FAA inspectors, who examined the airplane, the fuel tank stringers and the wing's ribs sustained structural damage.
: 25500 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 0.5 Hours Engines: 2 Turbo Fan Airframe Total Time: 8203.8 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Airesearch ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: TFE-731-3R-1H Registered Owner: Walker Aviation, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
