National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Charlevoix, MI
Accident Number: CHI01LA078
Date & Time: 02/02/2001, 1630 EST
Registration: N4123K
Aircraft: Piper PA-34-220T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane impacted a snow bank following a loss of control during landing roll.
The landing was being made on runway 27.
The pilot reported that during the landing roll, the airplane veered to the right of the runway due to too much right aileron input.
He reported he neutralized the aileron and steered with the rudder.
A gust of wind along with the crosswind then lifted the right wing and the airplane veered to the left where it contacted ice on the runway and slid into a snow bank.
Inspection revealed the center of the runway was clear, however, there were patches of ice along the left side of the runway.
The snow along the sides of the runway was high enough so that only the tops of the runway lights were visible.
The pilot reported winds from 330 at 12 knots, gusting to 17 knots.
A weather observation at the airport taken 6 minutes after the accident reported winds from 320 degrees at 9 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot failed to maintain directional control of the airplane due to inadequate compensation for the wind conditions.
Factors associated with the accident were the gusty crosswind,  the icy runway, and the snow bank.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 3.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ICY ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 6.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOWBANK Factual Information On February 2, 2001, at 1630 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-34-220T, N4123K, operated by a private pilot, collided with a runway light and snow bank following a loss of directional control during landing.
The landing was being made on runway 27 (4,550 feet by 75 feet), at the Charlevoix Municipal Airport, Charlevoix, Michigan.
The pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions and an IFR flight plan was filed.
The flight originated from Pontiac, Michigan, at 1500 est.
The pilot reported that during the landing roll, the "–aircraft veered right due to too much right aileron into right crosswind.
I neutralized aileron and steered to left with rudder.
Wind gust and right crosswind lifted right wing and aircraft veered left, hit ice and slid into left snow bank while moving in forward direction."
The pilot reported the left propeller, left main gear, and left flap contacted the snow bank.
The pilot reported the winds were from 330 degrees at 12 knots, gusting to 17 knots, during the landing.
A weather observation taken at the Charlevoix Municipal Airport, 6 minutes after the accident, reported the winds were from 320 degrees at 9 knots.
An inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration, Grand Rapids, Michigan, Flight Standards District Office, inspected the runway after the accident.
He reported the center of the runway was clear, however, there were patches of ice along the left side of the runway.
He reported that the snow along the sides of the runway was high enough so that only the tops of the runway lights were visible.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
