The winds were reported as being from the west, about 20 knots. The pilot elected to land on 
runway 01 instead of runway 31 because it was longer.  She aborted the first landing attempt 
because she was too high.  On the second landing attempt, the airplane floated down the 
runway, and the pilot had difficulty getting it on the ground.  Once on the ground, she did not 
have sufficient runway remaining to abort the landing successfully.  She pumped the brakes as 
hard as she could, but could not stop the airplane from going off the end of the 5,000-foot-
long, 100-foot- wide asphalt runway.  The airplane traveled down a steep embankment, and 
flipped over.
The pilot's failure to attain the proper touchdown point.  A factor was the crosswind
On June 1, 2002, at 1300 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 182Q, N97996, was substantially 
damaged during a landing at Rutland State Airport (RUT), Rutland, Vermont.  The certificated 
private pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that 
originated at Burlington International Airport (BTV), Burlington, Vermont, at 1200.  No flight 
plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that she was originally headed for North Hampton, 
Massachusetts.  While en route, she encountered moderate turbulence and haze, and elected to 
land at Rutland Airport.  As she approached Rutland, she obtained wind information on three 
different occasions. Winds at the airport were reported as being from 270 to 280 degrees, 
about 20 knots. 
The pilot elected to land on runway 01 instead of runway 31 because it was longer, and there 
were no trees on the end. She aborted the first landing attempt, because she was too high.  On 
the second landing attempt, the pilot made a crosswind landing.  Once on the ground, she 
began pumping the brakes, but couldn't stop the airplane from going off the end of the runway.  
The airplane traveled down a steep embankment and flipped over.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector interviewed the pilot over the telephone.  
According to the inspector, the pilot said that she floated down the runway, and had difficulty 
getting the airplane on the ground.  Once on the ground, she did not have enough distance to 
abort the landing safely.
An FAA inspector performed an examination of the airplane on June 3, 2002.  According to the 
inspector, the airplane sustained damage to both wings, the firewall was wrinkled, both wing 
struts were bent, and both propeller blades were damaged.
The pilot reported a total of 165 flight hours, of which, 47 hours were in make and model.  The 
pilot also reported that there were no mechanical deficiencies.
Runway 01 was a 5,000-foot-long by 100-foot-wide asphalt runway.
Weather at Rutland Airport, at 1315, included winds from 260 degrees at 10 knots gusting to 23 
knots, visibility 10 statute miles, and scattered clouds at 8,000 feet.
