During a touch and go landing, the pilot initiated a slight right turn to avoid striking a bird, and 
at which time, a wind gust pushed the airplane to the right.  The pilot reduced engine power, 
aborted the takeoff, and the airplane veered off the right side of the runway.  Subsequently, the 
right wing struck a tree, the airplane pivoted around the tree, and then the left wing contacted 
the ground.  The pilot stated the wind was from the west-southwest and gusting.
the pilot's failure maintain directional control of the airplane during a touch and go landing 
which resulted in a collision with trees.  A contributing factor was the gusting wind conditions.
On June 1, 2002, approximately 1940 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 172E single-engine 
airplane, N364SR, was substantially damaged after it struck a tree while executing touch and 
go landings at the Navajo Dam Airport, Navajo State Park, New Mexico.  The student pilot, sole 
occupant and registered owner of the airplane, was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91 solo instructional flight.  The flight departed the Four Corners Regional Airport, 
Farmington, New Mexico, at 1838. 
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot 
stated that he was performing touch and go landings to runway 24.  After the second touch and 
go landing, the pilot increased engine power to depart.  The pilot initiated a slight right turn to 
avoid striking a bird, and at that time, a wind gust pushed the airplane to the right.  The pilot 
reduced engine power, aborted the takeoff, and the airplane veered off the right side of the 
runway.  Subsequently, the right wing struck a tree, the airplane pivoted around the tree, and 
then the left wing contacted the ground.  The outboard 3 feet section of the left wing was 
structurally damaged.  The pilot stated the wind was from the west-southwest and gusting.
