Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Hayti, SD
Accident Number:
CEN11FA437
Date & Time:
07/02/2011, 2136 CDT 
Registration:
N711AT
Aircraft:
AMERICAN CHAMPION AIRCRAFT 
7GCBC
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Low altitude operation/event
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane collided with power lines while the pilot was intentionally flying at a low altitude. 
According to recovered GPS data, the majority of the accident flight was flown at less than 200 
feet above ground level (agl). The final minute of recorded GPS data showed the airplane in a 
descending right turn to an easterly heading at a descent rate of 90 to 100 feet per minute and 
an average ground speed of 110 knots. The final data point was at an altitude of 50 feet agl as 
the airplane crossed over the road where the power lines were located. A postaccident 
examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that 
would have precluded normal operation. One of the propeller blades had indentations along its 
leading edge that had the same diameter and profile as the power lines found entangled with 
the airframe.
The airplane was equipped with tandem seating intended for two individuals. The pilot was 
found in the front seat, and two 11-year-old children occupied the rear seat. Although the rear 
seat could accommodate two smaller individuals, it was only equipped with one restraint, and 
it could not be determined if both children were sharing the restraint at the time of the 
accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's decision to attempt low-altitude flight and his failure to maintain adequate 
clearance from power lines.
Findings
Aircraft
Altitude - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 7CEN11FA437
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 2, 2011, at 2136 central daylight time, an American Champion Aircraft model 7GCBC, 
N711AT, was substantially damaged when it struck power lines and terrain while maneuvering 
at a low altitude near Hayti, South Dakota. The pilot and his two passengers were fatally 
injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the private pilot under the provisions 
of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 without a flight plan. Day visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local area flight that departed from the pilot's private airstrip 
located near Bryant, South Dakota, at 2126.
There were no eyewitnesses to the accident. According to the local power company, a 
postaccident review of their load meters indicated that there was a power interruption along 
448th Avenue at 2136. The airplane wreckage was subsequently located in a vacant field, 
immediately east of 448th Avenue, by local residents who reported the accident at 2158. There 
were two power lines found entangled with the wreckage.
A global positioning system (GPS) handheld device was found at the accident site. The 
downloaded GPS data indicated that the accident flight was 10 minutes 49 seconds in duration. 
After departure, the airplane maneuvered at various headings and altitudes. A majority of the 
accident flight was completed at less than 200 feet above the ground. The final 60 seconds of 
recorded data showed the airplane in a descending right turn to an easterly heading, at a 
descent rate of 90 to 100 feet per minute and an average ground speed of 110 knots (127 mph). 
The final data point was recorded at 2136:44, at an altitude of 50 feet above ground level, as the 
airplane crossed over 448th Avenue on an easterly heading.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the pilot, age 45, held a private 
pilot certificate with a single engine land airplane rating. His last aviation medical examination 
was completed on September 30, 2008, when he was issued a third-class medical certificate 
with no limitations or restrictions. A search of FAA records showed no previous accidents, 
incidents, or enforcement proceedings.
The most recent pilot logbook entry was dated August 22, 2009. At that time, the pilot had 
accumulated 184.2 hours total flight time. The logbook indicated that all of his flight 
experience had been completed in single-engine land airplanes. The first flight in the accident 
airplane was dated July 25, 2008. The pilot's handheld GPS contained a log of flights 
completed after his final pilot logbook entry.
The pilot's logbook and GPS log times were combined to estimate the pilot's total flight 
experience. As of the accident flight, the pilot had accumulated 206.9 hours total flight time, of 
which 168.1 hours were as pilot-in-command and 38.8 hours were as flight instruction 
received. Based on available information, the pilot had flown 21.4 hours during the past year, 
15.3 hours during the prior 6 months, 13.5 hours during previous 90 days, 4.4 hours during the 
preceding 30 days, and 0.8 hours in the 24 hour period before the accident.
The pilot had not logged any flight instruction since receiving his private pilot license on April 
3, 2006. The logbook did not include any flight training in tailwheel airplanes, or a flight 
instructor endorsement for the operation of tailwheel airplanes. The logbook included four 
Page 3 of 7CEN11FA437
flights in the accident airplane that contained the caption "learning to land" in the remarks 
field. These four flights, dated between July 25, 2008, and August 12, 2008, were the pilot's 
first logged flights in the accident airplane. According to the logbook, all previous flight time 
had been completed in a Cessna model 172C airplane. Although required by federal regulation 
to be completed every 24 calendar months, there was no logbook record of the pilot completing 
a flight review since receiving his pilot license.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was a 2006 American Champion Aircraft model 7GCBC airplane, serial 
number (s/n) 1414-2006. A 180-horsepower Superior Air Parts Inc. model O-360-A3A2 
reciprocating engine, s/n 01E060026, powered the airplane. The airplane was equipped with a 
fixed-pitch, two blade, Sensenich model 76EM8S8-0-58 metal propeller. The airplane was 
equipped with tandem seating for two occupants. The tail wheel-equipped airplane had a 
maximum takeoff weight of 1,950 pounds and was certified for aerobatic flight.
The accident airplane was issued a standard airworthiness certificate on June 2, 2006. The 
airplane hour meter indicated 268.7 hours at the accident site. The airframe and engine had 
accumulated a total service time of 268.7 hours at the time of the accident. The last annual 
inspection was completed on October 22, 2010, at 150 total airframe hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest weather observing station was located at Watertown Regional Airport (ATY), about 
17 miles north-northeast of the accident site. At 2153, the ATY automated surface observing 
system reported: wind 130 degrees at 5 knots, visibility 10 miles, clear sky, temperature 23 
degrees Celsius, dew point 16 degrees Celsius, and an altimeter setting of 30.08 inches of 
mercury.
The United States Naval Observatory reported that the local sunset and end of civil twilight was 
at 2118 and 2154, respectively. The local moonrise and moonset was at 0716 and 2210, 
respectively. The moon phase was a waxing crescent with less than 2 percent visible at the time 
of the accident.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
A postaccident investigation confirmed that all airframe structural and flight control 
components were located at the accident site. The main wreckage was located in a vacant field, 
about 240 feet east of power lines that paralleled the eastern edge of 448th Avenue. There were 
two power lines found entangled with the wreckage; one around the airplane's right main 
landing gear and the other around right wingtip and aileron. The wreckage was inverted and 
facing northwest toward 448th Avenue.
The main wreckage consisted of the entire airframe, flight controls, engine, and propeller. All 
observed structural component failures were consistent with overstress separation. Flight 
control continuity was established between the individual flight control surfaces and their 
respective cockpit controls. The flap position could not be determined due to impact damage. 
The forward part of the cabin, including the instrument panel, was fragmented. The throttle, 
mixture, and carburetor control positions could not be determined because of impact damage.
The engine remained attached to the firewall by the control cables. Internal engine and valve 
train continuity was confirmed as the engine crankshaft was rotated. Compression and suction 
were noted on all cylinders in conjunction with crankshaft rotation. The upper spark plugs 
Page 4 of 7CEN11FA437
were removed and exhibited features consistent with normal engine operation. Both magnetos 
provided spark on all leads when rotated. There were no obstructions between the air filter 
housing and the carburetor inlet. The fuel supply line to the carburetor and the carburetor bowl 
both contained fuel consistent in appearance and odor with 100-low lead aviation fuel. A fuel 
sample was free of any water or particulate contamination. The carburetor inlet screen was free 
of any particulate contamination. Mechanical continuity was confirmed from the engine 
components to their respective cockpit engine controls.
The propeller remained attached to the engine crankshaft. The propeller blade had several 
indentations along its leading edges. Two of these indentations had the same diameter and 
profile as the power lines that were found entangled with the airframe.
The postaccident examination of the airframe, engine, and propeller revealed no evidence of 
mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On July 5, 2011, an autopsy was performed on the pilot at LCM Pathologists, located in Sioux 
Falls, South Dakota. The cause of death for the pilot was attributed to multiple blunt-force 
injuries sustained during the accident.
The FAA's Civil Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI) in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
toxicology tests on samples obtained during the pilot's autopsy. No carbon monoxide, cyanide, 
or ethanol was detected. Bupropion and its metabolite were detected in urine and blood 
samples. Ranitidine was detected in urine and blood samples.
Bupropion, trade name Welbutrin or Zyban, is prescription antidepressant used to treat 
depression; however, it also is prescribed as an aid during smoking and chewing tobacco 
cessation. According to the pilot's wife, about 3 months before the accident, the pilot was 
prescribed bupropion when he quit chewing tobacco. Ranitidine, trade name Zantac, is an over 
the counter medication used to decrease gastric acid production and treat ulcers. The pilot was 
reported to have taken ranitidine on the day of the accident to decrease the potential of 
stomach acid build-up.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The airplane was equipped with tandem seating that was intended for two individuals. The 
pilot was found in the forward position, wearing his seat restraints. The rear seat of the 
accident airplane was occupied by two children: the pilot's son and nephew, both 11 years old. 
Although the rear seat could accommodate two smaller individuals, it was only equipped with 
one restraint. According to first responders, one of the children remained restrained in the rear 
seat after the accident. The investigation was unable to determine if both children were sharing 
the same restraint at the time of the accident.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Low altitude operation/event (Defining event)
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 5 of 7CEN11FA437
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
45
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/30/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/03/2006
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 207 hours (Total, all aircraft), 51 hours (Total, this make and model), 170 hours 
(Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 14 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AMERICAN CHAMPION 
AIRCRAFT
Registration:
N711AT
Model/Series:
7GCBC 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Aerobatic; Normal
Serial Number:
1414-2006
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/22/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1950 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
18 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
219 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Superior
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A3A2
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7CEN11FA437
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ATY, 1749 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
15 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2153 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
12째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
130째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23째C / 16째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Bryant, SD (PVT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Bryant, SD (PVT)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2126 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
44.677222, -97.248056
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew T Fox
Adopted Date:
05/14/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Dan McKinney; Federal Aviation Administration - Rapid City FSDO; Rapid City, SD
Publish Date:
05/14/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=80959
Page 7 of 7CEN11FA437
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
