Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Greenwood, MS
Accident Number:
ERA11LA224
Date & Time:
04/01/2011, 1820 CDT 
Registration:
N146DG
Aircraft:
PIPER PA 46-350P
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Landing area undershoot
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane was climbing through 13,000 feet when the pilot heard a loud "pop" and observed 
a large reduction in manifold pressure. He declared an emergency to an air traffic controller 
and initiated a slow descent to the nearest airport recommended by the controller. The pilot 
asked the controller if there was a mechanic at that airport and the controller stated that there 
was not but that a mechanic was available at another airport. The pilot elected to go to the 
other airport, which was farther away.
The pilot acquired the airport visually but was initially a little high and planned to enter the 
traffic pattern on a downwind leg for the opposite runway; the pilot lowered the landing gear to 
assist in losing altitude. However, the airplane was then low and the airspeed was decreasing. 
The pilot subsequently decided to abandon the downwind approach and land straight-in to the 
runway. The oil pressure gauge indicated zero and the oil warning light illuminated. The pilot 
continued to run the engine until he thought he could reach the runway, and then he shut 
down the engine. He subsequently raised the landing gear as the airplane became low, but the 
airspeed also decreased. He realized that he was not going to reach the runway and lined up 
with a grassy area short of the runway to avoid colliding with the instrument landing system. 
He extended the landing gear and flaps and the airplane touched down and collided with a 
ditch.
A postaccident examination of the engine assembly revealed that the right turbocharger would 
not rotate when actuated by hand. The turbocharger was removed and oil was noted in the 
compressor outlet tubing. Several of the blades were broken and some were bent near the tip in 
the direction opposite of rotation. Metallurgical examination of the right turbocharger revealed 
that the turbine wheel assembly failed due to a fatigue fracture of one of the turbine wheel 
blades, which led to an imbalance of the turbine wheel.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot did not obtain the proper touchdown point as a result of his decision to shut down the 
Page 2 of 7ERA11LA224
engine and to deploy the landing gear and flaps before the landing was assured. Contributing 
to the accident was his decision to overfly a closer suitable airport and the fatigue fracture of a 
turbine blade in the right turbocharger, which led to an imbalance of the turbine wheel and the 
subsequent failure of the turbocharger.
Findings
Aircraft
Descent/approach/glide path - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Turbocharger - Failure (Factor)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 7ERA11LA224
Factual Information
On April 1, 2011, at 1820 central daylight time, a Piper PA-46-350P, N146DG, registered to 
Fountain Blue Management Services LLC, incurred substantial damage to both wings during a 
precautionary landing at Greenwood Le-Fore Airport (GWO), Greenwood, Mississippi, 
following a partial loss of engine power during climb to cruise. The certificated airline 
transport pilot and passenger were not injured. The personal flight was conducted under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and an instrument rules flight plan was filed for the planned flight to Lakefront 
Airport (NEW), New Orleans, Louisiana. The flight originated from Memphis International 
Airport (MEM), Memphis, Tennessee at 1720.
The pilot reported that while climbing through 13,000 feet above ground level, he heard a loud 
"pop" and observing a large reduction in manifold pressure. The pilot decided to make a 
precautionary landing, declared an emergency to the air traffic control (ATC) controller, and 
initiated a slow descent to the nearest suitable airport recommend by ATC. The pilot asked the 
controller if there was a mechanic at that airport, and the controller stated no. The controller 
informed the pilot that GWO had a control tower and a mechanic. The pilot then decided to 
divert to GSO, which was further than the original alternate airport.
He obtained an amended clearance from ATC for GWO and continued his descent to avoid a 
cloud layer. The passenger visually identified GWO, but they were a "little high" and the pilot 
planned on flying a downwind leg to final approach for runway 18; however, the oil pressure 
was low and decreasing rapidly, so the pilot decided to land straight ahead on runway 18. He 
lowered the landing gear to assist in losing altitude and the oil pressure gauge indicated "0" 
with the oil warning light illuminated. The pilot continued to run the engine until he thought 
he could make the runway, and then he shut the engine down and completed the emergency 
landing checklist. He raised the landing gear, but the airspeed decreased. He lined up with a 
grassy area prior to the runway to avoid the instrument landing system and then extended the 
landing gear and flaps. The airplane touched down hard and collided with a ditch collapsing 
the nose landing gear.
Review of the aircraft logbooks revealed the last annual inspection was conducted on 
September 13, 2010, at a total time of 3358.8 hours. The total time on the airframe at the 
accident site was 3513.0 hours. The total time since engine overhaul was 1326.6 hours. 
According to Hartzell Engine Technologies, the turbochargers are to be overhauled at engine 
overhaul or 12 years(whichever comes first). Information obtained from the information data 
tag indicated the right turbocharger was assembled in May 1988. Both turbochargers were 
removed and overhauled on March 12, 2008, at an airframe time of 2,510.3 hours.  The left 
turbocharger had been recently installed on March 30, 2011. The total time on the right 
turbocharger since the overhaul was 1,002.7 hours.
Examination of the crash site revealed the airplane collided with the ground with the landing 
gear in the extended position. Three ground scars were present on the ground extending about 
300 feet to a drainage ditch. The ground scars continued past the drainage ditch for 615 feet 
until the airplane came to a complete stop.
The airplane was recovered to a hangar and supported on an externally braced main landing 
gear jack under the engine case. The engine cowlings had been removed and the nose landing 
gear actuator separated from the mount assembly. The propeller assembly remained attached 
Page 4 of 7ERA11LA224
to the propeller crankshaft flange. The propeller spinner was not damaged. All three propeller 
blades remained attached to the propeller hub. Two of the three propeller blades were not 
damaged. The third propeller blade was separated about 6 inches outboard of the propeller de-
icing boot.
The main cabin area was not damaged. All airframe control surfaces were secure and movable 
through full travel using the cockpit controls. Continuity of the flight controls was confirmed 
aft to all flight control surfaces. The flaps and landing gear were down and the pitch trim was 
full nose up. Cockpit controls corresponded with the positions of the gear and flaps as well as 
the primary and secondary control surfaces. The left and right fuel caps were secure with a 
tight seal and fuel was present in both fuel tanks.
 The right wing remained attached at the fuselage. The main spar was twisted and the right 
wing exhibited diagonal wrinkling of the upper and lower leading edge wing skins and in the 
wheel well along the aft spar. The wing fairing had separated from the fuselage structure along 
the wing root. The right aileron and right flap remained attached at all hinge points. The flaps 
were not extended. The right main landing gear was extended and canted inboard and aft 
about 6 to 8 degrees.
The empennage, vertical fin, rudder, horizontal stabilizers, and elevators were not damaged.
The left wing remained attached at the fuselage. The lower section of the left main landing gear 
was extended and bent aft about 10 to 15 degrees. The upper section of the strut was secured to 
the attach points, but had twisted the main spar, which exhibited diagonal wrinkling of the 
upper and lower leading edge wing skins. The aft landing gear attach point was displaced 
upward resulting in buckling of the aft wing spar structure along the trailing edge and 
wrinkling of the wing skin. The wing fairing had separated from the fuselage structure along 
the wing root. The left aileron and right flap remained attached at all hinge points. 
Examination of the engine revealed the engine was secure in its mounts and displayed no 
external indication of over temperature or catastrophic failure. Both magnetos were attached 
and not tested. All valve covers and sparkplugs were removed to facilitate engine rotation and 
valve train inspection. The engine was rotated by hand from the propeller. Suction and 
compression was observed on all cylinders, and drive train continuity was confirmed. Oil was 
noted on removed engine cowling pieces in the vicinity of the right turbo charger. The ducting 
to both turbochargers had been removed. The left turbocharger was intact and rotated when 
the blades were actuated by hand. The right turbo charger would not rotate when actuated by 
hand. Examination of the turbocharger revealed the shaft was displaced from the center on the 
turbine side. The turbocharger was removed and oil was noted in the compressor outlet tubing. 
Several of the blades were broken and some were bent near the tip in the direction opposite of 
rotation. Oil was leaking in the hot section and in the compressor section into the intake of the 
engine. The turbine side showed black deposits on the inlet case side as well as the turbine 
blades. The turbocharger was forwarded to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for further 
examination. The examination revealed the turbine wheel assembly failed due to the fatigue 
fracture of one of the turbine wheel blades, which led to an imbalance of the turbine wheel.
All cylinders were bore scoped. The cylinders displayed normal combustion deposits and were 
wet with oil discharged from the right turbocharger.  The top spark plugs were wet with oil and 
exhibited color consistent with a rich mixture when compared to the Champion Spark Plug, 
Check-A-Plug wear chart.  The oil filter was removed and cut open for examination. No metal 
Page 5 of 7ERA11LA224
or other contaminates were noted in the filter. The propeller governor was removed and no 
metal was noted in the gasket screen.
The fuel distribution manifold was found safety wired with lead seals. Disassembly of the 
manifold found no cut off spring was installed. The diaphragm was intact and free to move. A 
trace amount of fuel was found in the manifold. The fuel injector nozzles were removed and 
were free of blockage. The fuel injector servo was separated at its mount and was not tested.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (partial)
Approach
Engine shutdown
Landing
Landing area undershoot (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/18/2011
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/07/2011
Flight Time:
8220 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2902 hours (Total, this make and model), 6461 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 112 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 41 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7ERA11LA224
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N146DG
Model/Series:
PA 46-350P 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
46-36066
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/14/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
154 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3513 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540 SER
Registered Owner:
FOUNTAINBLEAU 
MANAGEMENT SERVICES LLC
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
Allan R. Garner
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
GWO, 162 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1853 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.86 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Memphis, TN (MEM)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
New Orleans, LA (NEW)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1720 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Greenwood-Leflore Airport (GWO)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
162 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6503 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Straight-in
Page 7 of 7ERA11LA224
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.497222, -90.091111 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Carrol A Smith
Adopted Date:
02/23/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Jacob H Corbett; FAA Jackson FSDO; Jackson, MS
John B Butler; Textron Lycoming; Arlington, TX
Michael C MC Clure; Piper Aircraft Inc.; Duncanville, TX
Tom M McCreary; Hartzell; Cape Coral, FL
Publish Date:
02/23/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=78743
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
