Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Harrison, AR
Accident Number:
CEN14FA337
Date & Time:
07/02/2014, 0810 CDT 
Registration:
N7762Y
Aircraft:
PIPER PA30
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel contamination
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
An airport security camera captured the pilot getting into the airplane, starting the engines, 
and taxiing for takeoff. No preflight inspection was recorded. About 2 minutes later, the 
camera and witnesses saw the airplane take off and immediately enter a gradual left turn about 
400 feet above the ground. The bank angle increased to about 90 degrees before the airplane™s 
right wing dropped, and the airplane disappeared from view. Examination of the left engine 
revealed water in the fuel flow divider, fuel injectors, engine-driven fuel pump, and selector 
valve fuel bowl. A sample taken from the fuel truck was tested and contained no water or 
contaminants. It is likely that, due to water in the fuel, the left engine lost power, which 
resulted in the airplane turning to the left. The pilot did not quickly and appropriately 
configure the airplane for one-engine flight, which resulted in a loss of control.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's loss of control of the airplane during initial climb because he failed to correctly 
compensate for the loss of power in the left engine. Contributing to the accident was water 
contamination in the fuel and the lack of an adequate preflight inspection by the pilot.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Fuel - Fluid condition (Factor)
Personnel issues
Lack of action - Pilot (Cause)
Preflight inspection - Pilot (Factor)
Page 2 of 7CEN14FA337
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 2, 2014, about 0810 central daylight time, a Piper PA-30 airplane, N7762Y, impacted 
terrain shortly after takeoff from the Boone County Airport (KHRO), Harrison, Arkansas. The 
pilot, the sole occupant on board, was seriously injured. The airplane was destroyed. The 
airplane was being operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident, and no flight plan had been filed. The flight was originating at the time of the 
accident, and was en route to an unknown refueling stop. Its final destination was Salem, 
Oregon.
An airport security camera captured the pilot getting in the airplane, starting the engines, and 
taxiing away for takeoff. No preflight inspection was recorded. About two minutes later, the 
airplane took off. The accident was not captured. According to witnesses, however, the airplane 
lifted off runway 36 before reaching the 1,000-foot runway marker. It immediately entered a 
gradual left turn at about 400 feet. The bank angle increased to about 90° before the airplane 
dropped off on its right wing and disappeared from view. The point of impact was about 1,100 
feet west of the runway.
PERSONNEL (CREW) INFORMATION
According to FAA documents, the pilot, age 66, held an Airline Transport Pilot certificate with 
an Airplane Multiengine Land rating, and Commercial privileges with Airplane Single-Engine 
Land and Sea ratings. He also held a Flight Instructor certificate with an Airplane Single-
Engine rating. His Second Class Airman Medical certificate, dated June 25, 2014, contained the 
restriction, "Must wear corrective lenses for near and distant vision." When the pilot applied 
for this medical certification, he estimated his total flight time to be 11,500 hours. His logbook 
was never located. The pilot also held a Mechanic certificate with Airframe and Powerplant 
(A&P) ratings. He did not hold an Inspector Authorization (IA). There were no documents to 
indicate that he was current as either a pilot or as a mechanic.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N7762Y (serial number 30-849), a model PA-30, was manufactured by the Piper Aircraft 
Corporation in 1965. It was powered by two Lycoming IO-320-B1A engines (serial number L-
1833-55A, left; L-1826-55A, right), each rated at 160 horsepower, driving two Hartzell 2-blade, 
all-metal, constant speed, full-feathering propellers (model number HC-E2YL-2).
According to a single maintenance page found in the wreckage, both engines received 100-hour 
inspections on July 1, 2014, at 3,328.11 and 3328.42 total operating hours, respectively, and 
had accrued 1,314 hours since major overhaul. On the same date, the airframe received an 
annual inspection at a tachometer time of 3,328.11 hours. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The following METAR (Meteorological Terminal Aviation Routine Weather Report or 
Page 3 of 7CEN14FA337
Meteorological Aerodrome Report) was obtained from the KHRO Automated Surface 
Observing Systems (ASOS) at 0753:
Wind, 320 degrees at 6 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; sky condition, clear; temperature 21 
degrees Celsius (C.); dew point, 18 degrees C.; altimeter setting, 30.06 inches of mercury.
AERODROME INFORMATION
Boone County Airport (KHMO) is located 3 miles northwest of Harrison, Arkansas, at 
coordinates 36°15'41" North latitude, and 093°09'17" West longitude. It is situated at an 
elevation of 1,365 feet msl. It is equipped with one runway: 18-36, 6,161 feet x 150 feet, asphalt. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was located about 1,100 feet west of the airport, near the edge of the perimeter 
fence, at geographical coordinates 36°15'37.95 North latitude, and 93°9'25.67 West longitude. 
There was a 20-foot ground scar that extended to the right wing. At the beginning of this 
ground scar was the separated right wing tip. The fuselage was split into two sections: the 
forward section was aligned on a magnetic heading of 320 degrees, and aft section was aligned 
on a magnetic heading of 020 degrees. The cabin roof had been peeled back by first responders 
to extricate the pilot. The left horizontal stabilizer and elevator were bent up. The right wing 
was severed about midpoint.
Both propellers remained attached to their engines. Blade A (descending) of the left propeller 
was bent aft about 30 degrees, and blade B (ascending) was straight, consistent with little or no 
rotation at impact. Blade A (descending) of the right propeller was twisted and bent aft about 
80 degrees, and blade B (ascending) was twisted and bent forward. Both blades bore 90 degree 
striations on the cambered surfaces, consistent with high rpm at impact. Both spinners were 
unremarkable.
Examination of the cockpit revealed the throttles, propeller and mixture controls were full 
forward, consistent with a takeoff setting. The landing gear control was in the DOWN position. 
The left fuel selector was on the left main fuel tank, and the right fuel selector was between the 
right main and right auxiliary fuel tanks. Both boost pumps were OFF. The flap jackscrew 
exposed 22 threads. According to the Piper Aircraft Corporations, this would equate to 16° 
flaps down, sometimes used as a takeoff setting, particularly for short or soft fields.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
According to the pilot's son, his father had sustained a severe head injury and numerous 
fractures and internal organ damage.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
After the on-scene examination was completed, the airplane was transported to a nearby 
hangar where both engines were disassembled and examined. No anomalies were found with 
the right engine. Examination of the left engine, however, disclosed water in the fuel flow 
Page 4 of 7CEN14FA337
divider, fuel injectors, engine-driven fuel pump, and selector valve fuel bowl. A fuel sample 
taken from the servicing fuel truck was tested and contained no water or contaminants.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the airplane was first registered to the pilot in April 1992. At some 
later time, the airplane was seized by the federal government. FAA sent the pilot two letters, 
the first dated November 1, 2011, and the second dated February 2, 2012, requiring that the 
airplane be re-registered in accordance with 14 CFR Part 14. This was never done and no reply 
was received. On March 1, 2011, the airplane was purchased by another individual at a seized 
property auction. No logbooks accompanied the purchase. On July 8, 2011, application for 
registering the airplane as N7762Y, LLC was made. The airplane was kept in the new owner's 
hangar at his airstrip. The new owner stated he never flew the airplane. On June 1, 2014, after 
buying back the airplane, the accident pilot submitted an application for registration under his 
name.
On July 1, 2014, the pilot flew the airplane to KHRO. He enlisted the services of a local pilot, 
regarded as an expert on the Piper PA-30 Twin Comanche, to fly with him. This pilot said the 
accident pilot flew the airplane well. He cautioned him to sump his fuel tanks and to open the 
fuel drains before each and every flight because the fuel caps were susceptible to allowing water 
to get into the fuel tanks.
In the wreckage, a paper copy of a Special Airworthiness Certificate was recovered. According 
to FAA inspectors, the Special Airworthiness Certificate was issued by an FAA office (OKA-
MIDO-40) that didn't exist, and was sign by an FAA inspector (Marvin Berly) who didn't exist.
The maintenance logbooks were not in the airplane. However, a single piece of paper bearing 
entries for 100-hour engine inspections and an airframe annual inspection was recovered from 
the wreckage. The inspections were dated July 1, 2014, and both signed by the pilot, who was 
also a licensed A&P mechanic. According to the FAA inspectors, an airframe annual inspection 
can only be signed off by an IA.
The fixed base operator said the airplane had been parked on his ramp and neither he nor his 
employees observe the pilot working on the airplane. Additionally, the security camera did not 
capture such activity.
The wreckage was released to the Boone County Airport manager on July 4, 2014.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Fuel contamination (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 5 of 7CEN14FA337
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
66
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/25/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 11500 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N7762Y
Model/Series:
PA30 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
30-849
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3725 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-320-B1A
Registered Owner:
George A. Atiyeh
Rated Power:
160 hp
Operator:
George A. Atiyeh
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7CEN14FA337
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KHRO, 1365 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0753 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
320°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.06 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Harrison, AR (HRO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0810 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Boone County (HRO)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1365 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6161 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
36.000000, -93.000000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
11/17/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Scott Olson; FAA Little Rock FSDO; Little Rock, AR
Lynn Braswell`; FAA Little Rock FSDO; Little Rock, AR
John Butler; Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
11/17/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89595
Page 7 of 7CEN14FA337
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
