According to the private pilot, as he applied braking action during rollout, the airplane began 
to veer left. Although he added right rudder to correct the problem, he was not able to stop the 
airplane from veering to the left. The right main landing gear collapsed and the airplane spun 
around approximately 180 degrees, coming to rest on the runway surface. Examination of the 
airplane revealed a significant amount of side load had occurred, and both the left and right 
main landing gears collapsed to the left.  The right wing was damaged when the landing gear 
collapsed. There were several tire marks on the runway that terminated at the point where the 
airplane rested. The pilot did not report a mechanical problem with the airplane prior to and 
during the accident sequence of events.
Pilot in command failed to maintain directional control of the airplane during the landing roll 
that resulted in a ground loop and the overload failure of the right main landing gear.
On August 1, 2002, at 1347 eastern daylight tine a Piper PA-32R-301, N957T, registered to B & 
B Contracting and operated by a private pilot, right main landing gear collapsed while taxiing 
after landing at Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The personal 
flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with an instrument flight plan filed. 
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane was substantially 
damaged, and the private pilot and passenger were not injured. The flight departed Naples, 
Florida, at 1300 on August 1, 2001. 
According to the private pilot, as he applied braking action during rollout after landing the 
airplane began to veer left. Although the pilot added right rudder to correct the problem, he 
was not able to stop the airplane from veering to the left. The right main landing gear collapsed 
and the airplane spun around approximately 180 degrees, coming to rest on the runway surface 
with a heading of 130 degrees.
Examination of the airplane revealed a significant amount of side load had occurred, and both 
the left and right main landing gear collapsed to the left as a result. The right wing was 
damaged when the landing gear collapsed. There were several tire marks on the runway that 
terminated at the point where the airplane rested. The pilot did not report a mechanical 
problem with the airplane prior to and during the accident sequence of events.  The recorded 
winds were variable at three knots. 
