The pilot reported that during the landing roll on a remote gravel airstrip, he was unable to 
maintain directional control, and decided to abort the landing.  Shortly after applying full 
power and becoming airborne, he made a left turn to avoid a cabin, and the main landing gear 
encountered willows, pulling the airplane further to the left.  The pilot said he elected to crash 
the airplane between two trees instead of attempting to turn away or climb over them.  He 
subsequently reduced power and hit the trees.  The airplane received substantial damage to the 
wings, fuselage and empennage.  The pilot said there were no preimpact mechanical anomalies 
with the airplane.
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during the landing roll, which 
precipitated an aborted landing, and subsequent collision with trees.
On August 1, 2002, about 1600 Alaska daylight time, a tundra-tire equipped Bellanca 8GCBC 
airplane, N53828, sustained substantial damage during an aborted landing when it collided 
with terrain at a remote gravel airstrip 45 miles north-northwest of Fairbanks, Alaska.  The 
airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR 
Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The certificated private pilot, and the sole passenger, 
were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The 
flight originated at the Fairbanks International Airport, Fairbanks, about 1430.
In a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board, the pilot reported that the 
airplane had just touched down on the Beaver Creek airstrip when the nose of the airplane 
went to the right, and then pulled hard to the left.  He elected to abort the landing, and soon 
after becoming airborne, made a left turn to avoid a cabin at the end of the airstrip.  During the 
left turn the airplane's landing gear collided with willows, which pulled the airplane further to 
the left.  The airplane then bounced in a gravel stream bed, but kept flying.  The pilot said he 
elected to aim between two trees and make a controlled crash at low speed instead of 
attempting to turn away from the trees or attempt to climb over them.  He subsequently 
reduced power and collided with the trees, resulting in substantial damage to the wings, 
fuselage and empennage.
The pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
