The helicopter was en route to a gas production platform in the Gulf of Mexico when the 
helicopter's engine steadily lost power and the 2,500-hour commercial pilot initiated an 
autorotation to the water.  During touch down, a main rotor blade struck the tail boom, 
separating a section of the tail rotor drive shaft and damaging both vertical winglets.  No 
engine discrepancies or anomalies were noted with the engine during the investigation.
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
On August 1, 2002, at 1540 central daylight time, a Bell 206L-1 helicopter, N25GH, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing to the water following a loss of engine power 
near East Cameron 190, Gulf of Mexico.  The helicopter was registered to Go Helicopters Inc. 
and operated by Go Helitrans of Manvel, Texas.  The commercial pilot and three passengers 
were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company visual flight rules 
(VFR) flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 on-demand air taxi 
flight.  The flight originated at West Cameron 237, Gulf of Mexico, at 1530, and was en route to 
Vermillon 410, Gulf of Mexico.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB form 6120.1/2), the operator 
reported that en route to Vermillon 410, an offs-shore platform, while at 1,500 feet msl, the 
helicopter's engine steadily lost power until the 2,500-hour pilot initiated an autorotation.  
During the touch down on the water, a main rotor blade struck the tail boom separating a 
section of the tail rotor drive shaft, and damaging both vertical winglets.  The pilot and 
passengers exited the helicopter and was picked up by a crew boat.  The helicopter was loaded 
onto a barge and transported to shore, then to the operator's location in Manvel, Texas.
The helicopter's engine had accumulated a total time of 17,982.4 hours, with 4.4 hours since 
the last 100-hour inspection that was performed on July 30, 2002.
Examination of the fuel system, by FAA inspectors, revealed some debris in the main fuel tanks 
and discolored fuel in the line that goes to the fuel filter.  Clear fuel was found in the line that 
goes from the fuel filter to the fuel control.  The fuel control and power turbine governor were 
removed for further examination.  
On September 18, 2002, at the manufacturer's facilities in South Bend, Indiana, the fuel 
control and power turbine governor were tested for run-as-received (RAR), as requested by the 
NTSB IIC.  Three representatives from Honeywell and an Air Safety Inspector from the FAA's 
South Bend FSDO witnessed the examination.  Based on the testing, Honeywell found no 
anomalies that would result in a loss of power, flameout, or sudden overspeed condition.
No other engine discrepancies or anomalies were noted with the engine or airframe during the 
investigation.
