The amateur built airplane collided with trees during the climb phase of an aborted landing.  
The pilot reported that while on short final the airplane seemed to be traveling faster than 
normal although the airspeed indicator was indicating a normal approach speed of about 45 
mph.  He stated the airplane floated during the landing.  He reported that he applied the 
brakes when the main gear touched down, but the airplane still seemed to be going too fast.  He 
stated that he decided to go around when he reached a point approximately two-thirds the way 
down the 650 foot long landing area.  The pilot reported he added full power, but was unable to 
gain sufficient altitude to clear trees at the end of the landing area.  The airplane contacted the 
trees at an estimated altitude of about 20 feet.  The pilot reported the landing area was a 
combination of a gravel driveway and grass area.  He stated the normal landing distance for the 
airplane is about 250 feet.  The normal takeoff distance with two adults and at gross weight is 
about 160 feet.  The landing was being made to the west and the pilot reported the local winds 
were from the west southwest at 5 to 8 knots.
The pilot's delay in aborting the landing.  A contributing factor was the excessive airspeed.
On August 1, 2002, at 1300 central daylight time, an amateur built Air Cam, N1029G, collided 
with trees during the climb phase of an aborted landing on private property near the town of 
Ozawkie, Kansas.  The private pilot and his passenger were not injured.  The airplane was 
substantially damaged.  The Title 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological 
conditions without a flight plan.  The flight originated from Topeka, Kansas, at 1030.
The pilot reported that while on short final the airplane seemed to be traveling faster than 
normal.  He stated that the airspeed indicator was indicating about 45 mph which is a normal 
approach speed.  He stated the airplane floated during the landing.  He reported that he 
applied the brakes when the main gear touched down, but the airplane still seemed to be going 
too fast.  He stated that he decided to go around when he reached a point approximately two-
thirds the way down the 650 foot long landing area.  The pilot reported he added full power, 
but was unable to gain sufficient altitude to clear trees at the end of the landing area.  The 
airplane contacted the trees at an estimated altitude of about 20 feet.
The pilot reported the landing area was a combination of a gravel driveway and grass area.  He 
stated the normal landing distance for the airplane is about 250 feet.  The normal takeoff 
distance with two adults and at gross weight is about 160 feet.
The landing was being made to the west and the pilot reported the local winds were from the 
west southwest at 5 to 8 knots.
