Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Ridgefield, CT
Accident Number:
ERA12LA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2011, 1245 EDT 
Registration:
N231EB
Aircraft:
MOONEY AIRCRAFT CORP. M20K
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel starvation
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to the pilot, he completed a preflight inspection, which included checking the fuel 
quantity and conducting an engine run-up, without any discrepancies noted. The airplane took 
off without incident; however, at about 1,100 feet mean sea level, when the pilot made a right 
crosswind turn, the engine lost total power. The pilot unsuccessfully attempted to restart the 
engine and subsequently completed a forced landing to a residential area. Postaccident 
examination of the airplane did not reveal any mechanical malfunctions that would have 
precluded normal operation. The fuel selector was observed positioned to the left fuel tank, 
which did not contain any fuel. The right fuel tank contained about 8 gallons of fuel. The fuel 
tanks were intact and there was no evidence of a fuel spill at the accident site.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s improper fuel management, which resulted in a total loss of engine power due to 
fuel starvation.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid level (Cause)
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Personnel issues
Fuel planning - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6ERA12LA001
Factual Information
On October 1, 2011, about 1245 eastern daylight time, a Mooney M20K, N231EB, operated by a 
commercial pilot, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine 
power near Ridgefield, Connecticut. The certificated commercial pilot was seriously injured. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal 
flight which originated at Danbury Municipal Airport (DXR), Danbury, Connecticut, just prior 
to the accident. The flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. 
According to the pilot, he completed a preflight inspection, which included checking the fuel 
for contamination, and conducting an engine run-up, without any discrepancies noted. He 
stated that both fuel gauges indicated "about half," which corresponded with 14 to 19 gallons in 
each side, and he also visually confirmed the fuel quantity in each tank.
The engine started after two attempts and the pilot confirmed that all engine indications were 
normal prior to takeoff. The airplane took off without incident; however, at approximately 
1,100 feet mean sea level, when the pilot made a right crosswind turn, the engine lost total 
power. The pilot switched fuel tanks, was unable to restart the engine and looked for a place to 
land. The pilot stated he could not recall his exact actions prior to the forced landing; however, 
he thought that he turned the fuel selector to the "OFF" position, leaned the mixture, and 
turned the master and the ignition switches off. The airplane subsequently struck trees during 
a forced landing to a residential area. The airplane came to rest inverted, which resulted in 
substantial damage to the fuselage, wings, and empennage. 
First responders stated that a "small amount of fuel," approximately one quart, exited from the 
left fuel tank. In addition, a first responder indicated that when he arrived at the accident site, 
he turned the fuel selector from the left tank position to the off position.
A postaccident examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector revealed that the left fuel tank did not contain any fuel and the right fuel tank 
contained about eight gallons of fuel. There was no evidence that the fuel tanks had been 
compromised. In addition, there were no fuel stains on the wings or fuselage and there was no 
smell of fuel at the site. A fuel sample was taken from the right tank with no contamination 
noted. 
The pilot reported 502 hours of total flight time, of which, 145 hours were in the same make 
and model as the accident airplane. He noted that he accumulated 10 flight hours in the same 
make and model of the accident airplane in the past 90 days. 
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 1979, and was registered to the 
pilot in 2007. It was a low-wing, retractable tricycle gear, monoplane, equipped with a 
Continental Motors TSIO-360LB, 210-horsepower engine. The most recent annual inspection 
was completed on February 10, 2011. At the time of the accident, the airplane accumulated 
2,661 hours of total time in service. According to the pilot's operating handbook (POH), the 
fuel flow at maximum continuous horsepower was between 22.5 gallons per hour and 24.2 
gallons per hour. The total fuel capacity was 78.6 gallons, 39.3 gallons in each tank. A total of 3 
gallons of the fuel were unusable, 1.5 gallons in each tank. 
The airplane was last fueled on August 27, 2011. According to the fuel slip, line personnel 
added 12 gallons of fuel to both the left and right fuel tanks, for a total of 24 gallons. The pilot 
Page 3 of 6ERA12LA001
stated that he had the fuel tanks "topped-off" on that day, but the line personnel indicated to 
an FAA inspector that if a full "top-off" is requested, that they write that on the fuel slip. A copy 
of the fuel slip was obtained and "top-off" was not written on the fuel slip. In addition, 
according to an FAA inspector, 94 gallons of fuel had been added to the airplane since June 30, 
2011, and the airplane had been operated approximately 8.1 hours since that time. 
The airplane was equipped with an Electronics International Fuel Flow Instrument that 
retained the fuel quantity in the electronic memory. On October 4, 2011, FAA inspectors 
provided oversight while a mechanic applied power to the airplane. When the FAA inspector 
turned on the master switch, he noted that the fuel flow instrument aural warning activated, 
the fuel low and high/low fuel pressure warning lights were blinking, and the fuel quantity 
read-out was zero. He also noted that when power was applied, he could hear the fuel boost 
pumps operating. 
On November 15, 2011, the engine was examined by two FAA inspectors. The propeller was 
rotated by hand and continuity was confirmed to the cylinders, camshaft, push rods, and the 
accessory drive section of the engine. Both magnetos were removed and disassembled with no 
defects noted. One sparkplug was removed from each cylinder and all were found to be in 
normal condition. The turbocharger was removed and rotated. The main fuel line from the fuel 
pump was removed and no fuel was noted in the line. The fuel lines from the fuel pump to the 
flow divider were removed with no fuel noted in the line. The fuel lines from the flow divider to 
the fuel injectors were removed and a small amount of fuel was noted. The fuel pump was 
removed and no defects were noted with the fuel pump drive shaft or gears. 
The "Engine Power Loss Œ After Liftoff and During Climb" emergency procedure contained in 
POH, stated to:
1.Lower Nose, Establish Best Glide Speed.
2.Fuel Selector Œ Other Tank (Fullest Tank).
3.Throttle Œ Full Forward.
4.Mixture Œ Full Rich.
5.Magneto Switch Œ Both
6.Propeller Œ High RPM.
7.Low Boost Œ On.
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Preflight or dispatch event
Initial climb
Fuel starvation (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 4 of 6ERA12LA001
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/30/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/16/2010
Flight Time:
502 hours (Total, all aircraft), 145 hours (Total, this make and model), 350 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MOONEY AIRCRAFT CORP.
Registration:
N231EB
Model/Series:
M20K 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
25-0190
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/10/2011, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2661 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-360 SER
Registered Owner:
BALDWIN ROBERT A IV
Rated Power:
225 hp
Operator:
BALDWIN ROBERT A IV
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ERA12LA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DXR, 458 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1153 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 1900 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 5500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.67 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Ridgefield, CT (DXR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Ridgefield, CT (DXR)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1240 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Danbury Muncipal Airport (DXR)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
458 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
41.359722, -73.501667 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Luke Schiada
Adopted Date:
11/26/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Pete Lindberg; FAA/FSDO; Windsor Locks, CT
Publish Date:
11/27/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=81957
Page 6 of 6ERA12LA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
