Approximately 4 hours into the flight, while on a long descent to the destination airport, the 
pilot experienced a reduction in engine power. The power reduction continued over a period of 
eight minutes and resulted in a complete loss of engine power. Following the loss of power, the 
pilot's attempts to restore full engine power, which included the application of carburetor heat, 
failed. The pilot selected a nearby paved road for an emergency landing. During the landing roll 
out, the right wing collided with a road sign, and the airplane swerved  into an adjacent ditch 
and nosed over. Examination of the airplane failed to disclose a mechanical problem. Fuel was 
recovered from the fuel system. During the  functional test of the engine, the engine operated 
normally through all power ranges. A review of current weather information revealed that 
weather conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor icing. 
The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons. A factor was conditions were favorable for 
the formation of carburetor ice. 
 On May 1, 1997, at 1100 central daylight time, a Piper PA-28-180, N5778Z, collided with a road 
sign during an emergency landing roll, and nosed over into a ditch five miles west of  
Russellville, Alabama. The personal flight operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 
with a flight plan filed. Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The 
airplane sustained substantial damage; the pilot was not injured. The flight departed Quincy, 
Louisiana, at 0700. 
According to the pilot, approximately four hours into the flight, while on a long descent to 
Muscle Shoals, Alabama, he experienced a reduction in engine power. The power reduction 
continued over a period of eight minutes and resulted in a complete loss of engine power. 
Following the loss of power, the pilot's attempts to restore full engine power, which included 
the application of carburetor heat, failed. The pilot selected a nearby paved road for an 
emergency landing. During the landing roll out, the right wing collided with a road sign, and 
the airplane swerved into an adjacent ditch and nosed over.
During the examination of the airplane approximately twelve gallons of fuel were recovered 
from the fuel system. During the  functional test of the engine, the engine operated normally 
through all power ranges. A review of current weather information revealed that weather 
conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor icing.
