The pilot was departing in a tailwheel equipped airplane on runway 36. He reported that 
during the takeoff roll, there was a left crosswind that varied from a headwind to a tailwind, 
and the tail of the airplane began to swing to the right. The airplane ground looped to the left, 
and ran off the left edge of the runway. The right main landing gear strut collapsed, and the 
right wing struck the ground. The airplane came to rest partially up on its nose and received 
damage to the right landing gear attach point, the right wing, and propeller. At 1550, an 
Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Talkeetna reported the wind was from 245 
degrees at 10 kts. 
the pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions and failure to maintain directional 
control of the airplane.  A factor associated with the accident was: the variable crosswind 
condition. 
 On May 2, 1997, at 1554 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Cessna 180, N74806, crashed 
during takeoff at the Talkeetna Airport, Talkeetna, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as 
a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight when the accident occurred.  The airplane, 
operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage.  The certificated private pilot, and two 
passengers, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
On May 2, 1997, at 1710, the pilot reported in a telephone conversation with the National 
Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), that he was departing 
runway 36 at Talkeetna.  A crosswind from the left varied from a headwind to a tailwind.  
During the takeoff roll, the tail of the airplane began to swing to the right and a gust of wind 
lifted the left wing.  The airplane ground looped to the left and the airplane ran off the left edge 
of the runway.  The right main landing gear strut collapsed and the right wing struck the 
ground.  The airplane came to rest partially up on its nose and received damage to the right 
landing gear attach point, the right wing, and propeller.
At 1550, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) at Talkeetna was reporting in part:  
Wind, 245 degrees (magnetic) at 10 knots; visibility, 60 statute miles; clouds, 4,000 feet 
scattered, 20,000 feet broken; temperature, 55 degrees F; dew point, 29 degrees F; altimeter, 
29.96 inHg.
