The pilot reported he was starting a descent to his destination airport when the engine began to 
lose power.  He said he was unable to restart the engine, and made a forced landing into trees.  
The pilot related he had been flying the airplane with the left fuel tank selected, and he didn't 
recall if he switched to the right tank during the emergency descent.  A passenger seated in the 
right front seat stated the left fuel gauge was indicating empty, and that the right tank fuel 
gauge was indicating full.  He said the fuel selector was on the left tank, and when he told the 
pilot he should switch fuel tanks, the pilot reportedly told him to 'relax.'  The passenger stated 
that the pilot did not switch tanks.  Postaccident inspection disclosed the left fuel tank 
contained an unusable quantity of fuel, and the right tank was full. The airplane's engine was 
removed from the airplane, as well as the electric fuel boost pump.  The engine was started and 
ran on a test stand without any observed mechanical anomalies.  The fuel pump was also tested 
and found functional. 
a loss of engine power resulting from fuel starvation due to the pilot's improper positioning of 
the fuel selector, and the pilot's failure to identify and correct the deficiency during the ensuing 
emergency descent. 
 On May 1, 1997, about 1201 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Cessna U206F airplane, 
N14C, operated by Jay Hawk Air, of Anchorage, Alaska, under 14 CFR Part 135 as an on-
demand air taxi flight, sustained substantial damage following a loss of engine power and 
subsequent forced landing  to an off airport site located about 17 miles southwest of Hope, 
Alaska.  The commercial certificated pilot and one of the three passengers aboard reported 
minor injuries.  The remaining two passengers were not injured.  The flight was returning to 
Merrill Field, Anchorage, from Montague Island, Alaska.  The flight departed Montague Island 
about 1120.
In his written report to the NTSB, the pilot related he was just beginning a cruise descent from 
5,000 feet msl, when the engine "cut out" for one or two seconds.  He said he decided to enrich 
the mixture, because he thought the engine might be running lean because of the descent.  
About a minute later, the engine "...cut out again and then seemed to surge in and out.  At this 
point I commenced with emergency procedures.  I pitched for best glide speed and trimmed 
the plane.  Then I began to look for the best choice of airfields.  At this point, however, I was 
still not sure if the engine had stopped completely."  The pilot's statement notes he recalls 
reaching down to switch the fuel tanks, bringing the mixture to full rich, switching the 
magnetos, and activating the fuel boost pump.  The engine would not restart, but the propeller 
kept windmilling all the way to the ground.
The pilot reported he was attempting to reach an abandoned gasline airstrip (North Gasline), 
but was unable to reach the airstrip, and made a forced landing into spruce trees.  Prior to 
impact, he said he switched the fuel selector to the "OFF" position, and instructed the 
passengers to crack their doors open.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) on May 15, the 
pilot related essentially the same information as in his written statement.  The IIC asked him 
about his fuel management techniques, and the pilot replied he had been flying the airplane all 
of the flight with the fuel selector on the left tank.  He was asked if he remembered switching 
the fuel tank selector to the right tank following the loss of engine power.  He said he  recalled 
reaching down to move the selector, but doesn't actually remember moving it.
The NTSB IIC interviewed the right front seat passenger, Ralph S. Johnson, Yakutat, Alaska, 
via telephone on May 15.  Mr. Johnson was asked if he was familiar with a Cessna 206.  He said 
he was, and that he "flew the bush" quite a bit in Cessna airplanes, and always liked to sit up 
front when he could.  He was asked if he was familiar with where the fuel gauges, the fuel 
selector, and fuel boost pump switches were located.  He said he was, and then accurately 
described their locations.
Mr. Johnson was asked to recount the events of the flight.  He said the flight was uneventful 
until the engine started surging as they begin a descent near Hope.  He said he recalls looking 
at the gas gauges, and seeing the left tank was reading empty.  He said the right tank indicated 
full.  He remembered the pilot working the boost pump switch.  He said he told the pilot, 
"Switch your tanks, man!", and that the pilot responded by saying words to the effect, "just 
relax."  He said the fuel selector was on the left tank, and that the pilot did not switch to the 
right tank.
Postaccident inspection of the accident airplane's fuel tanks disclosed a full right tank, and 
residual fuel, estimated at less than one gallon, in the left tank.
The engine was removed from the airplane and inspected.  It displayed no obvious signs of 
malfunction.  The engine was placed on  a test stand at Sea Air, Inc., on May 30.  The engine 
started and ran without observed malfunction.
The electric boost pump was removed from the airplane and tested.  It performed within the 
factory specified parameters.
No parts of the airplane were retained by the NTSB. 
Parties to the investigation were Jay Hawk Air, and the FAA.
