According to the pilot, it was his first flight in this homebuilt airplane. After taking off, he 
stated there was a 'heaviness' in the left wing that caused him to turn left. After trying to 
correct it, he returned to the departure airport.  He stated he landed fast to combat the left 
turning tendency, and after touchdown, veered off the side of the runway.   The pilot stated he 
had no flight hours in the last 90 days. Witnesses state that after a fast approach, the airplane 
bounced three times on the runway.  On the last bounce, the airplane landed on the nose gear.  
The nose gear collapsed, and the airplane veered off the side of the runway. 
The pilot's failure to correctly recover from a bounced landing leading to the collapse of the 
nose gear.  Factors were the pilot's lack of recent flight time and lack of aircraft familiarity. 
 On May 1, 1997, about 1500 central daylight time, a Eugene Clements Pulsar, N1710E, 
experienced a nose gear collapse during landing on runway 35 at the Indianola Municipal 
Airport, Indianola, Mississippi. The airplane was operated by the owner/builder/pilot under 
the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. A flight plan was not filed for the 
personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The commercial pilot sustained 
minor injuries, and the homebuilt airplane was substantially damaged. The flight originated at 
1455.
This was the maiden flight for the airplane. The pilot reported that he previously had 
several hours of taxi time on the airplane. The pilot reported that the airplane was left wing 
heavy on takeoff.  After climbing to 2,500 feet, it was clear to the pilot that the condition was 
not improving, so he returned to land. The pilot decided to maintain extra speed on landing to 
compensate for the left turning tendency. The pilot stated he attempted to land on the right 
side of the runway, but as he did the airplane veered left and drifted off of the runway.  It 
collided with a runway light and the ground. The airplane came to rest back on the runway. The 
pilot reported that he had zero flight hours within the last 90 days.
A witness reported that the battery was "dead" and the airplane had to be "jump started" 
so the flight could proceed.  He stated the airplane initially banked left on takeoff, but it 
straightened out and realigned with the runway.  After it climbed "fairly high", it returned to 
land at the airport.  He stated the airplane appeared to be "too fast to land". The airplane 
touched down, lifted off, touched down, lifted off, and touched down for the third time.  On the 
last touchdown, the airplane landed on the nose wheel.  The nose wheel collapsed, and the 
airplane veered off the left side of the runway.  After sliding about 80 feet, the airplane came to 
rest on the runway.
Another witness confirmed that the airplane bounced multiple times while landing, then 
landed on the nose gear, collapsing it. The airplane then slid off the left side of the runway.
