During the takeoff roll, the aircraft drifted to the right, and application of left rudder did not 
correct the drift. The aircraft went off the right side of the runway, and the pilot aborted the 
takeoff. With application of left brake the aircraft nosed over in the soft ground. The pilot 
stated he had no mechanical difficulties with the aircraft and that he believed the tail wheel did 
not lock in the center detent during the start of the takeoff roll. 
failure of the tail wheel to lock in the centered detent during the beginning of the takeoff roll, 
which resulted in the pilot being unable to maintain directional control and the aircraft drifting 
off the runway and nosing over in the soft ground. 
 On May 2, 1997, about 1415 eastern daylight time, a Thacker Starduster Too SA300, 
N14525, registered to an individual, nosed over during an aborted takeoff at Lake Wales 
Airport, Lake Wales, Florida, while on a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight from Lake Wales 
to Jacksonville, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight 
plan was filed. The aircraft received substantial damage and the airline transport-rated pilot 
was not injured. The flight was originating at the time of the accident. 
The pilot stated that during takeoff on runway 6, the aircraft started drifting to the right 
while still at low speed. Application of left rudder did not correct the drift and the right main 
landing gear tire went off the edge of the runway. The aircraft was traveling at about 30 knots 
at this time. The aircraft continued to drift right and he aborted the takeoff. After closing the 
throttle he applied left brake and rudder in an attempt to turn the aircraft back onto the hard 
surface of the runway. Immediately upon application of the left brake the aircraft nosed over in 
the soft ground. The pilot stated there was no mechanical malfunctions with the aircraft and he 
believed that the tail wheel did not lock in the centered detent as he began his takeoff roll.
