The pilot stated that while en route, the right engine lost power.  The pilot alerted air traffic 
control and he was vectored to Dulles International Airport .  The pilot stated that he had the 
airport in sight when the left engine lost power.  The pilot notified air traffic control that he was 
not going to make the runway, and the airplane impacted trees about 1000 feet short of runway 
1. The pilot reported that in the course of his flight planning he misread the fuel quantity for 
the airplane as 108 gallons, which is the quantity for the auxiliary tank configuration.  The pilot 
stated that he failed to catch his mistake until after the accident had occurred. 
total loss of power on both engines due to fuel exhaustion as a result of the pilot's improper fuel 
consumption calculations. 
 On May 2, 1997, at about 0125 eastern daylight time, N1044P, a Piper PA-23, operated by the 
commercial pilot, sustained substantial damage after impacting trees about 1000 feet short of 
runway 010 while executing an emergency landing/approach to Washington Dulles 
International Airport, Washington, DC.  The pilot stated that both engines failed.  The pilot 
and one passenger his wife, sustained minor injuries.  Visual Meteorological conditions existed 
and an Instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed.  The flight was conducted under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight originated from the Lake in the Hills Airport, 
Lake in the Hills, Illinois, at about 2030 EDT on May 1, 1997.
The pilot stated that while enroute to Washington's National Airport, the right engine quite.  
He contacted Air Traffic and they vectored him to Dulles International Airport.  The pilot 
stated that he had Dulles insight when the left engine quit.  The pilot notified Air Traffic that 
they were not going to make the runway and crashed into the tops of trees and came to rest 
nose down in the trees.
The pilot stated the in the course of his flight planning he mistakenly read the fuel quantity for 
the aircraft as 108 gallons, which is the quantity for the auxiliary tank configuration.  The pilot 
stated that he failed to catch his mistake until after the accident had occurred.
