National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SKANEATELES, NY
Accident Number: NYC98LA178
Date & Time: 09/01/1998, 1800 EDT
Registration: N6287P
Aircraft: Maule MX-7-160
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The tail-wheel airplane was departing a 1,900 foot long, 70 foot wide, grass runway.
According to the pilot, '...Full power was brought up and the brakes were released.
The aircraft veered immediately to the left and not having airspeed to correct, I could not bring it to centerline.
The [airplane] accelerated but continued to the left...' The pilot then aborted the takeoff, however, the airplane continued to left, impacted a tree, and flipped over.
Examination of the wreckage did not reveal any pre-impact abnormalities of the airframe or engine.
The pilot stated he did not remember if the airplane's tail wheel was straight when he commenced the takeoff roll.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure maintain directional control and his delayed decision to abort the takeoff.
Contributing factors were trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 3.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Factual Information On September 1, 1998, about 1800 eastern daylight time, a Maule MX-7-160, N6287P, was substantially damaged during takeoff from a private unlisted grass airstrip in Skaneateles, New York.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
In a written statement, the pilot said he taxied the tail-wheel airplane to runway 28, a 1,900 foot long, 70 foot wide, grass runway.
He further stated: "...Full power was brought up and the brakes were released.
The aircraft veered immediately to the left and not having airspeed to correct, I could not bring it to centerline.
The [airplane] accelerated but continued to the left so I aborted the takeoff, chopped the power, and applied brakes.
As the [airplane] skidded almost to a stop, the left wing clipped a small pine tree.
The airplane flipped over and skid to a stop.
Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector did not reveal any pre-impact abnormalities of the airframe or engine.
During an interview with an FAA Inspector, the pilot stated he did not remember if the airplane's tail wheel was straight when he commenced the takeoff roll.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
