National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MCALLEN, TX
Accident Number: FTW98LA382
Date & Time: 09/02/1998, 1530 CDT
Registration: XARIM
Aircraft: Cessna T210M
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the landing roll on runway 31 with a right crosswind, the commercial pilot lost control of the airplane, and it exited the right side of the runway.
The pilot turned the airplane to parallel the runway and attempted to stop; however, he was unable to stop before the nose wheel impacted the embankment at the edge of intersecting runway 18/36.
The nose landing gear separated from the airplane, and the airplane nosed down, slid across runway 18/36 and came to rest in the grass.
According to the pilot, the wind was from 010 degrees at 7 knots gusting to 15 knots.
At 1553, the reported winds at the airport were from 020 degrees at 11 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for the crosswind resulting in a loss of control.
A factor was the crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
The airplane was owned and operated by Milenium Air Servicios of Guadalajara, Mexico.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a VFR flight plan was filed for the Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight from Reynosa, Mexico, to McAllen.
According to the pilot's written statement, following the touchdown on runway 31, a "heavy crosswind" made him "lose control," and the airplane exited the right side of the runway.
He turned the airplane to parallel the runway and attempted to stop; however, he was unable to stop before the nose wheel impacted the embankment at the edge of intersecting runway 18/36.
The nose landing gear separated from the airplane, and the airplane nosed down, slid across runway 18/36 and came to rest in the grass.
According to the pilot, the wind was from 010 degrees at 7 knots gusting to 15 knots.
At 1553, the reported winds at the airport were from 020 degrees at 11 knots.
A mechanic employed by McCreery Aviation Company, a fixed-base operator (FBO) on the airport, examined the airplane and reported that the firewall, propeller, engine, and nose landing gear were damaged.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 24, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
