National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PORTALES, NM
Accident Number: FTW98LA383
Date & Time: 09/02/1998, 1740 MDT
Registration: N50620
Aircraft: Air Tractor AT-502B
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot was flying westbound into the sun (275 degrees, 7 degrees above the horizon) during an aerial application pass over a cotton field.
There was a circular pivotal sprinkler system which extended from the northern center of the field to the southeast.
The pilot said that he looked over to adjust his onboard global positioning system and he struck the sprinkler.
The impact separated the left main landing gear and initiated a fire in the right hand forward part of the cockpit.
The pilot landed the airplane in the adjacent peanut field and the airplane ground looped during the emergency landing attempt.
The airplane was destroyed during the subsequent post landing fire.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain adequate altitude/clearance during an aerial application.
Also causal was the inadvertent ground loop/swerve during the landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - OTHER 2.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) DIVERTED ATTENTION - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 4.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On September 2, 1998, approximately 1740 mountain daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-502B, N50620, was destroyed by fire following an emergency landing near Portales, New Mexico.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant in the airplane, received minor injuries.
The airplane was owned/operated by  King AG Leasing Inc. under Title 14 CFR Part 137.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local aerial application flight which originated approximately 25 minutes before the accident.
No flight plan had been filed.
According to the pilot, he had flown 7 or 8 east-west passes over a cotton field, and was flying westbound into the sun (266 degrees, 19 degrees above the horizon).
He said that there was a circular pivotal sprinkler extending from the northern center of the field to the southeast.
He was adjusting his onboard global positioning system (GPS) and when he looked up, "I was right at the sprinkler."
He said that he "immediately pulled up elevator but still struck the sprinkler."
The pilot stated that a fire broke out in the right hand forward part of the cockpit and he knew he had to get out as soon as possible.
The pilot reported that the sprinkler impact had separated the left main landing gear and when he landed in the adjacent peanut field, the airplane ground looped to the left.
He further stated that when the airplane came to rest, "I opened the left cockpit door and bailed out as quick as possible."
The pilot received second degree burns on his right hand and arm, and first degree burns on his face.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 45, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 8000 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 40 Hours Engines: 1 Turbo Prop Airframe Total Time: 780 Hours Engine Manufacturer: P&W ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: PT6-34AG Registered Owner: KING AG LEASING INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
