National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KILL DEVIL HILL, NC
Accident Number: MIA98LA235
Date & Time: 09/01/1998, 1702 EDT
Registration: N50009
Aircraft: Cessna 150H
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated he applied full power and was climbing to a higher altitude as he crossed a bay.
The engine suddenly made a loud noise and lost power.
He turned back to the closest shore and an airport.
He was unable to reach the airport and made a forced landing in a sandy area, at which time the aircraft nosed over.
Postcrash examination of the engine by an FAA inspector showed the No.
1 cylinder exhaust valve head had broken off from the stem resulting in the No.
1 piston breaking and the No.
1 connecting rod bending.
The No.
1 exhaust valve had accumulated 1,527 flight hours since new.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Failure of the number one cylinder exhaust valve resulting in loss of engine power and a forced landing on unsuitable terrain at which time the aircraft nosed over.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,VALVE,EXHAUST - FAILURE 2.
ENGINE ASSEMBLY,PISTON - FAILURE 3.
ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CONNECTING ROD - BENT ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 5.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft received substantial damage and the commercial-rated pilot and one passenger received minor injuries.
The flight originated from Hatteras, North Carolina, the same day, about 1615.
The pilot stated he had refueled at Manteo, North Carolina, and then flew to Hatteras, which took about 45 minutes.
After being on the ground at Hatteras for about 1 hour, he departed for the return trip to Manteo.
As he crossed over Kill Devil Hills, he started to climb to a higher altitude to cross over the bay.
About 1/4 of the way across the bay, the engine suddenly snapped and made a thud noise and then began to lose power and vibrate.
He turned back toward Kill Devil Hills, and tried to make it to First Flight Airport.
The aircraft would not maintain altitude and he made a forced landing in a sandy area, at which time the aircraft nosed over.
Postcrash examination of the engine by an FAA inspector showed that the No.
1 cylinder exhaust valve head had broken off and caused the No.
1 piston to break and the No.
1 connecting rod to bend.
Damage to the No.
1 cylinder exhaust valve prevented metallurgical examination.
Logbook records showed the No.
1 cylinder exhaust valve had been installed in the cylinder during engine overhaul on April 25, 1979, at aircraft and engine total time 2324.6.
The No.
1 and No.
4 cylinders were removed for repair on November 10, 1981.
At the time of the accident the aircraft and engine had accumulated 1,527 flight hours since the engine overhaul and 1,236 flight hours since the No.
1 cylinder repair.
: 1600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 52 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3852 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-200-A Registered Owner: NEW MARKET AIRPORT, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
