National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: LEESBURG, FL
Accident Number: MIA98LA234
Date & Time: 09/01/1998, 1200 EDT
Registration: N5797R
Aircraft: Cessna 172G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis When the pilot attempted to taxi for takeoff, the aircraft would not move.
He left the engine running and exited the aircraft to see if he had left the wheel chocks in place.
As he exited the aircraft it began to move.
He could not get back in the aircraft due to the propeller blast.
The aircraft taxied uncontrolled and made a 360 degree turn.
The aircraft then taxied across a taxiway and field and collided with a fence.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's decision to leave the engine running with no one at the controls as he exited the aircraft to check for wheel chocks in place.
This resulted in the aircraft moving uncontrolled and eventually colliding with a fence.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT UNATTENDED/ENGINE(S) RUNNING - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
MISCELLANEOUS 3.
OBJECT - FENCE Factual Information On September 1, 1998, about 1200 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172G, N5797R, registered to an individual, collided with a fence at Leesburg Municipal Airport, Leesburg, Florida, while on a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft received substantial damage and the private-rated pilot received minor injuries.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that when he attempted to begin taxiing for takeoff, the aircraft would not move.
He left the engine running and exited the aircraft to see if he had left the wheel chocks in place.
As he exited the aircraft it began to move.
The wind from the propeller prevented him from getting back in the aircraft.
The aircraft taxied uncontrolled and made a 360-degree turn.
The aircraft then taxied across a taxiway into a field and collided with a fence.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 74, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Unknown Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
