Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Venus, FL
Accident Number:
ERA14LA183
Date & Time:
04/02/2014, 1940 EDT 
Registration:
N938VP
Aircraft:
ROBERT J REIMBOLD ZENITH CH 
750
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel starvation
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot, who was also the builder/owner of the kit airplane, reported that he was en route 
toward his home airport with each wing tank about 3/4 full. About 50 minutes into the flight, 
the engine experienced a total loss of power, and the pilot was unable to restart the engine. The 
pilot conducted an off-airport, forced landing, and the airplane impacted vegetation and came 
to rest inverted, which resulted in substantial damage to the left wing, vertical stabilizer, and 
nose structure.
After the airplane came to rest, the pilot turned the fuel selector valve to the ﬁoffﬂ position. 
Examination of the airplane revealed that the left wing fuel tank was devoid of fuel and that the 
right wing fuel tank contained about 6 gallons of fuel. Further examination revealed that, when 
the fuel line to the carburetor was removed and the fuel selector was selected to the ﬁonﬂ 
position, fuel drained freely from the fuel tank. Examination of both fuel tank venting caps 
revealed no abnormalities that would have precluded normal operation.
According to the fuel system drawing provided by the manufacturer, the fuel line from the right 
fuel tank runs laterally across the top of the airplane cabin to a T-fitting that is connected to the 
left tank fuel line. The fuel line then runs down the side of the airplane to the gascolator and 
the ﬁon/offﬂ shutoff valve. The airplane had no interconnecting fuel venting system, and each 
fuel tank was independently vented through the fuel caps.
An internet forum on this make and model kit airplane noted the occurrence of several other 
similar in-flight fuel starvation events. The general consensus of the forum discussion was that 
the fuel system design led to a partial or complete vacuum being developed during fuel 
consumption, which resulted in the fuel in the left fuel tank being consumed and a subsequent 
total power loss and in the right fuel tank being at or near maximum capacity. Therefore, it is 
likely that the fuel system™s venting was not sufficient to provide adequate positive pressure 
and that this resulted in a vacuum developing between the right fuel tank and the T-fitting and 
the subsequent loss of engine power due to fuel starvation.
Page 2 of 7ERA14LA183
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The fuel system™s inadequate design, which resulted in negative pressure in the right fuel tank 
and a total loss of engine power during cruise flight due to fuel starvation.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel system - Design (Cause)
Fuel - Fluid level (Cause)
Environmental issues
Rough terrain - Contributed to outcome
Page 3 of 7ERA14LA183
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 2, 2014, about 1940 eastern daylight time, a kit-built, experimental-amateur built 
Zenith CH-750, N938VP, was substantial damaged during a forced landing near Venus, 
Florida. The certificated private pilot and passenger were not injured. The airplane was 
registered to and operated by a private individual under the provisions of Title 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the flight, which departed from Lakeland Linder 
Regional Airport (LAL), Lakeland, Florida, about 1850, and was destined for LaBelle Municipal 
Airport (X14), LaBelle, Florida.
The pilot reported that prior to departure the fuel gauges indicated approximately three-
fourths full for both the left and right fuel tanks; however, he did not visually inspect the fuel 
quantity. About 18 miles from the destination, the engine lost total power and he attempted to 
restart the engine. The pilot subsequently made an off airport landing to a pasture. During the 
off airport landing, the airplane encountered some brush, which separated the nose wheel from 
the airplane; the airplane nosed over, and subsequently came to rest inverted. He further 
reported that after the airplane came to rest the fuel selector valve was selected from the "ON" 
to the "OFF" position and noted that no fuel was leaking from either of the fuel tanks.
A postaccident examination by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that the 
left fuel tank was devoid of fuel and the right fuel tank had approximately 6 gallons of fuel 
remaining. The forward portion of the airplane's fuselage, both wings, and the rudder were 
substantially damaged. The fuel line to the carburetor was disconnected, the fuel selector valve 
was placed in the "ON" position, and fuel flowed freely with no debris or restriction noted. The 
vented fuel caps were examined and no blockage or obstruction was noted around the hole or 
vents.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 75, held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land, 
and a third class medical certificate. The pilot reported 1,434 total hours of flight experience, 
76 hours of which were in the accident airplane make and model.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The two-seat, high-wing, fixed leading-edge slats, fixed-gear airplane, was manufactured in 
2013 and issued a special airworthiness certificate on March 9, 2013. It was powered by a 
Lycoming O-320-E2D 150-hp engine, driving an Ed Sterba fixed-pitch propeller. The airplane's 
most recent condition inspection was completed on March 5, 2014 with an airframe total time 
of 76.3 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1953 recorded weather observation at Punta Gorda Airport (PGD), Punta Gorda, Florida, 
located about 26 miles to the west of the accident location, indicated wind from 280 degrees at 
6 knots, 10 miles visibility, clear skies, temperature 23 degrees C, dew point 16 degrees C; 
altimeter setting 30.14 inches of mercury.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Page 4 of 7ERA14LA183
The airplane was equipped with two rigid 12-gallon fuel tanks, in which one tank was located in 
each wing. The fuel system routed fuel, via gravity feed, from the aft side of the fuel tank, 
through a fingerscreen which was attached to a 3/8 inch inside diameter hose. The fuel hose 
from the right fuel tank was routed along the top of the airplane cabin to a 3/8 inch Tee where 
it was connected to the left fuel tank. From the Tee, the fuel line routed down the side of the 
airplane, inside the side channel on the pilot side, to the gascolator, the fuel "ON/OFF" valve, 
and then through the firewall to the carburetor. The fuel indication system was an electric float 
type system. The airplane had no interconnecting fuel venting system and each fuel tank was 
independently vented through the fuel caps. The fuel system does not, nor was it required to 
utilize, a fuel boost pump. A note located on the manufacturer provided "fuel line routing" 
drawing stated "check fuel flow prior to running the engine to ensure proper fuel flow and tank 
venting. Fuel flow should exceed twice required fuel flow at maximum engine RPM at high 
angle of attack."
Zenith Aircraft Builders and Flyers Internet Forum
According to several postings on the forum dated between May 18, 2011, and August 24, 2011,  
revealed similar in flight fuel starvation issues. The general consensus of the forum discussion 
supported that a partial or complete vacuum developed during fuel consumption, which 
resulted in the fuel in the left fuel tank being consumed prior to the total power loss and the 
right fuel tank being at or near maximum capacity. One comment reported that the fuel caps 
provided with the kit were replaced with fuel caps that had a tube protruding forward in the 
airstream to provide a "positive pressure" within the fuel tanks. Several of the comments 
revealed that after landing the fuel quantity would equalize in each fuel tank.
CFR 23.975(a)(3) "Fuel tank vents and carburetor vapor vents" stated "The venting capacity 
must allow the rapid relief of excessive differences of pressure between the interior and 
exterior of the tank."
Advisory Circular 90-89A "Amateur-Built Aircraft and Ultralight Flight Testing Handbook" 
Chapter 1, Section 11 "Additional Engine Tests" 4e(2) stated in part "–with minimum fuel in 
the tanks, disconnect the fuel line to carburetor. The fuel flow with a gravity flow system should 
be 150 percent of the fuel consumption of the engine at full throttle–"
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Fuel starvation (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 5 of 7ERA14LA183
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
75
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/03/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/30/2013
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1434 hours (Total, all aircraft), 76 hours (Total, this make and model), 31 hours 
(Last 90 days, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBERT J REIMBOLD
Registration:
N938VP
Model/Series:
ZENITH CH 750 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental Light Sport
Serial Number:
75-8566
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/05/2014, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
6 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
76.3 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-E2D
Registered Owner:
REIMBOLD ROBERT J
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
REIMBOLD ROBERT J
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ERA14LA183
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KPGD, 25 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
26 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2053 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
263°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Lakeland, FL (LAL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
La Belle, FL (X14)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1850 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
26.971389, -81.503611 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Shawn Etcher
Adopted Date:
06/22/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Lester Abreu; FAA/FSDO; Miramar, FL
Publish Date:
06/22/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89016
Page 7 of 7ERA14LA183
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
