During a banner towing demonstration flight for a flight examiner, the airplane stalled. The 
pilot applied full-forward elevator controls; however, he was unable to recover the airplane, 
and it subsequently landed hard. The pilot reported that he did not hear the stall warning horn 
sound. No anomalies were detected in the stall warning system after the accident.
The pilot™s failure to maintain airspeed during a banner towing operation, which resulted in the 
airplane stalling and landing hard.
On May 1, 2013, about 1030 central daylight time, a Cessna 172M airplane, N8899V, 
descended and impacted terrain following a banner towing maneuver at the St. Tammany 
Regional Airport (L31), near Covington, Louisiana. The pilot who was the sole occupant 
sustained minor injuries. The airplane sustained substantial fuselage damage. The airplane was 
owned and operated by Northshore Group LLC under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 as a banner towing flight. Day visual flight rules (VFR) conditions 
prevailed for the flight, which did not operate on a VFR flight rules flight plan. The local flight 
originated from L31.
The pilot stated that he had an accident on April 28, 2013, when he was flying a 170-
horsepower Cessna 172N. The pilot reported that an inspector from the Baton Rouge Flight 
Standards District Office made an appointment with the operator and with him to review the 
banner towing operation and to demonstrate a pickup of the same banner and equipment that 
was used on April 28. Since the 170-horsepower airplane incurred substantial damage, it was 
agreed upon that the demonstration would be executed in N8899V, a 150-horsepower Cessna 
172M. The pilot advised that most of his training had been it the 170-horsepower airplane and 
that he had only pulled one banner with N8899V. The pilot preflighted the airplane and found 
no anomalies including the stall horn. He flew a closed traffic pattern at L31 for the banner 
pickup on the east parallel. The pilot confirmed that he had caught the pickup rope on the first 
pass. He said that he "felt the tail weight down during my pull up" and he started to nose the 
airplane over to maintain air speed. The pilot reported that the airplane started a stall/spin to 
the left without any buffeting or stall horn sounding. He indicated that his window was open 
and he may not have heard the stall horn. The pilot attempted a recovery with "full forward 
elevator controls" and the airplane subsequently "landed pretty hard."
The stall horn was checked after the accident and it was operational.
At 0953, the recorded weather at the Slidell Airport, near Slidell, Louisiana, was: Wind 140 at 5 
knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition broken clouds at 1,600 feet, broken clouds at 
2,300 feet, overcast clouds at 6,000 feet; temperature 24 degrees C; dew point 21 degrees C; 
altimeter 29.90 inches of mercury.
