The noninstrument-rated pilot departed on a cross-country flight after receiving a briefing that 
VFR flight was not recommended. No flight plan was filed, and a family member stated that the 
pilot had made this flight numerous times. Witnesses reported, 'a very low overcast (100 feet), 
fog, and drizzle, which changed to freezing drizzle and rain within one hour of the accident.'  
Witnesses stated that they 'heard the airplane circling, but did not see the airplane impact' due 
to obscuring low clouds. Impact occurred in a pasture in a nose down attitude. Examination of 
the wreckage revealed no preimpact malfunction. 
VFR flight by the noninstrumented-rated pilot into instrument meteorological conditions 
(IMC), which lead to spatial disorientation of the pilot, his loss of aircraft control, and an 
uncontrolled collision with the terrain.  Factors relating to the accident were: the adverse 
weather conditions, and the pilot's lack of instrument experience. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT On January 1, 1997, approximately 1308 eastern standard time, a 
Cessna 150F, N8925S, was destroyed when it descended from cruise flight and collided with 
terrain near Bittinger, Maryland.  The certificated private pilot/owner received fatal injuries.  
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the personal 
cross country flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot departed Connellsville Airport, Connellsville, Pennsylvania, approximately 1230, 
destined for the Warrenton Airport, Warrenton, Virginia, to pickup his two children.  The non 
instrument rated pilot received a weather briefing from the Altoona Flight Service Station.  The 
pilot was instructed that VFR flight was not recommended due to instrument conditions in the 
higher terrain area between his departure airport and destination.  The pilot did not file a flight 
plan, and according to a family member, had made this trip numerous times.
Witnesses reported "very low overcast (100 feet), fog, and drizzle, which changed to freezing 
drizzle and freezing rain within one hour of the accident."  The witnesses stated that they 
"heard the airplane circling, but did not see the airplane impact" in the pasture due to the 
obscuring low clouds.
The accident occurred during daylight hours, about 39 degrees, 38 minutes North latitude, 79 
degrees, 13 minutes West longitude.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION The pilot was issued an Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
Private Pilot Certificate on October 10, 1993, for airplane single engine land.  The pilot did not 
possess an instrument rating.
He was issued an FAA Airman's Third Class Medical Certificate on August 10, 1995, with no 
limitations.
The pilot's logbook was not found.  On his application for his last Third Class Medical 
Certificate, dated August 10, 1995, the pilot indicated a total pilot time of 350 hours, of which 
50 hours had been flown during the past 6 months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION No airframe or engine logbooks were found and turned over for 
further examination.  The airplane appeared to have been recently re-skinned on the lower left 
wing.  No material identification was observed on the bare aluminum skin.  Door panels were 
filled with styro foam sheets, which had been duct taped to the inside of the door panels.  The 
rotating beacon was installed with house hold Romex cable and common wire nuts.  A hand 
held GPS unit was mounted on the pilot's yoke.  It was connected to an antenna installed with 
the coax cable routed through one of the four screw holes attaching the original 
communications antenna.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS A copy of a "WeatherMation Flight Plan" from 
Connellsville, Pennsylvania to Warrenton, Virginia, computed on January 01, 1997, at 1228, 
was found in the airplane.  The weather report showed visual meteorological conditions at the 
departure airport and the destination.  Weather at Martinsburg, West Virginia (MRB), at 1145, 
reported winds from 130 degrees at 10 knots; Visibility, 8 miles; Ceiling, 2,500 feet overcast; 
altimeter, 30.26 inches.
The weather reported by witnesses in the area was very low overcast (100 feet), fog, and drizzle, 
which changed to freezing drizzle and freezing rain within one hour of the mishap.  The pilot 
received a telephone weather briefing from the Altoona Flight Service Station and was advised 
that VFR flight was not recommended.  Mountain obscuration was reported by the Altoona 
Flight Service Station along his intended route of flight and in the vicinity of the mishap.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION The ground impact scarring depicted the front 
cross section of the airplane.  A narrow 20 foot long gash represented the left wing, followed by 
the 18 inch deep crater for the engine, and a narrow shorter gash for the right wing.  Only the 
left main wheel had made a ground depression, located 2.5 feet offset and back from the engine 
crater.  Small pieces of Plexiglas and other debris were thrown in a 210 degree magnetic 
heading, but remained close to the initial impact crater.  The airplane came to rest 
approximately 40 feet away from the initial impact crater, facing 080 heading, in an upright 
position.
The empennage was crushed aft of the baggage compartment and scorpioned to the left.  The 
propeller displayed chord wise scratches and leading edge gouges.  The spinner displayed 
rotational crushing.  The engine exhibited continuity to the accessory section, and all cylinders 
produced thumb compression with the exception of the number 3 cylinder, which had a bent 
push rod.  Both magnetos produced sparks, and fuel was observed in the fuel bowl.  The oil 
filter was free of contaminates.  The carburetor fuel bowl was free of contaminates and no 
evidence of water was observed.  The throttle arm and mixture control were found loose.
All flight controls were accounted for at the mishap site and remained attached to their 
respective hinges.  Flight control continuity was confirmed to the cockpit area, but binding 
occurred in the cockpit due to extensive airframe deformations.  Flaps were in the "up" 
position, confirmed through the flap actuator.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION An autopsy was conducted on the pilot, on 
January 2, 1997, by Dennis J. Chute, M.D., the Assistant Medical Examiner for the State of 
Maryland.
Toxicological testing was also conducted by the FAA Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, on January 4, 1997.  The results were negative for alcohol, drugs, 
and carbon monoxide.
The wreckage was released on January 3, 1997, to Robert Pawlikowski, brother of the airplane's 
owner.
