The pilot and passenger prepared to depart on a volunteer search and rescue flight. A front seat 
belt became lodged under the fuel selector handle located on the cockpit floor between the two 
front seats. When the seat belt was pulled loose, the long, pointer end of the fuel selector 
handle snapped off. The pilot positioned the remaining portion of the fuel selector to what 
appeared to be the 'BOTH' position. Just after takeoff, the engine suddenly quit, and the pilot 
performed an emergency landing on snow covered terrain. Following the accident, the pilot 
discovered he had positioned the fuel selector to the 'OFF' position. The loss of the pointer end 
of the selector handle allowed the selector to rotate 360 degrees. 
the pilot's failure to properly verify the position of a fractured fuel selector handle, which 
resulted in fuel starvation and subsequent loss of engine power.  A factor related to the 
accident was: the fractured handle that allowed the fuel selector to be rotated to an OFF 
position.  
 On January 2, 1997, at 1202 Alaska standard time, a tundra tire equipped Cessna 185F, 
N23CB, crashed after takeoff about 4 miles northwest of Nome, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight when the accident occurred.  
The airplane, operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage.  The certificated private 
pilot was not injured.  The sole passenger received minor injuries.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.
The pilot reported that he and the passenger were preparing to depart on a volunteer search 
and rescue flight.  A front seat belt became lodged under the fuel selector handle located on the 
cockpit floor between the two front seats.  When the seat belt was pulled loose, the long pointer 
end of the fuel selector handle broke off.  The pilot positioned the remaining rotating portion of 
the selector to what appeared to the "Both" fuel tank position.  After departure, the engine 
suddenly quit about 200 feet above the ground and the pilot performed an emergency landing 
on snow covered terrain.  The airplane received damage to the fuselage, landing gear and 
wings.  Following the accident, the pilot reported that he found the fuel selector positioned to 
the "Off" position.  The pilot indicated that without the long end of the pointer attached, the 
selector could be rotated 360 degrees to the "Off" position.
