During his weather briefing, the pilot was told that his destination weather was not available, 
and was provided weather for an airport about 10 miles north. He was briefed that low 
visibility due to fog prevailed. The flight departed earlier then usual because the company 
business manager was concerned that the weather at the destination airport was deteriorating, 
and if the airplane was not there earlier they might not get into the airport. At the time of the 
accident there was a power failure, and lights around the destination airport went out. The 
airplane had struck power lines and a support tower located on the approach end of runway 1 
and runway 5, about 1/2 mile southwest of the airport. The airport had one NDB approach 
which was not authorized at night. The nearest recorded weather, about 10 miles north of the 
crash site, at the time of the accident was; '...ceiling 100, [visibility] 1/2 mile, fog, [temperature] 
46 degrees F, dew point, 42 degrees F, winds 220 degrees at 5 [knots], altimeter 29.90 inches 
Hg. Witnesses reported that there was heavy fog at the airport and the visibility was below 1/4 
mile. 
the pilot's continued VFR flight into instrument meteorological conditions.  Factors in this 
accident were: fog, the low ceiling, and the dark night. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 1997, about 1835 eastern standard time, a Cessna 208B, N802TH, 
operated by Tar Heel Aviation Inc., operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91, positioning flight, 
crashed while on approach for landing near Edenton, North Carolina.  Instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  The airplane was destroyed.  
The commercial pilot, and an airline transport-rated, jump seat passenger were fatally injured.  
The flight departed Manteo, North Carolina, about 1815 en route to Edenton to pick up cargo.  
It was then scheduled to continue on to Raleigh, North Carolina, under a contract with United 
Parcel Services (UPS).
At 1724:44, the pilot of N802TH telephoned the Raleigh Automated Flight Service 
Station (AFSS) and identified himself as Tarheel 1279 (THC1279).  The pilot told the specialist 
he was "trying to figure out what was going on with this cloud stuff and are you coming down 
out there yet...."  The specialist said, "we have been down all day...were still a little bit IFR 
[instrument flight rules]...are you looking for a standard briefing...."  The pilot answered, "no 
sir."
The weather at Edenton was not available, so the pilot was provided the Elizabeth City, 
North Carolina,  weather: "...indefinite ceiling 300, [visibility] 2 miles, in mist, [temperature] 8 
degrees C [46F], dew point, 7 degrees C [45F], winds 260 degrees at 5 [knots], altimeter 29.89 
inHg.   
The Air Operations Controller for UPS at the Manteo Airport (MQI), wrote in his 
statement to the sheriff, that the pilot of N802TH usually departed from MQI about 1915, en 
route to Edenton.  The UPS controller stated; "...[the pilot] told me the fog was forecasted to 
move in and UPS had told him to make sure to make it to Edenton."  On January 2, 1997, the 
flight departed about 1 hour earlier, because the business manager for UPS had called between 
1500 and 1600, and told the pilot of N802TH to "leave earlier," because UPS was concerned 
that the weather at Edenton was deteriorating and if the airplane was not there earlier they 
might not get into the airport.
According to the Air Operations Controller for UPS at Manteo, the pilot had called on 
the UNICOM frequency, after departure, and said, "...that he couldn't make it back to Manteo 
or Elizabeth City, because the fog had already moved in."  About 20 minutes later, the UPS 
controller at Manteo, called the pilot of N802TH, on the UNICOM and asked him "did he think 
he could get into Pitt Greenville?"  The pilot answered, "...the ceiling in Greenville was 700 feet 
and getting worse all the time and he didn't know if he could get in there or not."
The pilot of N802TH then asked the UPS controller at Manteo to call UPS in Raleigh, 
tell them the situation, and ask what they wanted the pilot of N802TH to do.  UPS in Raleigh 
advised UPS in Manteo that they would call back with further instructions, because they did 
not know what to do.  The information was forwarded to the pilot of N802TH, and it was at 
this time the pilot told the UPS controller at Manteo that he was "getting ready to try to go into 
Edenton" and that he would soon be "too low" to talk to Manteo.  The UPS controller at Manteo 
then told the pilot "if you miss at Edenton, climb up and call me for directions."
About 1835, there was a power failure and the lights around the Edenton Airport went 
out.  At 1845, the UPS controller at Manteo, tried to call the pilot of N802TH on the UNICOM, 
but he did not get any answer. There was no further radio communication with the airplane.
According to the UPS business manager's statement, between 1500 and 1600 he called 
Raleigh "to suggest we move the plane [N802TH] from Manteo to Edenton.  There had been a 
lot of fog weather."  He said about 1730, he called Manteo to see if the N802TH had moved to 
Edenton, and that "no one knew."  A little after 1800, he was on his way to someone's house 
and stopped at the Edenton Airport to see if the plane was there and he said it "was not."   In 
addition, he said, " I could not see from the gate to the back of the building where the plane was 
parked."  He arrived at his destination about 1830, and about 1850 the lights went out.  He 
called the UPS center and found out that the lights were out all over the area.  He told the 
people at the UPS center, "we would have to carry our air [cargo] somewhere because I didn't 
think the airplane could land out there [Edenton]."  He said it was not until about 2020 that 
the sheriff told him that it was possible that UPS's plane had crashed.
After the power failure, the sheriff's office received calls from some residents, that lived 
south of the airport, and had heard a low flying plane go over their homes just before the lights 
went out.  A deputy was dispatched to Cape Colony area, at a point where the power lines cross 
the Albemarle Sound to check on a possible airplane crash.  According to the deputy that was 
first on the scene, "...I found one electrical wire broken.  Using a pair of binoculars and a 
spotlight [I] looked in the area of the first electrical tower.  It was extremely foggy and I would 
estimate visibility [was] at a maxim of 300 yards...as the fog lifted briefly, I could barely see a 
white object in the water near the base of the tower.  I could not confirm at the time what the 
object was...[until another deputy] arrived with night vision [and] we were able to confirm that 
it was a downed aircraft."
The accident occurred during the hours of darkness approximately 36 degrees, 01 
minutes north, and 076 degrees, 34 minutes west.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Information on the pilot is contained in this report on page 3, under First Pilot 
Information.  The pilot's personal logbook containing his flight hours was not found.
The pilot was hired by Tarheel Aviation May 1995, and his last check ride before the 
accident was November 8, 1996.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. 
Meteorological information is contained in this report on page 3, under Weather Information.  
Witnesses reported that there was heavy fog at Edenton and the visibility was below 1/4 mile.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilots, on January 3, 1997, at the Medical Examiner's 
Office, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, by Dr. Robert Thompson and Dr. Karen Chancellor.
Toxicological tests were conducted at the Federal Aviation Administration, Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and revealed,  "...no drugs or alcohol detected...."
AERODROME INFORMATION
The published non-direction beacon (NDB) approach in effect at the time of the accident 
stated in the remarks: "Use Elizabeth [City] altimeter setting, when Elizabeth control tower 
closed, procedure not authorized...straight-in minimums not authorized at night."  There was 
no record found to indicate that the pilot had the Elizabeth City altimeter.  There was no 
recorded transmission between the airplane and the control tower at Elizabeth City.  The hours 
of operation of the Elizabeth City tower on the day of the accident were from 0700 to 2200.
The published minimums for the NDB approach to runway 5 was the same for the 
straight-in and circling approaches.  They were: 580 feet minimum descent altitude (MDA), 
with at least 1 mile visibility, and the height above the terrain was 561 feet.  The minimum 
ceiling was 600 feet and 1 mile visibility.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The accident site was located on the approach end of runway 1 and runway 5, about 1/2 
mile southwest of the airport.  The airplane came to rest directly under down power lines, a 
broken power line support tower, in about 5 feet of water, and about 600 feet offshore.  The 
airplane was removed from the water, the afternoon of January 3, 1997, and taken to Waff's 
Marine Salvage Yard, at Edenton were the airframe and engine were examined.
Wire from the power lines was found wrapped around the engine and airframe to 
include the tail section.  Wire strike marks were observed on the nose and main landing gear 
tires and struts.  In addition, wire strike marks were observed on the propeller blades.
Partial control continuity was established to the ailerons, because of the deformation 
and damage to the wings.  Control continuity was established to the elevators and rudder.  The 
left elevator and stabilizer displayed impact damage, and part of the power line cable was 
wrapped around the left stabilizer.  The right elevator and stabilizer displayed minor impact 
damage.  Examination of the engine revealed that it remained attached to the airframe by 
external lines and linkages.  Power line cable was found wrapped around the engine and 
propeller flange for 10 complete loops.  No discrepancies were found with the engine.
For reference purposes, the propeller blades were numbered from the rear, 1 thru 3 
counter clockwise.
Blade No. 1:  The blade airfoil was deformed slightly aft and the tip was twisted towards 
low pitch.  The leading edge was gouged about 1/2 inch inboard of the tip and about 3 inches 
inboard of the tip.  The gouge marks were consistent with wire that was wrapped around the 
propeller flange.
Blade No. 2:  The airfoil of the blade was deformed about 20 degrees forward from 
about 1/2 span, and the tip was twisted toward low pitch.  The leading edge displayed gouges at 
locations 3 inches, 4-1/2 inches, and 6 inches inboard of the tip.  The gouge marks were 
consistent with wire that was wrapped around the propeller flange.
Blade No. 3:  The airfoil of the blade was deformed about 90 degrees aft, and the tip was 
twisted towards low pitch.  The trailing edge was deformed and dimpled about 5 and 9 inches 
inboard of the tip.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to a record of telephone conversation between the UPS, Air Operations 
Controller at Manteo, and the FAA, dated January 5, 1997, the controller told the FAA:  "...[the 
jump seat passenger] usually rode this airplane to RDU [Raleigh], probably once a week and 
then caught a flight out of RDU...this was his regular means of transportation to RDU."  The 
passenger was a pilot for an air freight company.  The UPS controller said he "has ridden with 
these pilots on this run before."   He further said that the previous pilot that flew this trip "had 
been known to use his radar to paint the power lines running on an extended line from the 
runway, and follow these to the shoreline...then turn towards the runway."  The UPS controller 
said he "has seen this done on at least two occasions, although never with [the accident pilot]."   
The controller said he "feels certain that [the pilot of N802TH] knew of and used this 
procedure routinely to get into Edenton when weather was low...this is [a] fairly common 
practice for pilots going in to Edenton.  All local pilots know the powerlines are there and that 
they lead to the airport...both [pilots] knew the lines were there and their height...."
The broken power lines and tower were owned by Virginia Power Company.  The 
elevation of the tower at the point where it was damaged was 128 feet above the water.  The 
magnetic heading of the tower and power lines was 013/193 degrees.  The power lines sagged 
about 12 to 14 feet and their height above the water was about 110 feet.  The broken wires were 
shield or static wire and were 0.349 inches in diameter.  The static wire had a tensile strength 
of about 280 pounds.  In addition, a phase conductor wire was also broken.  The phase 
conductor wire had a diameter of 0.721 inches and a tensile strength of 100 pounds.
The aircraft wreckage was released to Mr. Paul Waff, representing the owner's insurance 
company, on January 4, 1997.
