Before the first of several legs of flight, the pilot used a wooden stick to confirm the fuel 
quantity, since one of the fuel gauges was inoperative. He then departed, performed airwork, 
and continued to a landmark, where a flyby was performed. The pilot landed at an airport, 
remained a short time, then during the preflight, he noted that the fuel quantity indicated 
about 1/2. The flight departed, and the pilot flew to another airport, and performed a full stop 
landing with taxiback. He then departed on a return flight to the original departure airport, 
where he performed two touch-and-go landings. During the takeoff roll of the third touch-and-
go, the pilot noted that the engine was not producing full power; however, with insufficient 
runway remaining to stop, he elected to continue. About 200 feet above ground level, the 
engine coughed, then the propeller stopped. Subsequently, the airplane collided with concrete 
blocks during a forced landing. The pilot stated to a police officer that he believed the engine 
quit because he ran out of fuel. Postcrash examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector 
revealed 3.0 gallons of fuel remaining in the fuel tanks. According to the airplane type 
certificate data sheet, the unusable fuel quantity was 3.5 gallons. Following recovery of the 
airplane, the engine was started, and it operated to 750 rpm. Impact damage precluded 
operating the engine to a higher rpm. 
the pilot's improper planning/decision, by failing to ensure there was sufficient fuel for 
continued flight, which resulted in fuel exhaustion and subsequent collision with objects 
(concrete blocks) during a forced landing.  Factors relating to the accident were: a partially 
inoperative fuel gauge, which provided a false fuel indication, and the pilot's operation of the 
airplane with the known deficiency. 
 On January 1, 1997, about 1341 eastern standard time, a Cessna 150K, N5813G, registered to a 
private individual, was substantially damaged during a forced landing near the Daytona Beach 
Regional Airport, Daytona Beach, Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The private-rated pilot 
and one passenger sustained serious injuries.  The flight originated about 1 minute earlier from 
the Daytona Beach Airport.
     The pilot stated that before departure he was aware that one of the fuel gauges was 
inoperative and during the preflight of the airplane he used a wooden stick that was labeled 
half and full.  Before departure on the first leg the fuel tanks were slightly less than full.  The 
flight departed, performed airwork, then flew south to the Kennedy Space Center (KSC) where 
a fly-by was performed.  The flight continued south of the KSC and performed a full stop 
landing at an airport.  Before departure the pilot checked the fuel tanks using the stick and it 
indicated 1/2.  The flight departed and he performed a full stop landing with taxi back at 
another airport then continued to the Daytona Beach Airport.  He performed two touch-and-go 
landings then during the landing roll of the third, after applying power to go around, he 
recognized that the engine was not developing full power.  With insufficient runway remaining, 
he elected to continue and about 200 feet above ground level, the engine began coughing and 
the propeller stopped.  With obstructions ahead the pilot intentionally stalled the airplane 
which collided with concrete blocks.  He further stated to a police officer that the engine may 
have quit because he ran out of fuel.
     The airplane was examined the following day by an FAA airworthiness inspector who stated 
that when he arrived, the airplane was in the process of being dismantled.  The non-ruptured 
fuel tanks were drained and found to contain 3.0 gallons of fuel.  According to the airplane type 
certificate data sheet, the total unusable fuel quantity is 3.5 gallons.
     Following recovery of the airplane the engine was started and operated to about 750 rpm.  
Impact damage prevented engine operation to full rated rpm.  No discrepancies were noted 
during the engine run.
