The airplane had just executed an ILS runway 3 approach and was cleared to land by the 
control tower operator.  The landing approach was flown with excessive airspeed.  The airplane 
touched down on the runway with approximately 2,000 feet of runway remaining, and tire skid 
marks were seen for approximately 2,000 feet on the runway.  The airplane went off the 
runway, past the departure end of the runway, and collided with 2 aircraft and a hangar.  The 
airplane was not configured correctly for landing.  The flaps were found at 20 degrees; both the 
AFM and company procedure recommend 40 degrees for landing.  The drag chute had not 
been used.  A review of the airframe and engines did not reveal any abnormalities, and the 
pilots did not report any malfunctions with the airframe or engines. The weather at the time of 
the accident was reported as 100 feet overcast with a runway 3 visibility range of 5,000 feet, 
the wind was from 200 degrees at 10 knots.  The runway was wet. 
the flightcrew's excessive airspeed and failure to attain a proper touchdown point on the 
runway.  Factors were: the fog, wet runway, tailwind and improper procedures by the flight 
crew. 
 On January 1, 1997 at 0230 central standard time (cst), a Gates Lear Jet,  N8040A, was 
substantially damaged when the airplane went of the left side, and past the departure end of 
runway 03, at the Kansas City Downtown Airport, Kansas City, Missouri.  The airplane struck 
two aircraft, and a hanger after departing the runway.  Neither flight crew member was injured 
in the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 135 flight was operating on an instrument flight plan, and 
instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane had just executed an ILS runway 03 approach, and had been cleared to land by 
the control tower operator.  The control tower operator witnessed the touch down of the 
aircraft, and reported that the airplane landed on the runway with approximately 2,000 feet of 
runway remaining.  The tower operator advised the crew of the airplane that they were going to 
run out of runway, after the airplane had landed.  There was no response from the crew of the 
Gates Lear Jet on tower frequency, following the tower operator's advisory. 
The airplane was inspected by a representative from the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA), on the day of the accident.  The representative reported that he observed skid marks on 
the runway which began approximately 2,000 feet from the end of runway 03.  The skid marks 
went from the center of the runway to the left side of the runway, and then continued through 
the grass.  The airplane was found with the flaps set at 20 degrees and the drag chute stowed.  
The airplane flight manual, and company procedure recommend the use of forty degrees of 
flaps during landing.  The altitude bug on the copilots altimeter was set at 900 feet.  The 
decision height for the approach to runway 03 is listed at 994 feet.  A review of the airframe 
and engines by the FAA representative did not reveal any abnormalities.
In an interview of the pilot following the accident the pilot  reported that runway 03 was 
chosen, because it had the minimum visibility required for the approach.  The pilot was also 
aware that he was landing the airplane with almost a direct tailwind.  Both pilots had flown 
into the airport where the accident occurred, on prior flights.  The pilot did not report that 
there were any malfunctions with the airframe or engines.
The weather at the time of the accident was reported as 100 feet overcast with a runway 03 
visibility range of 5,000 feet, the wind was from 200 degrees at 10 knots.  The runway was wet.
The last radar data for the accident aircraft showed that at 1,000 feet (six feet above decision 
height) N8040A had a ground speed of 176 knots.
The airplanes nose was crushed from hitting the other aircraft, and impacting with the hanger, 
the right tip tank had ruptured.
