The pilot was cleared for an instrument approach in instrument flight conditions. The right fuel 
gauge indicated empty, and the left fuel gauge indicated about 3 gallons of fuel. The engine 
started to sputter and quit. The airplane became VFR and collided with trees and a house. The 
pilot informed law enforcement personnel that the airplane ran out of fuel. There was no odor 
or visible evidence of fuel present at the crash site. About 1/2 ounce of fuel was drained from 
the carburetor bowl. The propeller and flywheel were replaced. The engine started and 
developed power. 
The pilot-in-command's improper management of fuel resulting in a total loss of engine power 
due to fuel exhaustion. 
 On January 1, 1997, about 1505 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-181, registered to 
Enterprise Seven Leasing Inc., operated as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, experienced a total 
loss of engine power while on an instrument approach to Florence Regional Airport, Florence, 
South Carolina, and crashed into a residential area. Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed and an IFR flight plan was filed. The airplane sustained substantial damage. The 
commercial pilot/pilot-in-command (PIC), and a private pilot occupying the left front seat 
reported serious injuries. One passenger sustained serious injuries, and the other passenger 
sustained minor injuries. The flight originated from Miami, Florida, about 4 hours 22 minutes 
before the accident.
The PIC stated he filed an IFR flight plan listing himself as the PIC. They departed 
Miami en route to Savannah, Georgia, with the private pilot flying the airplane. Upon reaching 
Jacksonville, Florida, he checked weather and requested a clearance direct to Florence, South 
Carolina. They were handed off to Florence Approach Control about 20 miles south of 
Florence. The left fuel gauge indicated 5 to 6 gallons of fuel. The right fuel gauge was empty. 
They were cleared for the ILS approach, and handed off to Florence tower. The left fuel gauge 
indicated about 3 gallons of fuel remaining. They were established on the localizer course and 
just inside the outer marker at 1,800 feet, 4.6 miles from the runway when the engine started 
to sputter. The private pilot turned the boost pump on,  switched fuel tanks, rocked the wings 
and pumped the throttle with negative results. The engine quit. The private pilot established a 
glide and he declared an emergency. They became VFR at about 800 feet. There were no forced 
landing areas available. He informed the private pilot that he had the flight controls. The 
airplane collided with trees and a house.  He further stated there was no odor or leakage of fuel 
present, and there was no known mechanical problem with the airplane. The pilot-in-
command informed a Florence Police Department sergeant during an interview that they were 
on final approach when they ran out of fuel.
A witness stated he heard an airplane overhead. He looked up and saw the airplane 
come out of the clouds. The engine sputtered and then cut off. The airplane continued towards 
the east disappearing below the tree line.
Examination of the crash site revealed no odor or visible evidence of fuel. Inspection of 
the carburetor bowl drain produced less than 1/2 ounce of fuel. No indication of fuel leakage 
stains were found around the fuel filler cap of either wing. The airplane was transported to a 
full service maintenance fixed base operator. The propeller and  flywheel were replaced with 
serviceable parts. The engine was started and developed power.
