During the landing roll, when the pilot applied the brakes to slow the airplane, one brake 
locked.  According to the pilot, after touching down on the runway center line, 'all [was] 
straight with the rudder control.'  When the tail came down the rudder 'authority diminished,' 
and when the pilot applied the brakes, the airplane departed the runway to the right and nosed 
over.  The pilot stated that he could not control the airplane with the left brake.  Examination 
of the brakes did not reveal any discrepancies.  According to the pilot's flight times, shown on 
the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, he had less than 1 hour, (.9) of total flight time in this make and 
model airplane. 
the pilot's failure to maintain direction control of the airplane after applying the brakes.  A 
factor was the pilot's lack of familiarity with this make and model airplane. 
 On January 1, 1997, about 0955 eastern standard time, a Waco YMF-5, N14128, 
registered to Waco Flying LTD., was substantially damaged during the landing, near 
Kissimmee, Florida.  The commercial-rated pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed in the vicinity, and no flight plan had been filed.  The local personal flight 
was being conducted in accordance with Title 14 CFR Part 91.
During the landing roll, when the pilot applied the brakes to slow the airplane, one 
brake locked.  According to the pilot, after touching down on the runway center line, "all [was] 
straight with the rudder control."  When the tail came down the rudder "authority diminished," 
and when he applied the brakes, the airplane departed the runway to the right and nosed over.  
The pilot stated that he could not control the airplane with the left brake.
Initially the damage to the airplane was reported as minor, however, after further 
examination of the wreckage, the FAA determined that damage to the wings was substantial.  
Examination of the brakes did not reveal any discrepancies.
According to the pilot's flight times, shown on the NTSB Form 6120.1/2, he had less 
than 1 hour, (.9) of total flight time in this make and model airplane.
