Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MCGRATH, AK
Accident Number:
ANC98LA014
Date & Time:
01/02/1998, 1526 AST 
Registration:
N861TA
Aircraft:
Douglas DC-6B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 125: 20+ Pax,6000+ lbs
Analysis 
During the takeoff roll, while passing 45 knots indicated airspeed, ice formed between the 
inner and outer panes of the airplane's windshield, obscuring the crew's vision.  The flight crew 
aborted the takeoff, the airplane drifted off the left side of the snow covered runway, and 
caught fire.  The crew reported the airplane and windshield were cold soaked and the 
temperature was -10 degrees Fahrenheit. The windshield anti-ice system blows air from a 
combustion heater between the windshield glass panes. The air source for the heater, once the 
airplane has forward airspeed, is two leading edge wing scoops.  The crew told the NTSB 
investigator that the taxi time was too short for the windshield to warm up, and that during the 
taxi, snow was circulated around the airplane and into the wing scoops. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The ingestion of snow into the windshield anti-ice system, and the resulting obscured 
windshield which made runway alignment not possible.  Factors associated with this accident 
were the cold windshield, the reduced performance of the windshield anti-ice because of the 
short taxi by the crew, and the insufficient information on the system provided by the 
manufacturer. 
Page 2 of 6ANC98LA014
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN
Findings
1. (C) ANTI-ICE/DEICE SYSTEM,WINDSHIELD - ICE INGESTION
2. (F) ANTI-ICE/DEICE SYSTEM,WINDSHIELD - TOO COLD
3. (F) ANTI-ICE/DEICE SYSTEM - DIMINISHED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) INFORMATION INSUFFICIENT - KIT MANUFACTURER
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED
Findings
5. WINDOW,FLIGHT COMPARTMENT WINDOW/WINDSHIELD - OBSTRUCTED
6. (C) PROPER ALIGNMENT - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. TERRAIN CONDITION - BERM
----------
Occurrence #3: FIRE
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED
Page 3 of 6ANC98LA014
Factual Information
 On January 2, 1998, at 1526 Alaska standard time, a Douglas DC-6B airplane, N861TA, 
departed the edge of runway 34 during an aborted takeoff from the Nixon Fork Mine landing 
strip, thirty miles north of McGrath, Alaska.  The transport category airplane was destroyed by 
a postcrash fire.  The airline transport certificated pilot, and the other two flight crewmembers, 
were uninjured.  The airplane was operated by Woods Air Fuel, Inc., of Palmer, Alaska.  The 
flight was operated under 14 CFR Part 125 as a cargo flight transporting ore concentrate from 
Nixon Fork Mine.  The flight originated from Palmer at 1230, and was on the takeoff roll of the 
return leg.  Visual meteorological condition prevailed at the time of the accident, and an IFR 
flight plan was on file.  
The captain reported that at an indicated airspeed of 45 knots during the takeoff roll, ice 
formed between the inner and outer windshield panes, with the icing following the flow of 
heated air through the windshield. The crew's forward visibility was obscured, and the takeoff 
was aborted.  The captain reported that the airplane drifted left into snow berms on the side of 
the 4,200 feet long by 85 feet wide runway and caught fire.  The three crewmen evacuated the 
airplane without injury.
The three crewmen relayed to the NTSB investigator that after arrival at the mine strip, the 
airplane and windshield cold soaked for about one hour in the -10 degree Fahrenheit 
temperature. After loading the airplane, they taxied for only a few minutes in light, powdery 
snow, before beginning the takeoff roll.  The crewmen stated that the windshield anti-ice 
system was activated, but because of the short taxi, did not have time to warm completely.  All 
crewmembers indicated that during the taxi, snow was circulated around the airplane and the 
wing scoops.  
Research revealed that the windshield anti-ice system was modified as part of installing 
Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) number 981SO on June 26, 1987.  This STC eliminated 
the superchargers on engines numbers 3 and 4 from providing conditioned air to the airplane's 
cabin.  The modification was part of a conversion to a cargo configuration.
The modified cockpit heating and windshield anti-ice system receives supply air from one of 
two sources.  On the ground, a blower fan draws air from the underside of the fuselage for a 
combustion heater.  As the airplane transitions to flight, ram air pressure from two wing 
leading edge scoops becomes greater than ground blower discharge air, and becomes the 
heater air supply source.  Air and any particulate matter in the wing scoops and ducting passes 
directly to the heater.  Once airborne, the blower fan is deactivated by a weight on wheels 
switch.  
From the heater the warm air is ducted directly to the windshield, where it flows between the 
outer glass pane and the inner vinyl pane, and is then discharged into the cockpit.
The "DC-6 Airplane Operating Manual" used by two other companies states "...Certain 
combinations of temperature and humidity will cause moisture to condense from the air 
between the windshield panels and settle on the inner surfaces of the glass, obscuring vision. 
Once formed, anti-icing airflow with heater operation will be required to clear the panels."  
This language is not included in the STC literature, nor in the flight handbook for the company 
operating the accident airplane.
Page 4 of 6ANC98LA014
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial; Flight 
Engineer
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/31/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
27000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 16000 hours (Total, this make and model), 24000 hours (Pilot 
In Command, all aircraft), 250 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 55 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Douglas
Registration:
N861TA
Model/Series:
DC-6B DC-6B
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
43522
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/22/1997, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
103800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
25 Hours
Engines:
4 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
46626 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
R-2800-CB-16
Registered Owner:
WOODS AIR FUEL, INC.
Rated Power:
2400 hp
Operator:
WOODS AIR FUEL, INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Air Cargo
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
W4FB
Page 5 of 6ANC98LA014
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
60 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
-23°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
NIXON FORK MINE, AK 
(NFR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
PALMER, AK (PAQ)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1526 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
NIXON FORK MINE STRIP (NFR)
Runway Surface Type:
Snow
Airport Elevation:
1500 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry; Snow--dry
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4200 ft / 85 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
MATTHEW    L THOMAS
Adopted Date:
02/15/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
ALLAN R LEE; ANCHORAGE, AK
JAMES C HEIRSTON; ANCHORAGE, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC98LA014
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
