Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Goshen, IN
Accident Number:
CEN17LA048
Date & Time:
12/03/2016, 0851 EST 
Registration:
N218D
Aircraft:
ARION AIRCRAFT LLC LIGHTNING 
LS-1
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The sport pilot reported that, before departing on a cross-country flight, he contacted the flight 
service station for a weather briefing for his flight route. He then conducted a preflight 
inspection of the airplane, started it to allow it to warm up, and ran the carburetor heat before 
departing. The climb to cruise at 2,000 ft was normal. The pilot reported that, about 10 miles 
from the departure airport, the engine started to run "rough" and that he applied carburetor 
heat. When this did not have any effect on engine performance, he decided to return to the 
departure airport. He added that, during the return, the engine "power was very poor" and that 
the airplane was losing altitude rapidly. The pilot spotted a clear field nearby and performed a 
soft-field landing approach. Upon landing, the gear dug into the soft plowed field. The airplane 
continued forward on its belly, which resulted in substantial damage. The weather conditions 
were conducive to the accumulation of serious icing at any power setting. Although the pilot 
reported that he used carburetor heat, it is likely that the ice had already accumulated to the 
degree that the carburetor heat was insufficient to melt the ice and restore full engine power. 
An examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any preimpact anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power due to carburetor icing and the subsequent forced landing on a 
rough/soft field.
Page 2 of 6CEN17LA048
Findings
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Contributed to outcome (Cause)
Soft surface - Contributed to outcome
Page 3 of 6CEN17LA048
Factual Information
On December 3, 2016, about 0851 eastern standard time, an Arion Aircraft LLC, Lightning LS-
1 airplane, N218D, impacted soft terrain during a forced landing following an inflight loss of 
engine power near Goshen, Indiana. The pilot and his passenger were uninjured. The airplane 
sustained substantial fuselage damage. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Day visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which did not operate on a flight plan. The 
flight originated from the Goshen Municipal Airport (GSH), near Goshen, Indiana, about 0840 
and was destined for the Ankeny Regional Airport (IKV), near Ankeny, Iowa.
According to the pilot, he contacted the flight service station for a weather briefing along his 
route of flight to IKV. He conducted a preflight inspection of the airplane. About 0825, the 
pilot loaded the airplane and started it to allow it to warm up. About 0830, the airplane was 
taxied to runway 27. The pilot performed flight checks that allowed the operating temperatures 
to continue to warm and he "ran the carburetor heat again just prior to departing." About 
0835, he departed from the runway on a 270 heading. The climb to cruise at 2,000 feet was 
normal and he subsequently transitioned to cruise. About 9 to 10 nautical miles from GSH the 
engine started to run "rough" and the pilot applied carburetor heat. This did not improve 
engine performance, so he decided to return to GSH where he started to line up for a 
downwind for runway 27. The engine continued to sputter with carburetor heat applied. 
Engine "power was very poor" and the airplane was losing altitude rapidly. The pilot then 
thought that the airplane may be able to make runway 9. He subsequently realized the airplane 
was too low for that approach and with little power, the airplane would not be able to make the 
field where it would end up in the trees or fence short of runway 9. The pilot spotted a clear 
field that he could turn into and have an up wind landing. He called common traffic advisory 
frequency at GSH about 0852 and announce a mayday call that indicated where the airplane 
was landing. The pilot performed a soft field landing approach and slowed as much as possible 
heading back on 270 heading. He knew that the fields were recently tilled and would be very 
soft and muddy due to recent rains. The pilot attempted to fly just above the surface as long as 
possible and keeping the nose up. On landing the gear dug into the very soft plowed field and 
the airplane continued forward on its belly. The pilot indicated that it was a very short amount 
of time from when he "called in and actually landed the plane."
At 0853, the recorded weather at GSH was: Wind 260 degrees at 5 knots; visibility 10 statute 
miles; sky condition overcast clouds at 2,800 feet; temperature 1 degree C; dew point -3 
degrees C; altimeter 30.33 inches of mercury.
The temperature and dew point spread were plotted on a carburetor icing probability chart. 
Their intersection was within the serious icing at any power setting envelope.
A Federal Aviation Administration Inspector conducted an on-scene investigation of the 
accident airplane. He established flight control continuity existed. He observed that the fuel 
filters, one for each tank, were mounted in the aircraft cabin under the seats. The filters 
appeared clean and contained a liquid consistent with 100 low lead aviation gasoline. Some 
Page 4 of 6CEN17LA048
engine components sustained impact damage and the engine could not be test run. However, 
no preimpact anomalies were detected.
History of Flight
Enroute
Other weather encounter
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Sport Pilot
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Sport Pilot 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/19/2015
Flight Time:
247 hours (Total, all aircraft), 245 hours (Total, this make and model), 227 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ARION AIRCRAFT LLC
Registration:
N218D
Model/Series:
LIGHTNING LS-1 NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2012
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Special Light-Sport
Serial Number:
152
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/29/2016, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
393.7 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Jabiru
ELT:
C126 installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
3300A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
120 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN17LA048
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KGSH, 827 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0853 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
88째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.33 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
1째C / -3째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
GOSHEN, IN (GSH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
ANKENY, IA (IKV)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0840 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.531389, -85.863333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Edward F Malinowski
Adopted Date:
05/01/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert D Holdridge; Federal Aviation Administration; Grand Rapids, MI
Publish Date:
05/01/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94464
Page 6 of 6CEN17LA048
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
