Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Dayton, OH
Accident Number:
CEN10FA180
Date & Time:
04/01/2010, 1253 EDT 
Registration:
N4BA
Aircraft:
BEECH B36TC
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Approximately 1 minute after takeoff, as the airplane was about 1 mile southwest of the airport, 
the pilot reported an engine failure to air traffic controllers and initiated a return to the airport. 
One witness, located about 1 mile west of the airport, reported that the sound of the engine 
changed abruptly; noting that the engine seemed to lose power completely. Another witness, 
located near the airport, observed the airplane approach from the west and turn to align with 
the downwind runway. During the turn, the left wingtip struck the ground and the airplane 
impacted short of the runway. A postimpact fire ensued. Although the pilot initiated a return to 
the airport, an interstate highway and an open grass area short of the runway were both 
potentially available for an emergency landing. A postaccident examination of the engine 
revealed that the No. 1 (aft) main crankshaft bearing failed due to unknown circumstances. The 
progressive failure of the bearing likely precipitated secondary failures of the crankcase 
through-bolt and the fuel pump coupling, which resulted in a complete loss of engine power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The complete loss of engine power due to failure of the No. 1 main bearing, and the secondary 
failure of a crankcase through-bolt and the fuel pump drive coupling. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's decision to attempt a return to the airport for a downwind forced 
landing, despite having an interstate highway and an open grass area short of the runway as 
available emergency landing sites.
Findings
Aircraft
Recip eng rear section - Failure (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Page 2 of 7CEN10FA180
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2010, at 1253 eastern daylight time, a Beech B36TC Bonanza, N4BA, impacted 
terrain short of the runway during a forced landing following a loss of engine power at the 
Dayton-Wright Brothers Airport (MGY), Dayton, Ohio. A post-impact fire ensued and the 
airplane was destroyed. The pilot and sole passenger on-board sustained fatal injuries. The 
airplane was registered to Poelking LLC and operated by the pilot under the provisions 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed. The flight departed from MGY about 1250. The intended 
destination was DuPage Airport (DPA), West Chicago, Illinois.
The pilot initially contacted Dayton Approach Control while he was on the ground at MGY and 
requested an IFR clearance to DPA. However, before a clearance was issued, the pilot informed 
the controller that he needed to return to the ramp due to a magneto problem. Thirty minutes 
later, the pilot again contacted Dayton Approach while on the ground at MGY and requested a 
clearance to DPA. A clearance was issued at 1248 and the flight was released for takeoff at 
1249.
At 1251:11 (hhmm:ss), the pilot contacted Dayton Approach Control. He informed the 
controller that they were airborne and climbing through 1,300 feet mean sea level (msl). At 
1251:32, the controller replied that radar contact was established 1 mile south of MGY. 
However, 14 seconds later, the pilot stated that he was ﬁgoing to circle around for a landingﬂ at 
MGY because a ﬁcompartment [had] come open.ﬂ The controller acknowledged and cleared the 
flight to return to MGY. At 1252:16, the pilot stated that he was declaring an emergency due to 
an engine failure.
Radar data depicted the airplane tracking the Runway 20 extended centerline after takeoff. The 
initial radar data point was recorded at 1251:05 and indicated that the airplane was near the 
departure end of Runway 20 at 1,300 feet msl. About 1251:42, the airplane entered a right turn 
and remained in that turn until the final data point, which was recorded at 1252:46. At that 
time, the airplane was approximately 1/2 mile southwest of the Runway 2 threshold at 1,200 
feet msl, and on an approximate magnetic course of 094 degrees. The radar track data 
indicated that the airplane was within 1/4 mile of an interstate highway during the right turn.
A witness reported that she was working in her yard, about 1 mile southwest of the airport, 
when the accident airplane flew over. Initially, the sound of the engine was completely normal. 
However, the routine engine sound changed abruptly, noting that the engine seemed to 
completely cut out. She added that the engine did not sputter, or increase and decrease pitch, 
during that time. The change in engine sound caused her to look up. She reportedly observed 
the airplane in a right turn with an estimated bank angle of 45 degrees. The airplane was 
heading northwest when she first saw it. It remained in that right turn until she lost sight of it, 
at which time it was on an easterly heading. She added that nothing about the airplane seemed 
unusual except for the abrupt change in the engine sound and a lower than normal flight 
profile.
Additional witnesses reported observing the airplane approach the airport from the west with 
the landing gear in the retracted position. They stated that the airplane banked to the left in an 
apparent attempt to line-up with runway 2. The left wingtip struck the ground and the airplane 
Page 3 of 7CEN10FA180
impacted an open grass area south of the runway. A post impact fire ensued.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 50, held a private pilot certificate with airplane single engine land and 
instrument airplane ratings. He was issued a third-class airman medical certificate on March 
26, 2009, with a restriction for corrective lenses. FAA records indicated that the pilot added an 
instrument rating to his private pilot certificate on August 31, 2009.
The pilot™s flight time logbook was not available to the NTSB. On his instrument rating 
application, the pilot noted a total flight time of 182.5 hours, with 102.7 hours of instruction 
received. He reported a total of 93.1 hours in B36TC airplanes at the time of that exam.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was a 1983 Beech B36TC (Bonanza), serial number EA-356. It was a six-
place, single-engine airplane, with a retractable tricycle landing gear configuration. The 
airplane was powered by a 300-horsepower Continental TSIO-520-UB turbo-charged engine, 
serial number 515941. It was equipped with a 3-bladed, constant speed (adjustable pitch) 
McCauley model 3A32C406 propeller assembly, serial number 983648.
Maintenance records indicated that an annual inspection was completed on March 11, 2010, at 
a total airframe time of 2,283.9 hours. The records noted that the engine had accumulated 
997.8 hours since overhaul at the time of the annual inspection. There was no record of 
maintenance issues subsequent to the annual inspection.
Maintenance records also indicated that aluminum fragments were found in the filter during 
an oil change conducted in July 2009. The engine was disassembled as a result and several 
piston pins were found to be frozen. The connecting rods were repaired and new cylinders were 
installed. The airplane was subsequently returned to service with no further issues noted.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
Weather conditions recorded by the MGY Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS) at 
1253 were:  Clear skies; 10 miles visibility; winds from 210 degrees at 9 knots, gusting to 22 
knots; temperature 22 degrees Celsius; dew point 9 degrees Celsius, altimeter 29.98 inches of 
mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Dayton-Wright Brothers (MGY) was a non-towered airport; served by a single runway. Runway 
2-20 was 5,000 feet long by 100 feet wide and constructed of asphalt. The approach area to 
Runway 2 consisted of an open grass area extending approximately 1,000 feet from the 
threshold. A localizer antenna was located in this area on the runway centerline about 900 feet 
from the threshold. 
The east side of Runway 2 was bordered by an open grass area about 500 feet wide. 
Commercial/business areas bordered the airport to the south. Residential areas bordered the 
airport to the east. A residential area was located about 1,200 feet east of the Runway 2 
threshold, with an open grass area between the threshold and the nearest residences.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Initial ground impact was on the airport property about 860 feet south-southwest of the 
Runway 2 threshold. The debris path was oriented on an approximate 024-degree magnetic 
Page 4 of 7CEN10FA180
bearing. The main airplane wreckage, which consisted of the fuselage, engine, empennage, and 
wings, came to rest about 179 feet from the initial impact point. Grass scorched by the post 
impact fire extended to approximately 120 feet north-northeast of the main wreckage.
The nose section of the airplane was fragmented. The upper portion of the fuselage and aft 
fuselage structure remained. The lower fuselage was consumed by the postimpact fire. The 
engine had separated from the airframe. It came to rest inverted with the main wreckage. The 
propeller assembly was separated from the engine crankshaft flange. The propeller blades 
remained attached at the hub. The left wing tip separated from the airframe and came to rest 
about 75 feet south of the main wreckage. The empennage was partially separated from the aft 
fuselage. The vertical stabilizer, with the rudder attached, had separated from the empennage. 
The flight controls and flaps sustained damage consistent impact forces and the postimpact 
fire.
No anomalies consistent with a pre-impact failure or malfunction of the airframe were 
observed. A teardown examination of the engine was conducted subsequent to the accident. (A 
summary of those findings is included later in this report.) 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy of the pilot was performed by the coroner™s office of Montgomery County, Ohio, on 
April 5, 2010. The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute forensic toxicology report was 
negative for all substances in the screening profile.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Teardown examination of the engine revealed that the #1 (aft) main bearing had failed. 
Specifically, the right half of the #1 main bearing was fractured into 5 pieces. A portion of the 
right bearing was located under the left bearing. In addition, the lower, aft crankcase through-
bolt was fractured near mid-length. Finally, the fuel pump drive coupling and the standby 
alternator drive shaft were fractured.
Metallurgical examination of the #1 main bearing revealed damage consistent with contact of 
the fracture faces between other bearing sections. No fracture features were visible.
The crankcase through-bolt was fractured at one of the o-ring grooves at the case split line. The 
adjacent o-ring was hardened and partially charred. The cadmium surface plating was bubbled 
and solidified into surface beads on either side of the split line. The fracture surface exhibited 
features and deformation patterns consistent with bending over-stress. The overstress region 
appeared to emanate from a crescent-shape area that exhibited intergranular separation. 
Cadmium was identified on portions of the crescent-shaped area.
The fuel pump coupling was fractured at the reduced diameter shear section. The fracture 
surface exhibited crack arrest lines and surface topography consistent with high-stress reverse 
bending fatigue. The standby alternator driveshaft was also fractured at a reduced diameter 
section. Otherwise, the driveshaft appeared straight and undamaged. The fracture surface 
exhibited features consistent with rotational bending fatigue fracture.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Director of Maintenance at the fixed base operator (FBO) met the accident pilot when he 
returned to the ramp with a rough magneto. The pilot informed the maintenance director that 
the drop in engine speed exceeded limitations on one of the magnetos, and that he did not 
Page 5 of 7CEN10FA180
observe any drop on the second magneto.
The maintenance director got in the airplane and conducted a run-up. He stated the engine 
started without hesitation, and went to 1,200 or 1,300 rpm. He conducted at least two magneto 
checks and the drop in engine speed was about 100 rpm. Engine operation was smooth the 
entire time.
The pilot reportedly commented to the mechanic that he had been idling for a long time and 
had not leaned the mixture. He noted that he did not observe any issues with the operation of 
the engine or the magnetos during the time he was in the airplane.
The airplane flight manual specifies a maximum drop in engine speed of 150 rpm during a 
magneto check.
Airport records indicate that the accident airplane was fueled with 61.6 gallons of 100 low lead 
aviation fuel about 1815 on March 31, 2010; the evening prior to the accident flight.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Landing area undershoot
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/26/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/31/2009
Flight Time:
182 hours (Total, all aircraft), 93 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 6 of 7CEN10FA180
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N4BA
Model/Series:
B36TC 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
EA-356
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/11/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3850 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2284 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520 SER
Registered Owner:
POELKING AIR LLC
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
POELKING AIR LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MGY, 957 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
200°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 22 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
210°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.98 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Dayton, OH (MGY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
West Chicago, IL (DPA)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1250 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Dayton-Wright Brothers (MGY)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
957 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
20
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5000 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 7 of 7CEN10FA180
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.580833, -84.229167
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy Sorensen
Adopted Date:
06/20/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Gary L Middleton; FAA-Cincinnati FSDO; Cincinnati, OH
Ernest Hall; Hawker Beechcraft Corp.; Wichita, KS
Sara Irwin; Teledyne Continental Motors, Inc.; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
06/20/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75624
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
