Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Charleston, SC
Accident Number:
ERA10LA199
Date & Time:
04/01/2010, 1200 EDT 
Registration:
N3181L
Aircraft:
RATCLIFFE JOHN A KOLB MARK3X
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The accident flight was the airplane's first flight and the pilot's first flight in the airplane make 
and model. According to witnesses, after starting the engine, the pilot completed a high speed 
taxi before taking off; the airplane lifted off in "a couple hundred feet." The witnesses stated 
that at first, the airplane pitched up "steeply" then leveled off about 75 feet above ground level 
(agl). It then pitched up "steeply" again until it reached about 200 feet agl and then it returned 
to a "less steep" climb angle. The airplane was next observed to make a right turn onto the 
crosswind leg of the traffic pattern at 300 to 400 feet agl, and then turned onto the downwind 
leg of the traffic pattern at 700 to 800 feet agl. The airplane then turned to the right, pitched 
nose down, and continued rotating to the right until it impacted nose first in a marsh located 
near the end of the runway. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the wing spar and 
the fuselage. Postaccident examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any evidence 
of a mechanical malfunction or failure that would have precluded normal operation. A review 
of the pilot's records revealed that he had never logged any flight time in the accident airplane 
make and model. He had never logged any flight time in a tailwheel-equipped airplane, nor did 
he possess a tailwheel endorsement to act as pilot-in-command of a tailwheel-equipped 
airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed which resulted in an aerodynamic stall and 
subsequent loss of control. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's lack of experience in the 
make and model airplane.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Recent experience w/ equipment - Pilot (Factor)
Page 2 of 7ERA10LA199
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2010, at 1200 eastern daylight time, an experimental, amateur-built, Ratcliffe Kolb 
Mark 3X, was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain while maneuvering, at 
Charleston Executive Airport (JZI), Charleston, South Carolina. The certificated private pilot 
was fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for 
the local personal flight conducted under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The accident flight was the first flight of the airplane and the pilot's first flight in the airplane 
model.
According to witnesses, after starting the engine the pilot initially taxied onto runway 4 and did 
a high speed taxi to a point about halfway down the runway. He then turned the airplane 
around and back taxied down runway 4 and cleared the runway at the end. After about 1 
minute the pilot reentered the runway for takeoff. The airplane then lifted off in a couple 
hundred feet. At first the airplane pitched up "steeply" then leveled off about 75 feet above 
ground level (agl). It then pitched up "steeply" again until it reached about 200 feet agl, and 
then it returned to a "less steep" climb angle. The airplane was next observed to make a right 
turn onto the crosswind leg of the traffic pattern at  300 to 400 feet agl, and then to turn onto 
the downwind leg of the traffic pattern at 700 to 800 feet agl. The airplane then turned to the 
right, pitched nose down, and continued rotating to the right until it impacted nose first in a 
marsh located near   the end of the runway.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane 
single-engine-land. His most recent application for a FAA third-class medical certificate was on 
March 22, 2010. He reported 138 total hours of flight experience on that date.
A review of pilot records revealed that the pilot had approximately 75 hours of pilot in 
command time and had never logged flight time in the accident airplane make and model. 
Further review also revealed that he had never logged flight time in a tailwheel equipped 
airplane, and he did not have a tailwheel endorsement to act as pilot in command in a tailwheel 
equipped airplane. 
The pilot had begun flying in 1971 and had stopped flying in 1978. During that time period he 
had accumulated 90 hours of flight experience and had been flying Cessna 150 and Piper PA-
28 airplanes. Pilot records indicated that the pilot was then inactive for the next 26 years and 
did not resume flying until 2004.
From 2004 until the last entry in January of 2010 the pilot logged another 48.1 hours in the 
Cessna 150, Cessna 172, and Piper PA-28 airplanes. He did not fly again until the day of the 
accident flight approximately 2 months later.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident aircraft was a two seat, high wing, strut braced, pusher configuration, tailwheel 
equipped airplane. The forward fuselage was of welded steel tubing mated to an aluminum 
tailboom. The horizontal stabilizer, tail fin, and wings were constructed of riveted aluminum 
tubing covered in fabric. The wings included a folding mechanism for storage and ground 
Page 3 of 7ERA10LA199
transport. It was powered by a 100 horsepower, Rotax 912ULS, normally-aspirated, air and 
water cooled, horizontally-opposed, four-cylinder engine.
According to FAA records, the airplane's special airworthiness certificate was issued on 
November 6, 2009.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A weather observation taken about 5 minutes prior to the accident, at JZI included; wind at 
010 degrees at 4 knots, visibility 10 miles, temperature 26 degrees C,  Dew point 05 degrees C, 
and an altimeter setting of 30.14 inches of mercury. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
An on scene examination of the wreckage was initially attempted by a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector but, due to terrain conditions he was unable to do a detailed 
examination. His cursory examination revealed however that the airplane had come to rest 
inverted. The lift struts where still attached but, the wing had separated from the fuselage. The 
tail boom was bent to one side approximately 2 feet aft of the fuselage. The engine had 
separated from its mounting location, and had come to rest approximately 25 feet from the 
main wreckage. The propeller hub had remained attached to the crankshaft but two of its three 
blades were broken off at approximately mid-span.
At the request of the Safety Board, on April 5, 2010, the wreckage was removed from the marsh 
by an aircraft recovery company for examination by Safety Board investigators. 
Examination of the wreckage by Safety Board investigators confirmed the FAA inspector's 
initial observations. 
Examination of the airframe did not reveal any evidence of preimpact malfunction or 
anomalies. The airframe exhibited impact damage and multiple areas of crush and 
compression damage to the tubing that made up its structure. The wing folding fittings which 
had been modified from the original design by the pilot to reduce wear on the wing fold bolts, 
nuts, and cotter pins were discovered to be secured in the flight (wings locked) position. Flight 
control continuity was also confirmed from the rudder pedals, and control sticks to their 
respective flight control surfaces.
Examination of the fuel system did not reveal any evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction 
of the fuel system. Further examination revealed, that two of the plastic 5 gallon fuel tanks still 
contained a small amount of automotive gasoline. The third tank however, had been breached 
and was devoid of fuel. It was also discovered, that fuel lines which had separated from the 
tanks during the impact sequence also contained automotive gasoline, which was bright, clear, 
and did not exhibit evidence of any particulates or debris. When a sample of the automotive 
gasoline was applied to a coupon containing water finding paste, the coupon did not change 
color, indicating that water was not present. Examination of the electric fuel pump also 
revealed that it contained automotive gasoline. Its internal screen was clear of debris, and 
when power was applied it would pump fuel.
Examination of the engine did not reveal any evidence of preimpact malfunction or failure. 
Engine control continuity was confirmed from the cockpit mounted engine controls to the 
breaks in the cables and wires which made up the control system to the engine. Continuity of 
the intake system, exhaust system, valve train, and crankshaft was confirmed. The crankshaft 
was rotated by hand, and no binding was noted. All sparkplugs were removed for examination. 
Page 4 of 7ERA10LA199
Their electrodes appeared normal and were light gray in color. Thumb compression was 
established on all cylinders and oil was present internally and in the rocker boxes. The 
carburetors were disassembled to inspect the diaphragms and the inside of the float bowls. The 
diaphragms were dry, and no tears or punctures were evident. The floats were functional, and 
the internal portions of the float bowls contained automotive gasoline and were clean and free 
of debris
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Medical University of South Carolina's 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine on behalf of the Charleston County, South 
Carolina, Coroner. The cause of death was full body blunt trauma.
Toxicological testing of the pilot was conducted at the FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The specimens were negative for carbon monoxide, 
cyanide, basic, acidic, and neutral drugs.
The pilot's forensic toxicology report indicated that "43 (mg/dL, mg/hg) ETHANOL" was 
detected in muscle however, putrefaction was present, and "NO ETHANOL" was detected in 
brain, indicating that the ethanol found in this case was most likely from sources other than 
ingestion.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Review of the pilot's builders Log revealed that he had added many options and had modified 
portions of the design which increased the empty weight of the airplane approximately 113.5 
pounds over the kit manufacturer's specified empty weight. Review of the weight and balance 
information contained in the builders log also revealed that the gross weight of the airplane 
with the pilot and fuel onboard was in excess of the kit manufacturer's recommended gross 
weight by 78.5 pounds at the time of the accident.
  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to FAA Advisory Circular AC 90-89A (Amateur Built Aircraft and Ultralight Flight 
Testing Handbook), the weight and balance for the aircraft to be tested should be carefully 
done and the gross weight and CG range should be determined prior to every flight.
The test pilot of an amateur built aircraft should be competent in an aircraft of similar 
configuration, size, weight, and performance as the aircraft to be tested. If the aircraft's builder 
is the test pilot, the costs involved in maintaining pilot competence should be budgeted with 
the same level of commitment and priority that is assigned to plans and materials to complete 
the project.
The test pilot should also be rated, current, and competent in the same category and class as 
the aircraft being tested, should have 100 hours solo time before flight testing a kit plane or an 
aircraft built from a time-proven set of plans, and have had a minimum of 50 recent takeoffs 
and landings in a conventional (tail wheel aircraft) if the aircraft to be tested is a tail dragger.
The test pilot must also have talked with and, if possible, fly with a pilot in the same kind of 
aircraft to be tested, and should have taken additional instruction in similar type certificated 
aircraft. For example, if the aircraft to be tested is a tail dragger, a Bellanca Citabria or Super 
Cub is appropriate for training, and the test pilot should be considered competent when they 
Page 5 of 7ERA10LA199
have demonstrated a high level of skill in all planned flight test maneuvers in an aircraft with 
performance characteristics similar to the test aircraft.
Furthermore, the test pilot should also have studied the ground and in-flight emergency 
procedures developed for the aircraft and practice them in aircraft with similar flight 
characteristics, have logged a minimum of 1 hour of training in recovery from unusual attitudes 
within 45 days of the first test flight, and should have studied the performance characteristics 
of the aircraft to be tested.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern 
downwind
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/22/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
138 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
RATCLIFFE JOHN A
Registration:
N3181L
Model/Series:
KOLB MARK3X 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
M3X6-1-00078
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/06/2009, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
0 Hours as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
912 ULS
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ERA10LA199
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
JZI, 17 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1155 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Charleston, SC (JZI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Charleston, SC (JZI)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Charleston Executive Airport (JZI)
Runway Surface Type:
Concrete
Airport Elevation:
17 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
04
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4313 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Traffic 
Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
32.700833, -80.002778 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Todd G Gunther
Adopted Date:
11/17/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Giguere; FAA/FSDO; Columbia, SC
Publish Date:
11/17/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75619
Page 7 of 7ERA10LA199
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
