Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Ft. Lauderdale, FL
Accident Number:
NYC08LA091
Date & Time:
02/01/2008, 1542 EST 
Registration:
N3RP
Aircraft:
North American Rockwell Corp. 
NA-265-80
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Ground collision
Injuries:
1 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
Analysis 
The Rockwell International Sabreliner had just been released from the repair station following 
several months of maintenance, primarily for structural corrosion control and repair. 
According to the pilots, they began to taxi away from the repair station. Initially, the brakes 
and steering were satisfactory, but then failed. The airplane then contacted several other 
airplanes and a tug with an airplane in tow, before coming to a stop. The airplane incurred 
substantial damage as a result of the multiple collisions. Neither crewmember heard or saw any 
annunciations to alert them to a hydraulic system problem. Postaccident examination revealed 
that there was no pressure in the normal hydraulic system, as expected, and that the auxiliary 
system pressure was adequate to facilitate emergency braking. Additional examination and 
testing revealed that the aural warning for low hydraulic system pressure was inoperative, but 
all other hydraulic, steering, and braking systems functioned properly. Both the pilot and 
copilot were type-rated in the Sabreliner, and each had approximately 350 hours of flight time 
in type. Neither crewmember had any time in Sabreliners in the 90 days prior to the accident. 
Operation of the emergency braking system in the airplane required switching the system on, 
waiting for system pressure to decrease to 1,700 pounds per square inch (psi), pulling the "T" 
handle, and then pumping the brake pedals 3 to 5 times. In addition, the system will not 
function if both the pilot's and copilot's brake pedals are depressed simultaneously. The 
investigation did not uncover any evidence to suggest the crew turned on the auxiliary 
hydraulic system, or waited for the system pressure to decrease to 1,700 psi in their attempt to 
use the emergency braking system.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The depletion of pressure in the normal hydraulic system for an undetermined reason, and the 
pilots' failure to properly operate the emergency braking system. Contributing to the accident 
was an inoperative hydraulic system aural warning.
Page 2 of 9NYC08LA091
Findings
Aircraft
Hydraulic power system - Not specified (Cause)
Hydraulic, indicating system - Malfunction (Factor)
Hydraulic, auxiliary system - Incorrect use/operation (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Flight crew (Cause)
Page 3 of 9NYC08LA091
Factual Information
On February 1, 2008, about 1542 eastern standard time, a Rockwell International NA-265-80, 
N3RP, was substantially damaged when it collided with three other airplanes while taxiing for 
departure at Fort Lauderdale Executive Airport (FXE), Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The three 
pilots on board two of the affected airplanes were not injured, and an airport tug driver 
received minor injuries. The positioning flight was being operated under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of 
the accident, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed.
According to the pilot, the NA-265-80 (Sabreliner) was inactive since October 2007, due to 
extensive maintenance to repair corrosion. The pilot and copilot were to move the airplane to 
the operator's home base at Hernando County Airport (BKV), Brooksville, Florida, after the 
maintenance was completed. The repair station informed the pilot about 1 1/2 weeks prior to 
the accident that the repairs were nearly completed, and that he would be able to pick up the 
airplane by January 30. The pilot and copilot arrived in Fort Lauderdale a few days prior to 
January 30, in order to be prepared to move the Sabreliner once it was released by the repair 
station. 
The repair station released the Sabreliner to the pilots on February 1. The Sabreliner was 
located on the repair station ramp in the northwest corner of FXE. The pilot and copilot 
boarded the airplane, started the auxiliary power unit (APU), and started both engines. 
According to the copilot, he read the checklists, and he and the pilot executed the items.
According to recorded air traffic control tower (ATCT) information, about 1540, the Sabreliner 
began to taxi out, and contacted the FXE ATCT ground controller to coordinate maneuvering 
around a Cessna Caravan that was headed in the opposite direction on the same ramp. The 
ground controller replied "...don't have you in sight if you guys are in the foxtrot one ramp that 
is uncontrolled." The accident crew responded that they were aware of that, but that they 
wanted to "get out of the way" of the Caravan. Ground control then asked for the accident 
crew's intentions, and at 1542:04, the accident crew replied "taxi out for departure and I'll get 
the clearance as soon as I get clear of the Caravan." At 1542:50 the Caravan pilot broadcast 
"mayday mayday mayday watch out watch out watch out" on the ground control frequency.
According to the pilot of the Caravan, he had deplaned his passengers and was taxiing his 
airplane to its parking location. Since the Sabreliner was blocking his intended path, the 
Caravan pilot stopped to let the Sabreliner pass. He saw the Sabreliner begin coming towards 
him, and the left wing of the Sabreliner then struck the Caravan's rotating propeller. The 
Sabreliner continued moving at a speed that the Caravan pilot estimated to be 10 knots. On the 
same ramp, a DH-125 was being towed by a tug, and the Caravan pilot saw the two persons 
who were on the tug jump off it while it was still in motion. The Sabreliner struck the DH-125 
and the tug, and continued to move forward until it struck another, stationary Sabreliner. The 
Caravan pilot estimated that the accident Sabreliner had traveled 20 to 30 yards beyond the 
Caravan before it finally stopped. The Caravan pilot notified the ATCT of the event, and 
requested fire and rescue assistance.  
In his postaccident statement, the Sabreliner pilot indicated that "all gauges...were indicating 
correctly and all systems were operating normal[ly]." Both he and the copilot stated that the 
airplane, including braking and steering systems, was functioning normally during the initial 
taxi, that all appropriate checklists had been complied with, and that the auxiliary power unit 
Page 4 of 9NYC08LA091
was shut down for taxi. When the Sabreliner was abeam the Caravan, the Sabreliner started to 
drift to the left, and the pilot attempted to correct the drift. The pilot said that the airplane "did 
not respond" to his steering commands, and that the brakes were "not functioning properly." 
The copilot stated that "the brakes failed" and that application of the emergency brake was "to 
no avail." Neither crewmember heard or saw any annunciations to alert them to a hydraulic 
system problem. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The pilot of the Sabreliner held an airline transport certificate with an instrument airplane 
rating, and type ratings in the Sabreliner and Lear 25. He reported 8,500 total hours of flight 
experience, with 350 hours in the accident airplane make and model. He reported that he had 
no flight time in Sabreliners in the past 90 days. His most recent flight review was 
accomplished in August 2007, and his most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
first-class medical certificate was issued in October 2007. The pilot was employed by the 
operator.
The copilot of the Sabreliner held an airline transport certificate with an instrument airplane 
rating, and type ratings in several airplanes, including the Sabreliner. He reported 14,400 total 
hours of flight experience, with 360 hours in the accident airplane make and model. He 
reported that he had no flight time in Sabreliners in the past 90 days. His most recent flight 
review was accomplished in September 2007, and his most recent FAA second-class medical 
certificate was issued in August 2007. The copilot stated that he was not an employee of the 
operator of the accident airplane, and that he primarily flew Learjets for another operator.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION 
According to FAA records, the Sabreliner was manufactured in 1977, and was registered to the 
current operator on December 26, 2007. According to the Sabreliner maintenance manual 
(MM), the airplane was equipped with two hydraulic systems; the normal system, and the 
auxiliary system. Operating pressure for both systems was 3,000 pounds per square inch (psi). 
The normal system powered the nose wheel steering (NWS), the wheel brakes, and other 
systems. The auxiliary system was for "emergency or alternate use" in case of "normal system 
power failure." The auxiliary system provided "sufficient fluid and pressure" to operate the 
NWS and wheel brakes "for a limited number of operations." Each hydraulic system was 
equipped with a dedicated accumulator, and the accumulators stored fluid at the system 
working pressure of 3,000 psi. The MM stated that the normal system accumulator could "be 
used as a limited source of pressure in case of pump failure or when the pump is not 
operating."  
The hydraulic systems control switches were located on the overhead switch panel in the 
cockpit. The two pressure gauges for the hydraulic systems were located at the bottom of the 
center instrument panel. These gauges were approximately 1 inch in diameter, and were 
situated immediately below the airborne radar control and display unit, which protruded 
approximately 1 inch beyond the instrument panel. The hydraulic pressure annunciator light 
was one of 52 separate warning lights, each approximately 1/4 inch by 3/4 inch, grouped on 
the annunciator panel. The annunciator panel was located on the lower left corner of the 
copilot's instrument panel. Two master caution annunciator lights, one on the pilot's side, and 
one on the copilot's side, were located below the instrument panel glareshield. The emergency 
brake was a "T" handle located on the forward right corner of the lower/aft pedestal panel, 
Page 5 of 9NYC08LA091
approximately at the copilot's hip when seated normally. The handle is pulled up and rotated 
counterclockwise to enable the emergency braking system.
 
According to the FAA and repair station personnel, the airplane had been undergoing 
maintenance for several months at the facility; this work was primarily corrosion correction 
and control activities. According to the FAA, a review of the repair station's records for the 
accident airplane indicated "that the hydraulic system was not opened" and that "fluid was 
added to the hydraulic fluid reservoir."
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
The 1553 FXE weather observation recorded winds from 130 degrees at 10 knots, visibility 10 
miles, scattered clouds at 6,900 feet, temperature 27 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 15 degrees 
C, and altimeter setting of 30.12 inches of mercury.
COMMUNICATIONS 
A transcript of the communications between the accident airplane crew and FXE ground 
control indicated that the crew was planning to obtain an IFR clearance and then taxi out for 
departure. The communications also indicated that the collision occurred in a non-movement 
area of the airport, meaning that ground control was not responsible for aircraft control or 
separation in this area.
FLIGHT RECORDERS 
The accident airplane was equipped with a B&D Instruments and Avionics cockpit voice 
recorder (CVR). The date stamped in the "Replace Beacon By End Of" location on the 
underwater locator beacon placard was March 2007. The CVR was removed from the airplane 
and sent to the National Transportation Safety Board Recorders Laboratory in Washington, 
D.C. for readout. This model was designed to record 30 minutes of analog audio on a 
continuous loop tape in a four-channel format. The CVR housing did not sustain any heat or 
structural damage. Internal inspection of the unit revealed that the tape transport was jammed 
by recording tape wrapped around a post, and a portion of the tape was damaged and 
unusable. The tape contained approximately 8 minutes of usable data. The audio information 
that was recovered did not pertain to the accident sequence. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION 
Sabreliner N3RP sustained substantial damage to both wings, the left engine nacelle, and 
airplane nose. Sabreliner N430MP sustained substantial damage to its right wing and right 
fuselage. The DH-125 sustained damage to its fuselage. The Caravan sustained damage to its 
propeller.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Flight Plan
According to Lockheed Martin Fight Services, at 1455 on the day of the accident, an IFR flight 
plan was filed for the accident Sabreliner. The flight plan listed a proposed departure time of 
1500 for a flight from FXE to BKV, with two persons on board. The flight plan identified the 
accident pilot as the pilot-in-command of the planned flight.   
Recent Maintenance Activity 
Page 6 of 9NYC08LA091
One airplane maintenance record entry, dated January 31, 2008, indicated that the repair 
station had completed several structural repairs, and replaced multiple electrical, engine, and 
other system components. Another entry with the same date indicated that the airplane had 
been inspected in accordance with four separate continuing airworthiness inspections. The "24 
month/1500 hour/3000 cycle" inspection was the longest-interval inspection of the four 
inspections listed in the entry.  
Pilot's Checklist Information
Items 8 and 9 of the "Before Starting Engines" checklist respectively specified that the normal 
system hydraulic pump switch was to be in the "Guarded AUTO" position, and the auxiliary 
hydraulic system switch was to be in the "OFF" position. Item 6 of the "Starting Engines" 
checklist stated "Hydraulic pressure.....Check." Item 3 of the "Before taxi" checklist stated 
"Auxiliary hydraulic system.....Check/off." 
A page in the "Emergency Procedures" section of the pilot's checklist manual was entitled 
"BRAKE FAILURE." This page contained three discrete steps, and three additional notes 
regarding the system and procedures. The first step contained two items; the auxiliary 
hydraulic system switch was to be placed in the "ON" position, and then the pilots were to wait 
until the system pressure "drops to 1,700 psi." The second step was to pull the emergency 
brake T-handle. The third step stated "Pump pedals approximately 3 to 5 times for braking 
pressure. If pedals are released completely, they must be pumped again for braking pressures." 
The third "NOTE" stated in part that "...Emergency braking procedures (pumping action) 
cannot be accomplished if the opposite set of brake pedals is being depressed." 
FAA Examination and Testing 
On February 5, 2008, FAA inspectors and a technician from the repair station conducted 
hydraulic systems examination and testing of the airplane. The airplane had not been operated 
or powered up since the accident, and the results of the examination and testing were as 
follows:
The hydraulic reservoir was found to be full and properly serviced. In the cockpit, the battery 
switches were both "OFF," the guarded hydraulic pump switch was in the "AUTO" position, 
and the auxiliary hydraulic pump switch was in the "OFF" position. The hydraulic pressure 
gauges for the "Normal" and "Aux" systems indicated approximately "0" and "2,800" psi, 
respectively. According to the technician, these readouts were indicative of the system 
pressures at the time of the accident. The emergency brake handle was pulled up, and had been 
rotated so that its long axis was parallel to the airplane longitudinal axis. 
Electrical power was then applied via the batteries, and an operational check of the hydraulic 
power system was performed in accordance with steps B (1) through B (4) of the Sabreliner 
MM NA 69-420, Section 29-10-4. System functionality, including proper hydraulic pressure 
and pump performance, were satisfactory, with the exception of the warning horn/clacker. The 
horn/clacker was designed to provide an alert by sounding when the hydraulic switch is in the 
"OFF" position and the engine master switches are in the "ON" positions. The horn/clacker did 
not sound during the test. The "Hydraulic Power Off" and the "Master Caution" annunciator 
lights, designed to illuminate and provide visual warnings of the hydraulic system problems, 
did function properly. 
The nose wheel steering (NWS) system was tested in accordance with MM NA 69-420, Section 
32-50-03. The NWS system test results were satisfactory.
Page 7 of 9NYC08LA091
The brake system was tested in accordance with MM NA 69-420, Section 34-40-02. The brake 
system test results were satisfactory. In addition, the brake wear values were determined in 
accordance with the Goodyear Component Maintenance Manual (CMM) Section 32-43-24, and 
were found to be within acceptable limits.
History of Flight
Taxi-to runway
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Ground collision (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
34, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/01/2007
Flight Time:
8500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 350 hours (Total, this make and model), 7500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
34, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/01/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2007
Flight Time:
14400 hours (Total, all aircraft), 360 hours (Total, this make and model), 13651 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Page 8 of 9NYC08LA091
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
North American Rockwell 
Corp.
Registration:
N3RP
Model/Series:
NA-265-80 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
38042
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
10
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/31/2008, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
23000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
5825 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
General Electric
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
CF700
Registered Owner:
Qualint LLC
Rated Power:
4500 lbs
Operator:
Qualint LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FXE, 13 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1553 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 6900 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
130°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.12 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 15°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Ft. Lauderdale, FL (FXE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Brookesville, FL (BKV)
Type of Clearance:
Unknown
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Fort Lauderdal Executive (FXE)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
13 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 9 of 9NYC08LA091
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
26.198333, -80.180000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael C Huhn
Adopted Date:
03/23/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Michael Spencer; FAA/FSDO; Fort Lauderdale, FL
Publish Date:
03/25/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
