The pilot touched down on runway 02, which was 4,279 feet long, 200 feet wide, with an 
asphalt surface, about 500 feet beyond the approach end of the runway.  As he applied the 
brakes, the right brake "seemed to pull harder than the left," and he immediately released the 
brake pressure.  The pilot applied left rudder to compensate for the situation, and the airplane 
began to "fishtail" down the runway.  The airplane traveled off the right side of the runway, and 
impacted a concrete block, shearing off the right landing gear and damaging the right wing.  
Examination of the airplane revealed no pre-impact mechanical deficiencies with the airplane, 
and no skid marks were observed on the runway.  The winds were reported to be from 190 
degrees at 6 knots.  The pilot reported 89 hours of total flight experience, 5 of which were in 
make and model.
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during landing.  A factor was the tail wind.
On November 1, 2003, at 1415 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-151, N41977, was 
substantially damaged while landing at the Quantico Marine Corps Airfield/Turner Field 
(NYG), Quantico, Virginia.  The certificated private pilot was not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the flight which originated 
at the Middle Peninsula Regional Airport (FYJ), West Point, Virginia.  The personal flight was 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, he touched down on runway 02, about 500 feet beyond the approach 
end of the runway.  As he applied the brakes, the right brake "seemed to pull harder than the 
left," and he immediately released the brake pressure.  The pilot applied left rudder to 
compensate for the situation, and the airplane began to "fishtail" down the runway.  The 
airplane traveled off the right side of the runway, and impacted a concrete block, shearing off 
the right landing gear and damaging the right wing.  
The airplane was examined by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector and 
substantial damage was noted to the right wing spar.  The inspector was unable to examine the 
right brake, due to the extensive impact damage to the right landing gear.  However, according 
to the inspector, no skid marks were observed on the runway.  Runway 02 was 4,279 feet long, 
200 feet wide, with an asphalt surface.
The pilot reported 89 hours of total flight experience, 5 of which were in make and model. 
Weather reported at the time of the accident included a few clouds at 20,000 feet, 7 miles 
visibility, and wind from 190 degrees at 6 knots.
