The pilot stated he entered the traffic pattern for runway 17 at Lawrence County Airport, 
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. The prevailing winds were calm as the pilot made a 3-point landing 
on the runway. On the landing roll out, a gust of wind picked up the left wing and the airplane 
veered to the right. He put in opposite rudder correction but lost directional control of the 
airplane. The airplane continued to the right, collapsed the left main landing gear with a side 
load, and the left wing collided with the runway. No wind gusts were being reported at the time 
of the accident.
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control on landing rollout resulting in the airplane 
veering to the right and collapsing the left main landing gear with a side load.
On November 1, 2003, at 1300 central standard time, a Luscombe 8F, N9929C, registered to a 
private owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, collapsed the left main landing 
gear on landing roll at Lawrence County Airport, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane received 
substantial damage. The private pilot and private pilot rated passenger reported no injuries. 
The flight originated from Lewisburg, Tennessee, on November 1, 2003, at 1230.
The pilot stated he entered the traffic pattern for runway 17 at Lawrence County Airport, 
Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. The winds were calm and he made a 3-point landing to the runway. 
On the landing roll out, a gust of wind lifted the left wing up and the airplane started veering to 
the right. The put in opposite rudder correction and lost directional control of the airplane. The 
airplane continued to the right, collapsed the left main landing gear with a side load, and the 
left wing collided with the runway. The airplane came to a stop.  The pilot and the passenger 
exited the airplane and observed the left wing spar had been bent upward.
The nearest weather reporting facility at the time of the accident was Nashville International 
Airport, Nashville, Tennessee. No gust were being reported at the time of the accident.
