The airplane was flying through a valley when the pilot unexpectedly encountered rapidly 
rising terrain. The valley that the accident airplane went through, gains approximately 3,000 
feet over 5 statute miles. The pilot was forced to turn sharp to the right and could not maintain 
altitude. The airplane impacted into a heavily forested area, destroying the airplane and 
causing serious injury to the pilot receiving instruction and the flight instructor on board.
the dual student's failure to maintain clearance from the terrain.  Also causal was the flight 
instructor's inadequate supervision.  Low altitude flight and rising terrain are contributing 
factors.
On November 1, 2003, at approximately 1157 mountain standard time, a Cessna 172R, 
N9864F, operated by Hesston College, was destroyed following impact with terrain during 
climb near Cloudcroft, New Mexico. The commercial certificated flight instructor and private 
pilot receiving instruction were seriously injured, and a private pilot passenger received minor 
injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The mountain flying training flight was 
being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91. The flight originated from Las 
Cruces, New Mexico, at approximately 1100 and was en route to Roswell, New Mexico.
The airplane was one of three airplanes participating in a mountain flying training program. 
According to the accident report submitted by the college, the flight was proceeding through a 
valley, en route to Roswell. The terrain "rose up unexpectedly." The valley that the accident 
airplane was in, rises approximately 3,000 feet in 5 statute miles. According to the college, the 
airplane was unable to climb fast enough to clear the rising terrain. The airplane turned sharp 
to the right but was unable to maintain terrain separation. The airplane made a forced landing 
in a heavily forested area in Lincoln National Forest. During the forced landing, the airplane 
impacted several trees, separating both wings and the left horizontal stabilizer. The airplane 
came to rest inverted. 
The calculated density altitude at the accident site was approximately 10,380 feet. According to 
the Cessna Pilot Operating Handbook, the service ceiling of the C172R is 13,500. The 
maximum gross weight is 2,450 pounds and the actual weight of the accident airplane was 
calculated to be 2,424 pounds. Based on these conditions, the maximum rate of climb was 200 
feet per minute.
