The instructor and student stated that during a simulated engine out approach and landing, 
the approach was at a higher than normal glide path. Touch down was further down the 
runway than normal. The dual student stated it would have been possible to complete the 
landing roll in the grass, however, the instructor initiated a go-around. The dual student stated 
the stall warning horn activated during the climb and the airplane contacted trees at the 
departure end of the runway. The instructor stated they had no mechanical failures with the 
airplane. The engine was operated to full power after the accident with no evidence of failure or 
malfunction. The carburetor heat was found on after the accident.
The flight instructor's improper monitoring of the dual student during a simulated engine out 
approach and her delayed decision to initiate a go-around resulting in the airplane colliding 
with trees at the departure end of the runway during the go-around.
On August 2, 2001, about 1520 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172N, N3467E, registered to 
Aviation Atlanta, Inc, collided with trees during an aborted landing at Covington Municipal 
Airport, Covington, Georgia, while on a 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed. The airplane 
received substantial damage and the commercial-rated flight instructor and private-rated dual 
student received minor injuries. The flight originated from Atlanta, Georgia, the same day, 
about 1417.
The flight instructor stated that after takeoff, they performed several commercial maneuvers 
and then diverted to Covington Municipal Airport to perform landings. They performed two 
full-stop landings. They took off on runway 10, and while turning crosswind, she applied 
carburetor heat and reduced engine power to idle. She then instructed the dual student to land 
on runway 28. When they aligned with the runway it appeared they were slightly high on the 
glide path to land in the first one third of the runway. She instructed the dual student to slow 
slightly to increase the rate of descent. After touchdown, they both applied the brakes and it 
appeared they would not stop before reaching the end of the runway, and the tires were 
skidding. The instructor took control of the airplane and began a short field takeoff. She 
believes that when they realized they might contact the trees at the departure end of the 
runway, the dual student may have fully deflected the control wheel to the left. They contacted 
the trees in a descending left bank and came to rest in the trees. The instructor stated they had 
no mechanical difficulties with the airplane.
The dual student stated that while on final approach for the simulated engine out landing, they 
were above the desired approach path and at 75 knots airspeed. The instructor directed her to 
pitch up to reduce the airspeed in order to increase the sink rate. The airplane gained altitude, 
slowed down, and then started to descend, while moving further down the runway. It was clear 
to her that they were very far down the runway, a distance that had eliminated the possibility of 
a go-around. They were very close to landing, if not already landed. It was clear that they would 
be able to land safely and finish the roll out in the grass. At this point, the instructor took 
control of the airplane and initiated a go-around. She told the instructor to just go into the 
grass. The instructor continued the takeoff attempt. The stall warning horn was sounding 
during the climbout due to the low airspeed and the pitch up trim condition. She began to 
release the pitch up trim. She then put her hands back on the control wheel to help pull up. 
They then contacted the trees.
The NTSB examined the airplane after recovery. The carburetor heat was found on. The 
airframe fuel lines were unobstructed. A fuel supply was connected to the engine, which was 
still mounted on the airplane, and the engine was started and operated to full power with no 
evidence of failure or malfunction. The engine magneto drop was about 50 rpm for each 
magneto. Maximum rpm obtained during the test run was 2,000 rpm. When carburetor heat 
was applied at full power, the engine dropped to 1,900 rpm. The normal static full power for 
the engine is about 2,200 rpm. The low full power rpm obtained during the test run was 
attributed to the fact that the engine test run was performed with the accident propeller, which 
had received bending damage during the accident.
