The pilot/mechanic performed a forced landing on a bean field after a total loss of engine 
power during departure from the airport. The pilot/mechanic reported that he was performing 
a maintenance test flight when the engine quit at approximately 500 feet agl.   He reported that 
the no fuel leaks were noted during a ground test run and no anomalies were noted during a 
run up prior to departure. The main fuel line to the flow divider was reported to have backed 
off.
the inadequate maintenance inspection and the unsuitable terrain encountered by the pilot 
mechanic.  The fuel system leak was a contributing factor.
On August 1, 2001, at 1131 central daylight time, a Beech A36, N136GR, piloted by a private 
pilot, was substantially damaged during a forced landing on a bean field near Sugar Grove, 
Illinois.  The pilot reported a total loss of engine power during climb from runway 18 (3,199 
feet by 75 feet, asphalt) at the Aurora Municipal Airport, Sugar Grove, Illinois.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 
maintenance test flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The private pilot reported no 
injuries.  The local flight originated from the Aurora Municipal Airport, Aurora, Illinois at 1129.
The pilot/mechanic reported that the airplane had received an annual inspection. A ground 
test run was performed prior to the maintenance test flight with no fuel leaks noted.  He 
reported that during a postaccident inspection of the airplane, a fuel line loosened but did not 
come completely off the fitting.  He also stated that there was evidence of a small fire in the 
engine compartment area.
The pilot reported in a written statement, "Ground run up after annual [inspection] ok.  No 
leakage noted.  Run up before flight ok.  Full power attained at takeoff.  [Approximately] 500 
[feet] engine quit.  Changed fuel tanks [and] turned on fuel pump.  Engine restarted [and] quit 
after [approximately] 5 [seconds].  Put down landing gear and landed straight ahead in a bean 
field.  Beans collapsed nosegear [and] damaged wings [and] firewall.  No injuries.  Found main 
fuel line to flow divider had backed off about 3-4 turns.  Fuel stain evident."
