The certificated commerical pilot was flying the second airplane in a flight of two airplanes, 
within an area of mountainous terrain.  Shortly after takeoff he lost sight of the first airplane, 
but was able to maintain radio contact.  As the flight progressed, it began to rain, accompanied 
by diminished visibility and low ceilings.  He then became disoriented to his exact position, 
and he mistakenly turned into a small valley.  The pilot said that once he entered the valley, the 
terrain began rising, so he initiated a climb.  The valley became too narrow to turn around, and 
the clouds began to close around the airplane as he continued to climb.  The terrain continued 
to rise, and he noticed his airspeed was decreasing.  Shortly thereafter, the airplane collided 
with rising terrain, and sustained substantial damage. 
 
  
The pilot's continued flight into adverse weather conditions after becoming lost/disoriented.  
Factors in the accident were rising terrain, a blind/box canyon, low clouds, and rain.
On August 3, 2001, about 1250 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Cessna 207 airplane, 
N9794M, sustained substantial damage during an in-flight collision with terrain, about 15 
miles east of Healy, Alaska. The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-
demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The 
airplane was registered to Ronald D. Rosso, and operated by Denali Air Taxi, Inc., Denali Park, 
Alaska.  The certificated commercial pilot, and the five passengers aboard, were not  injured.  
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed in the area of the accident,  and VFR company 
flight following procedures were in effect.    The flight originated from the Denali Wilderness 
Lodge about 1240, en route to the Denali Airstrip. 
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on August 4, the pilot reported that his airplane was the second airplane in a flight of 
two airplanes transporting lodge guests to the Denali Airstrip.  He stated that shortly after 
takeoff he lost sight of the first airplane, but maintained radio contact.  He added that the 
standard route to the Denali Airstrip was through mountainous terrain.  As the flight 
progressed, it began to rain, accompanied by worsening visibility and low ceilings.  The pilot 
said that he became disoriented to his exact position, and mistakenly turned into a small valley.  
He said that once he entered the valley,  the terrain began rising, so he initiated a climb.  The 
valley became too narrow to turn around, and the clouds began to close around the airplane as 
he continued to climb.  The terrain continued to rise, and he noticed his airspeed was 
decreasing.  Shortly thereafter, the airplane collided with rising terrain, and sustained 
substantial damage. 
The emergency locator transmitter (ELT) activated, and personnel from a local helicopter 
operator at Denali Park, began a search, and found the airplane wreckage. 
The pilot stated that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane. 
