On the second approach to land, the pilot elected to perform a touch-and-go landing with flaps 
retracted. As the pilot flared for the touchdown the airplane began to porpoise. When the 
airplane touched down, the pilot reported hearing a thud. Examination of the airplane failed to 
disclose a mechanical malfunction or a component failure.  The airplane sustained structural 
damage to  the nose gear assembly and engine firewall. The pilot reported that the landing 
winds were 180 degrees at 7 to 15 knots. runway 14.
The pilot's improper landing flare that resulted in a hard landing. A factor was the pilot 
induced porpoise.
On August 2, 2001, about 1130 central daylight time, a Cessna 172, N7006A, landed hard at 
Mobile Regional Airport in Mobile, Alabama. The personal flight was conducted under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident, and no flight plan was filed. The airplane sustained substantial damage to the nose 
wheel assembly and firewall, and the private pilot and private-rated safety pilot reported no 
injuries. The flight departed Mobile Downtown Airport in Mobile , Alabama, at 1100. 
The pilot was flying the airplane from the right seat and was practicing ILS approaches on 
runway 14; the safety pilot occupied the left seat. The pilot had executed one practice approach 
and was three miles from the airport on the second approach when the tower requested that 
the airplane maintain its speed. The pilot reported this speed to be 120 mph. The pilot 
requested and was granted a touch-and-go, and the pilot elected to perform the maneuver 
without flaps. The pilot stated, "As I was slowing the aircraft for landing and descending to the 
runway, I began porpoising, possibly from a gust. From that point forward, I am unclear as to 
what happened, except that my plane hit with a thud." 
The post-accident examination of the airplane disclosed that the nose gear assembly and the 
engine firewall  had sustained structural damage. The pilot did not report a mechanical 
problem with the airplane. The examination of the airplane also failed to disclose a mechanical 
malfunction or component failure. The pilot reported that the prevailing winds were 180 
degrees at 7-14 knots. Runway 14 was the landing runway. 
Review of the Mobile Regional Airport automated surface observation system 1056 central 
daylight time and 1156 central daylight time observations showed no wind gusts at the time of 
the accident.
