Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Dallas, OR
Accident Number:
WPR16LA020
Date & Time:
11/02/2015, 1424 PST 
Registration:
N22743
Aircraft:
BELL 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
Analysis 
The commercial pilot of the helicopter reported that, after he released the external load of trees 
in the loading zone and about 50 ft above ground level, it seemed like the engine experienced a 
partial loss of power. The pilot stated that he heard an abnormal noise as the helicopter began 
to spin to the right, and the low rotor rpm warning light illuminated. The pilot jettisoned the 
external load line and rolled the throttle toward a closed position in order to counteract the 
yawing motion, with no response noted. The pilot then initiated an autorotation; during the 
landing sequence, the helicopter impacted a tree and came to rest upright in a nose-high 
position. The pilot further stated that, after the helicopter came to rest, he noted that the 
engine was at a "very slow idle" and he had to shut down the engine. Postaccident examination 
of the helicopter revealed no evidence of any preexisting mechanical anomalies that would 
have precluded normal operation. The engine was removed and installed in an engine test cell 
and ran throughout various power settings. 
The airframe fuel filter was removed. The filter element was almost black. The fuel removed 
was dark, and debris was observed within the fuel filter bowl. The fuel sample from the filter 
housing was tested and found to be within Jet A specifications. The debris noted within the 
sample contained various metals, the source of which could not be determined. Given that fuel 
was found throughout the fuel system, it is unlikely that the debris in the filter resulted in a 
blockage and restriction of fuel flow; however, the reason for the partial loss of engine power 
could not be determined. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 7WPR16LA020
A loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined based on the available 
information.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 7WPR16LA020
Factual Information
On November 2, 2015, about 1424 Pacific standard time, a Bell 206B, N22743, was 
substantially damaged during an autorotation landing following a partial loss of engine power 
near Dallas, Oregon. The helicopter was registered to and operated by Applebee Aviation under 
the provisions of 
14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 133. The commercial pilot, sole occupant 
of the helicopter, sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed for the external load flight. The local flight originated from a staging area 
about 15 minutes prior to the accident.
The pilot reported that prior to the accident flight; the helicopter was refueled with 30 gallons 
of Jet-A fuel. The pilot departed from a staging area and began lifting Christmas trees from a 
field to a nearby loading zone. The pilot stated that after about 5 or 10 loads, he released a load 
of trees in the loading zone and shortly after, it seemed like the engine went to a reduced power 
setting at an altitude of about 50 feet above ground level. He further stated that he heard an 
abnormal noise originate from the helicopter as the helicopter began to spin to the right along 
with an illumination of a low rotor RPM light. The pilot jettisoned the external load line and 
rolled the throttle towards a closed position in order to counteract the yawing motion, with no 
response noted. The pilot initiated an autorotation and during the landing sequence, the 
helicopter impacted a tree. Subsequently, the helicopter came to rest upright in a nose high 
position. The pilot further stated that after the helicopter came to rest, he noted that the engine 
was at a "very slow idle" and he had to shut off the engine.
Postaccident examination of the helicopter by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector 
revealed that the tailboom forward of the tailrotor gearbox was twisted about 90
o
. The 
helicopter was recovered to a secure location for further examination. 
On December 2, 2015, the recovered helicopter was examined at the facilities of AvTech Inc., 
Auburn, Washington, by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge and representatives from Rolls Royce and Bell Helicopters. The examination revealed 
that the skids were removed to facilitate wreckage transport. Flight control continuity was 
established throughout the airframe to the main rotor head and aft to the tailrotor. An area of 
impact damage was observed just forward of the tailrotor gearbox. Continuity of the engine 
controls was established from the cockpit controls to the engine. The airframe fuel filter was 
removed. The filter element was dark, almost black in color. The fuel removed was dark in 
color (charcoal looking). Debris was observed within the fuel filter bowl. Samples of the debris 
and fuel were retained. Power was applied to the helicopter, and the fuel boost pumps were 
turned on. Fuel expelled out of the engine supply fuel lines. A sample was taken, and the fuel 
appeared to be fairly clear in color with no debris noted. Visual inspection of the fuel tanks 
revealed that about 10 to 20 gallons of fuel was present.
The engine was visually intact and all fuel and air lines appeared to be secure. N1 and N2 
rotated freely and continuity was established throughout the engine to the gearbox. The engine 
fuel filter was removed from its housing, and a fuel sample was collected. The fuel was dark in 
Page 4 of 7WPR16LA020
color and contained an unknown sediment inside. The filter was dark in color. The fuel from 
the fuel nozzle supply line was captured and was found clear in color. 
The engine was removed and subsequently shipped to Rolls Royce for further inspection. Fuel 
samples were retained and sent for subsequent testing.
On April 6, 2016, the engine was further examined at the facilities of Rolls Royce, Indianapolis, 
Indiana. The engine was placed on an engine stand, and visually examined. Compressed air 
was applied to the port where the PC Line connects to the compressor scroll. Air was found 
leaking from the PC line that connects to the fuel control unit. The engine was subsequently 
installed in an engine test cell and run for about 90 minutes throughout various power settings. 
During a governor droop test, when the load was removed from the engine to test the 
governor's ability to maintain RPM, N2 RPM increased to the limit for the test cell. Throughout 
the engine run, the engine produced rated power at cruise flight and takeoff power settings. 
The power turbine governor and fuel control unit were removed and subsequently examined at 
the facilities of Honeywell, Inc., South Bend, Indiana, under the supervision of an NTSB 
investigator. The investigator reported that the bench tests of the power turbine governor 
revealed the unit was "sluggish" however, would not result in a loss of engine power. The fuel 
control unit was placed on a test bench and functioned normally.
The fuel sample from the fuel filter housing from the accident helicopter was submitted to a 
third-party laboratory for analysis. There was a small amount of unknown debris visible in the 
sample. Three tests, including Freezing Point; Flashpoint and Distillation were performed on 
the fuel sample. All tests were found to be within specification for Jet A fuel. The debris was 
retained and sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for further examination. The testing 
results for the debris found higher elemental levels of calcium (Ca), copper (Cu), iron (Fe), 
magnesium (Mg), nickel (Ni), potassium (K), silver (Ag) and zinc (Zn). The source of the debris 
could not be determined.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Autorotation
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 5 of 7WPR16LA020
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
26, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/29/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/29/2015
Flight Time:
800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 600 hours (Total, this make and model), 750 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 78 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N22743
Model/Series:
206B B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3624
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid;
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/25/2015, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3201 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
55 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
18443.3 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls Royce
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20B
Registered Owner:
APPLEBEE AVIATION INC
Rated Power:
hp
Operator:
APPLEBEE AVIATION INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Rotorcraft External Load 
(133)
Page 6 of 7WPR16LA020
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KMMV, 159 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
16 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2228 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
45째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 6500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
230째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14째C / 8째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Rain; No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Dallas, OR 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Dallas, OR 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1411 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
45.006944, -123.401944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joshua Cawthra
Adopted Date:
01/25/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Dan Ridgeway; Federal Aviation Administration; Hillsboro, OR
Jack Johnson; Rolls Royce; Indianapolis, IN
Mark Stuntzner; Bell Helicopter; Euless, TX
Publish Date:
01/25/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92270
Page 7 of 7WPR16LA020
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
