Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bryce, UT
Accident Number:
DEN02LA013
Date & Time:
12/01/2001, 1215 MST 
Registration:
N911KH
Aircraft:
Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Sightseeing
Analysis 
The helicopter was fueled to capacity the evening before, and the engine compartment was 
preheated before departure. Preflight inspection revealed no frost on the airframe or rotor 
blades. The particle separator was clean and dry. Engine start and takeoff were normal. After 
crossing a highway 1/2 mile south from the heliport, at an airspeed "in excess of 50 mph [and] 
at an altitude of approximately 50-70 feet," the engine "flamed out." There was a noticeable 
yaw and the pilot heard "the sound of the engine shutting off." He autorotated towards a 
highway right-of-way. The helicopter struck the ground hard and slid 20 to 30 feet. "Mast 
bumping" broke the rotor head off. It struck the rear of the helicopter, severing the tail section. 
The helicopter spun around and rolled over on its right side. Postaccident examination 
disclosed no fuel remaining because the rear skid leg had punctured the fuel tank. The pilot 
and his two passengers had been drenched with fuel when they evacuated the helicopter. All 
fuel lines and fuel filter were intact, free of debris, and contained fuel. The turbine and 
compressor turned freely by hand. The pilot said he noted dirt on the inside of the cap 
"consistent with the dirt at the crash site." Later, he wrote that "the dirt on the inside of the fuel 
cap was orange, the same color as at the heliport. The dirt at the crash site is more brown 
native soil." He noted vehicle tracks in the snow behind the helipad. Footprints led from the 
tire tracks to a small dirt pile and back to the helipad. Suspecting the helicopter may have been 
sabotaged, the pilot contacted the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) field office in St. 
George, Utah. He said that in the 6 years the company has been doing business in the Bryce 
Canyon area, he had been slandered, vandalized, and threatened with death. According to the 
FBI special agent, his agency would not become involved unless there was "conclusive 
evidence" that a crime had been committed.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
loss of engine power for reasons undetermined. Contributing factors were the low airspeed and 
altitude at which to perform an autorotation.
Page 2 of 6DEN02LA013
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. (F) AIRSPEED - LOW
3. (F) ALTITUDE - LOW
4. AUTOROTATION - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
5. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE
Page 3 of 6DEN02LA013
Factual Information
On December 1, 2001, approximately 1215 mountain standard time, a Bell 206B, N911KH, 
operated by Alladin Air Service as a nonscheduled domestic passenger sightseeing flight, was 
substantially damaged when it collided with terrain during a forced landing near Bryce, UT. 
The pilot and two passengers sustained serious injuries. Day visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and a company VFR flight plan had been filed for the local flight being conducted 
under Title 14 CFR Part 135. The flight originated at Bryce approximately 1215.
According to the pilot's accident report, the helicopter was fueled to capacity the evening 
before, and the engine compartment was preheated before departure. His preflight inspection 
revealed no frost on the airframe and rotor blades. The particle separator was clean and dry. 
Engine start and takeoff were normal. After crossing a highway 1/2 mile south from the 
heliport, at an airspeed "in excess of 50 mph [and] at an altitude of approximately 50-70 feet," 
the engine "flamed out." There was a noticeable yaw and the pilot heard "the sound of the 
engine shutting off." He autorotated towards a highway right-of-way. The helicopter struck the 
ground hard and slid 20 to 30 feet. "Mast bumping" broke the rotor head off. It struck the rear 
of the helicopter, severing the tail section. The helicopter spun around and rolled over on its 
right side
The passenger in the rear seat videotaped the flight, including the accident sequence, and a 
copy was made available for examination. As the helicopter sat on the helipad with its rotor 
blades turning, a male could be seen walking around the front of the helicopter and getting into 
the right seat. Engine sounds were normal during takeoff and climb-out. Shortly thereafter, a 
warning horn was clearly audible.
In initial telephone conversations with the pilot, he said he suspected a faulty fuel control unit 
(FCU) was to blame for the power loss. This was the second "loaner" FCU a Dallas overhaul 
facility had sent him to use while his FCU was overhauled. He submitted three FAA Form 
8130-3s (Airworthiness Approval Tags) for documentation. 
The helicopter was transported to the company's hangar at Panguitch Airport where, on 
December 4 and 5, it was examined by an FAA aviation safety inspector and a Rolls-Royce 
investigator. Although the pilot said the helicopter had been fueled to capacity, no fuel 
remained because the rear skid leg had punctured the tank. The pilot and his two passengers 
had been drenched with fuel when they evacuated the helicopter. All fuel lines and fuel filter 
were intact, free of debris, and contained fuel. The turbine and compressor turned freely by 
hand. The pilot wrote, "I also noted the fuel cap, when removed and examined, had dirt on the 
inside of the cap consistent with the dirt at the crash site."
In an undated letter submitted shortly after the accident, the pilot said he became suspicious 
about the dirt on the inside of the fuel cap, so he took soil samples from the accident site and 
from the helipad. "The dirt on the inside of the fuel cap was orange, the same color as at the 
heliport. The dirt at the crash site is more brown native soil," he wrote. He noted vehicle tracks 
in the snow behind the helipad. Footprints led from the tire tracks to a small pile of orange-
colored dirt and back to the helipad. Suspecting the helicopter may have been sabotaged, the 
pilot contacted the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) field office in St. George, Utah. He 
said that in the 6 years the company has been doing business in the Bryce Canyon area, he had 
been slandered, vandalized, and threatened with death. According to the FBI special agent, his 
agency would not become involved unless there was "conclusive evidence" that a crime had 
Page 4 of 6DEN02LA013
been committed.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/09/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/05/2001
Flight Time:
8147 hours (Total, all aircraft), 8012 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 34 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N911KH
Model/Series:
206B 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1855
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/18/2001, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
24 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
1016 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20B
Registered Owner:
N911KH Corp.
Rated Power:
400 hp
Operator:
Alladin Air Service
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
AQ6A
Page 5 of 6DEN02LA013
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BCE, 7586 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1209 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
355°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 1300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.13 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-3°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Bryce, UT (UT77)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1215 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Arnold W Scott
Adopted Date:
12/06/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
David G Cawthra; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Salt Lake City, UT
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6DEN02LA013
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
