The pilot and CFI were conducting a series of touch and go landings when smoke was seen 
streaming from the right lower section of the engine cowling after take off. Witnesses also 
reported hearing a rough engine condition.  At approximately the same time, the pilot initiated 
a left turn towards the airport. The airplane was last seen in a nose low attitude. The airplane 
disappeared below the tree line and collided with the ground. Examination of the engine 
revealed damage throughout the supercharger assembly.  The supercharge impeller was not 
totally secure on the impeller shaft. The impeller shaft retainer nut was loose on its shaft. This 
nut as well as the impeller shaft gear-teeth showed signs of wear. These teeth were worn down 
and disfigured.  Both the aluminum cover plate and the bottom of the impeller blades showed 
signs of circular scraping. Small pieces of metal were found throughout the engine. 
Disassembly of the oil filter revealed metal shavings throughout.  No metal parts or gear teeth 
were found in the oil sump.
A loss of engine power following a supercharger bearing failure and subsequent collision with 
the ground while maneuvering for an emergency landing.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2002, at 1500 eastern standard time, a North American, T-6-AT6D, N7471C, 
registered to U.S. Aircraft Inc, collided with trees, and the ground while maneuvering for an 
emergency landing at the Gilmer County Airport in Gainesville, Georgia.  The instructional 
flight was operated by the private pilot under the provision Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight 
plan filed. Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane 
sustained substantial damage, and the certified flight instructor (CFI) and the private pilot 
received fatal injuries. The instructional flight initially departed from Gainesville, Georgia, at 
1425, on April 1, 2002.
The pilot's wife reported they had recently purchased the T-6 and were not familiar with it. At 
the recommendation of the sales broker, the CFI was selected to train them. They had flown 
several hours with the CFI and on the morning of the accident she had flown about two hours. 
After her flight, the pilot and CFI took off and flew to Lawrenceville, Georgia, where the 
airplane was refueled. 
According to the pilot's wife, she and friends were seated on a bench near runway 29 when the 
pilot and CFI returned from Lawrenceville. They recalled that the pilot and CFI made several 
touch and go landings to runway 29. On the fifth landing and takeoff, they observed a light 
color smoke streaming from the right lower section of the engine cowling. They also reported 
hearing a rough engine condition.  At approximately the same time, the pilot and CFI initiated 
a left turn towards the airport. The airplane was last seen in a nose low attitude. The airplane 
disappeared below the tree line and collided with trees and the ground about 1/4 mile from the 
departure end of runway 29. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Review of information on file with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Airman's 
Certification Division, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, revealed that the pilot being instructed was 
issued a private certificate pilot with ratings for airplane single multiengine land, and 
instrument airplane. Review of records on file with the FAA Aero Medical Records Division 
revealed that the pilot held a third class medical certificate issued July 24, 2001 with no 
restrictions. The pilot reported on his application for the medical certificate that he had 
accumulated 750 total flight hours.
The CFI was issued an Airline Transport Pilot certificate (ATP) August 16, 2000. FAA airmen 
records showed that the CFI was rated for airplane multiengine ATP and single engine land 
commercial level as well as multiple type ratings. Medical records revealed that the instructor 
was issued a first class medical certificate on March 1, 2001. The CFI had accumulated a total 
of 6650 hours, however his total flight experience in the T-6 was not determined. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
On February 19, 2002 the airplane was purchased by U.S. Aircraft, Inc. LLC. The registration 
application paperwork was completed March 8, 2002 but was still being processed at the time 
of the accident. 
Review of maintenance records revealed that the last annual inspection was conducted on 
October 10, 2001 at a total airframe time of 5440.11 and a total engine time of 553.3 since 
overhaul. At the time of purchase the engine had approximately 500 hours. The review of the 
engine maintenance logs showed that the engine was last overhauled in 1976.  The engine oil 
was changed about 25 hours prior to the accident, during the pre-buy inspection. The engine 
oil filter was examined during the oil change and no contamination was detected in the filter 
material. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Weather data was recovered from the nearest observation facility at Dekalb-Peachtree Airport, 
Atlanta, Georgia. The surface weather observation at 1453 EST was: clear sky, visibility 10 
statute miles, temperature 21 degrees Celsius, wind from 290 degrees at 4 knots and 
barometric pressure of 30.01 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The examination of the accident site disclosed that airplane wreckage debris was scattered over 
an area approximately 40 feet long and 40 feet wide. The wreckage was orientated on a 200-
degree magnetic heading.  The accident site examination also showed that the airframe was 
separated into three major pieces. The left and right outboard wing sections were lodged in 
trees 20 feet northeast of the main wreckage. Both wing assemblies sustained leading edge 
crush damage. The main wreckage consisted of the engine assembly, empennage section, and 
the center carry-through wing section. Fuel was found in the engine driven fuel pump and fuel 
lines.
The flight controls and surfaces were also examined at the accident site. This examination 
established flight control movement from the flight control surfaces to the cockpit. The 
airplane was equipped with two flight control sticks and two engine throttle quadrants. 
The engine assembly was attached to the airframe but was displaced aft at the bottom attach 
points into the engine firewall. The carburetor throttle control rods were also deformed and 
displaced from their normally installed positions. The propeller assembly was still attached to 
the engine. 
Examination of the engine revealed damage throughout the supercharger assembly.  The 
supercharger impeller was not totally secure on the impeller shaft. The supercharger impeller 
shaft retainer nut was loose on its shaft. This nut as well as the impeller shaft gear-teeth 
showed signs of wear. These teeth were worn down and disfigured. The steel spacer that sits on 
top of the impeller shaft bearing retainer showed signs of rubbing against its aluminum cover 
plate. Both the aluminum cover plate and the bottom of the supercharger impeller blades 
showed signs of circular scraping. Beneath the steel spacer of the supercharger impeller the 
bearing retainers were found broken. Small pieces of metal were found throughout the engine. 
Disassembly of the oil filter revealed metal shavings throughout. Several teeth on the idler gear 
were found to be separated from the gear. The intermediate gear also had numerous separated 
teeth. The front spark plugs were saturated with oil.  No metal parts or gear teeth were found in 
the oil sump. 
Examination of the airframe revealed that the right wing assembly was torn from the airframe 
outboard the over wing step area. The left wing was torn from the airframe at the wing root. 
The vertical fin and horizontal stabilizer assemblies were still attached to the airframe. The 
tubular structure of the airframe sustained deformation damage and was evident throughout 
the entire tubular network. Both cockpit areas maintained their shapes but also sustained 
deformation to the seat attach points. The airplane was equipped with seat belt and shoulder 
harness restraint systems for both pilot stations. The examination of the restraint systems 
revealed that they were functional. The forward cockpit instrument panel was in the normally 
installed position, however the rear cockpit instrument panel sustained deformation damage 
and was displaced forward. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Forensic Medicine Associates, Inc. conducted postmortem examination of both the 
instructor and the private pilot on April 4, 2002. The CFI's cause of death was determined to 
be multiple blunt force trauma. The private pilot's cause of death was determined to be 
multiple blunt force trauma.  The Toxicology and Accident Research laboratory, Federal 
Aviation Administration, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma performed postmortem toxicology of 
specimens from the pilot and instructor. No carbon monoxide, cyanide, ethanol or drug was 
detected in the blood of the instructing pilot. No carbon monoxide or cyanide was detected in 
the blood and no ethanol was detected in the vitreous of the private pilot. Pseudoephedrine was 
detected in the blood of the private pilot.
  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
During previous instructional flights the pilot and CFI noticed oil on the cowling and 
windscreen, and concluded that there was a small oil leak. A line service manager stated that 
prior to the accident flight he had to wait to refuel the aircraft because the pilot and instructor 
were working near the engine with the cowling removed. At 0900,  41.7 gallons of aviation fuel 
was purchased on the day of the accident. 
The airplane wreckage was released to the family of the pilot.
