The helicopter collided with the ground following a loss of tail rotor drive during a steep 
approach.  After performing various maneuvers, the certified flight instructor (CFI) and the 
student began traffic patterns to a landing zone (LZ).  On short final, approximately 40 feet agl, 
and 40 mph, the helicopter yawed left slowly.  When the helicopter had reached a 45-degree 
left yaw, the CFI took the controls.  As the helicopter approached a 90-degree left yaw, the CFI 
had applied full right pedal.  Simultaneously, he lowered the collective and reduced power.  
The helicopter rotated 360 degrees about 3 times before impact.  Post accident inspection 
revealed incorrect installation of the forward end of the intermediate drive belt on the 
intermediate pulley group.  The tail rotor drive system uses three belts, interconnected via 
pulleys at various points within the tail boom, to drive the tail rotor.  The forward and aft belts 
and pulleys were normal.  The intermediate belt was found shredded, burned, and separated.  
The aft end of the intermediate belt was positioned correctly on the rear pulley; however, the 
forward end was around the wrong pulley, the one meant for the forward belt, which induced a 
large misalignment of the intermediate belt and consequent rub between it and the pulley side.   
All pulleys were installed with specified tightness and with fore/aft play as stated in the 
maintenance manual.  Maintenance records for the helicopter indicated that the belts were 
replaced twice in the past 8 months, both times by the manufacturer.  The first time was in 
August 2001, for a heavy maintenance rebuild.  The second time was in November 2001 
following a tail rotor strike.  The belts had about 200 hours operating time since their last 
replacement in November.
The tail rotor drive system failure as a result of incorrect installation procedures by the 
manufacturer's personnel.
On April 1, 2002, at 0955 mountain standard time, a Rotorway Exec 165F helicopter, N21901, 
collided with the ground following a loss of tail rotor drive during a steep approach near 
Chandler, Arizona.  The helicopter, owned and operated by Rotorway International under 14 
CFR Part 91, was on a local area instructional flight.  The helicopter sustained substantial 
damage.  The commercial pilot/flight instructor sustained serious injuries, and an airline 
transport pilot student sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and no flight plan was filed.  The flight departed from Stellar Airpark, Chandler, about 0900.
The CFI reported that after performing various maneuvers, he and the student began traffic 
patterns to a landing zone (LZ).  On short final, approximately 40 feet, and 40 miles per hour 
(mph), the helicopter yawed left slowly.  When the helicopter had reached a 45-degree left yaw, 
the CFI took the controls.  As the helicopter approached a 90-degree left yaw, the CFI had 
applied full right pedal.  Simultaneously, he lowered the collective and reduced power.  The 
helicopter rotated 360 degrees about 3 times before impact.  The helicopter impacted the 
ground, collapsing the right skid, and coming to rest on its right side.
The helicopter was examined at Rotorway International in Chandler under the auspices of the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector.  He reported that the tail rotor drive system 
uses three belts, interconnected via pulleys at various points within the tail boom, to drive the 
tail rotor.  The forward and aft belts and pulleys were normal.  The intermediate belt was found 
shredded, burned, and separated.  The aft end of the intermediate belt was positioned correctly 
on the rear pulley; however, the forward end was around the wrong pulley, the one meant for 
the forward belt, which induced a large misalignment of the belt and consequent rub between it 
and the pulley side.   All pulleys were installed with specified tightness and with fore/aft play as 
stated in the maintenance manual.  The engine, clutch, drive belt system, and transmission 
were found in working order.
Maintenance records for the helicopter indicated that the belts were replaced twice in the past 
8 months.  The first time was in August 2001, for a heavy maintenance rebuild.  The second 
time was in November 2001 following a tail rotor strike.  The belts had about 200 hours 
operating time since their last replacement in November.
On April 4, 2002, Rotorway International issued a Mandatory Compliance Bulletin M-20 that 
required immediate inspection to verify proper routing of tail rotor drive belts through the tail 
boom.  Any belt not properly routed into the correct idler pulley groove required immediate 
replacement.
