The airline transport pilot was conducting a 14 CFR Part 91 personal cross-country flight, when 
the engine lost power about 20 miles from the final destination.  The pilot said the symptoms 
were similar to fuel starvation, but according to his calculations he should have had 30 minutes 
of fuel remaining.  In a written statement to the NTSB, the pilot wrote that the morning 
following the accident, before the airplane was recovered, he "noticed a substantial amount of 
frost/ice buildup around the left fuel vent, and on the ground from the fuel venting throughout 
the night," and "in my opinion it seemed to indicate that there was still a fair amount of water 
in the fuel that caused this ice buildup."  He wrote, "although I felt I properly drained the tanks 
prior to takeoff, it seems there was still water trapped in the tanks."  After recovery the 
airplane's engine was prepared with a new propeller and clean fuel at an aircraft maintenance 
facility.  The engine was started, and run through a variety of power settings, without any 
evidence of mechanical malfunction.  The pilot reported that during the forced landing, the 
landing gear was torn off, structurally damaging the fuselage.  He also stated that prior to the 
accident there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
The pilot's inadequate preflight inspection, which failed to detect water-contaminated fuel, 
resulting in a loss of engine power during cruise flight, and subsequent in-flight collision with 
terrain.
On October 2, 2005, about 1930 Alaska daylight time, a Cessna 185 airplane, N9950X, collided 
with terrain during an emergency landing following a loss of engine power during normal 
cruise, about 20 miles west of Iliamna, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated by the pilot as 
a visual flight rules (VFR) personal cross-country flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the 
accident occurred.  The airline transport pilot and sole passenger were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight departed from a 
dirt airstrip 20 miles north of Aleknagik, Alaska, about 1830.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on October 4, the pilot said about 20 miles west of Iliamna the 
engine lost power.  He said the symptoms were similar to fuel starvation, but according to his 
calculations he should have had 30 minutes of fuel remaining.  He said during the forced 
landing the landing gear was torn off, structurally damaging the fuselage.  He said prior to the 
accident there were no known mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
In a written statement to the NTSB dated October 16, the pilot wrote that the morning 
following the accident he "noticed a substantial amount of frost/ice buildup around the left fuel 
vent, and on the ground from the fuel venting throughout the night," and "in my opinion it 
seemed to indicate that there was still a fair amount of water in the fuel that caused this ice 
buildup."  He wrote, "although I felt I properly drained the tanks prior to takeoff, it seems there 
was still water trapped in the tanks."
On October 12, after recovery, the airplane's engine was prepared with a new propeller and 
clean fuel.  The engine was started, and run through a variety of power settings, without any 
evidence of mechanical malfunction.
