National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BLAIRSTOWN, NJ
Accident Number: NYC96LA119
Date & Time: 06/01/1996, 1415 EDT
Registration: N8869U
Aircraft: Cessna 172F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During landing the pilot experienced a loss of control, and the airplane went off the side of the runway and struck a tree.
According to the pilot, 'I experienced a wind shift, from essentially, up the runway to a direct crosswind to the right.
This wind shift occurred during my landing flare, and blew me off centerline, and toward the right side of the runway.
I immediately took corrective action, but the inertia drove me off the edge of the runway onto the grass along side of (the runway).
I continued to attempt corrective action, but because the trajectory of my travel was about 45 degrees along the runway, but on the grass, control was difficult to return.
The roll started to straighten out gradually, but by this time, I was along the tree line and the right wing tip clipped a small tree, spinning the nose of the plane into the dirt embankment, and trees, bringing the aircraft to a complete stop.'
The pilot reported no mechanical malfunctions.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain directional control due to improper compensation for wind conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
OBJECT - TREE(S) Factual Information On June 1, 1996, about 1415 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172F, N8869U, was substantially damaged when it collided with trees and terrain during landing at Blairstown Airport(1N7), New Jersey.
The private pilot and passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
No flight plan had been filed for the flight originating in Forty Fort, Pennsylvania.
According to the NTSB Form 6120.1/2 the pilot stated that while landing on runway 25, "I experienced a wind shift from, essentially, up the runway to a direct crosswind to the right.
This wind shift occurred during my landing flare, and blew me off centerline and toward the right side of the runway.
I immediately took corrective action, but the inertia drove me off the edge of the runway onto the grass along side of runway 25.
I continued to attempt corrective action, but because the trajectory of my travel was about 45 degrees along the runway, but on the grass, control was difficult to return.
The roll started to straighten out gradually, but by this time, I was along the tree line and the right wing tip clipped a small tree, spinning the nose of the plane into the dirt embankment and trees, bringing the aircraft to a complete stop."
The pilot reported no mechanical malfunctions.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
