National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RICHLAND, WA
Accident Number: SEA96LA109
Date & Time: 06/01/1996, 1830 PDT
Registration: N88401
Aircraft: Bellanca 8GCBC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he was 'a little hot (short final approximately 62 mph indicated)' on his approach to the 1,000-foot-long gravel airstrip and that he considered, but did not perform, a go-around on two occasions during the approach.
When he increased braking in an effort to stop the aircraft on the airstrip, the aircraft's tail came up.
With its tail in the air, the aircraft then encountered soft dirt on the left edge of the airstrip and continued over onto its back.
The pilot stated in his accident report that a 'go-around could have been made on very short final or immediately upon touch[down].'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to perform a go-around and his subsequent excessive use of the aircraft brakes.
The short airstrip length and the pilot's excessive airspeed for the approach were related factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - SHORT RUNWAY/LANDING AREA 2.
(F) AIRSPEED - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) GO-AROUND - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) BRAKES(NORMAL) - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On June 1, 1996, at approximately 1830 Pacific daylight time, a Bellanca 8GCBC, N88401, sustained substantial damage when it nosed over during landing on a private 1,000-foot gravel strip near Richland, Washington.
The commercial pilot/owner, who was the aircraft's sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR 91 flight from Stehekin State Airport, Stehekin, Washington.
The pilot reported: I made an approach for a landing to the west.
I considered a go-around at this point but was not certain that I would be able to clear the trees at the west end of the strip, thus I applied more brake at which time the tail came up.
Although I...came off the brakes...I was unable to get the tail back down at which point I hit the softer  dirt on the left side of the gravel....the aircraft [pitched] farther forward...and then the aircraft continued over onto its back and came to rest.
The pilot stated in his report that the wind sock at the airstrip indicated a right quartering head wind of about 5 knots at the time of the accident.
The pilot made the following recommendation in his report as to how the accident could have been prevented:  "Go around could have been made on very short final or immediately upon touch[down]."
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 42, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): Glider Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
