National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GEORGETOWN, CA
Accident Number: LAX96LA217
Date & Time: 06/01/1996, 0948 PDT
Registration: N9332F
Aircraft: Hughes 269B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During a dual instructional lesson, the CFI initiated a practice autorotation from 1,000 feet above ground level (agl) while in the traffic pattern.
The CFI reported that as the helicopter descended through 800 feet agl, all engine power was suddenly lost and the practice maneuver turned into a forced landing.
Just prior to experiencing the engine power loss, all instruments had been in the green.
The CFI further stated that the helicopter touched down softly at the approach end of the runway with a forward speed between 2 and 3 miles per hour.
Thereafter, the helicopter tipped forward, shook violently, and the main rotor blade contacted the airframe which resulted in substantial damage.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: loss of engine power for undetermined reason(s), while practicing an autorotation, which resulted in a forced landing; and the flight instructor's misjudged landing flare during the emergency autorotation/landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
AUTOROTATION - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) ---------- Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 3.
(C) FLARE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) Factual Information On June 1, 1996, at 0948 hours Pacific daylight time, the pilot of a Hughes 269B, N9332F, initiated a practice autorotation from 1,000 feet above ground level (agl) while in the traffic pattern at the Georgetown Airport, Georgetown, California.
At the time, the certified flight instructor (CFI) was providing dual instruction to his student.
The aircraft was substantially damaged and there were no injuries.
The flight originated at 0920 from private property in Foresthill, California.
The CFI reported that as the helicopter descended through 800 feet agl, all engine power was suddenly lost and the practice maneuver turned into a forced landing.
Just prior to experiencing the engine power loss, all instruments had been "in the green."
The CFI further stated that the helicopter touched down softly at the approach end of the runway with a forward speed between 2 and 3 miles per hour.
Thereafter, the helicopter tipped forward, shook violently, and the main rotor blade contacted the airframe which resulted in substantial damage.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 25, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Helicopter Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1670 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 70 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3200 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Engine Model/Series: HIO-360-A1A Registered Owner: RICK PATTERSON, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
