National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: RIMROCK, WA
Accident Number: SEA96LA108
Date & Time: 06/01/1996, 1500 PDT
Registration: N2965N
Aircraft: Cessna 120
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot attempted to take off from a 2,471-foot-long rough turf runway.
He reported that the takeoff attempt went normally until the airplane reached a speed of 40 to 45 MPH and that the airplane did not accelerate beyond that speed.
Unable to accelerate or to get airborne by the point on the runway at which he was accustomed to doing so, the pilot aborted the takeoff and initiated braking.
The tailwheel-equipped airplane nosed over onto its back about 200 feet short of the runway end.
After the accident, an FAA inspector computed the airplane to be 32 pounds over maximum gross weight.
The U.S. Government and Washington state airport directories indicated that the unattended airport was closed form October 1 through June 1.
Density altitude at the airport was calculated to be 3,424 feet.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's delay in aborting the takeoff, and his excessive use of brakes while decelerating the airplane during the aborted takeoff.
Factors relating to the accident were: the pilot's loading the airplane above its maximum gross weight, high density altitude, and the rough surface of the runway.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 1.
(F) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - EXCEEDED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH DENSITY ALTITUDE 3.
(C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(C) BRAKES(NORMAL) - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 6.
AIRPORT/FACILITIES - CLOSED Factual Information On June 1, 1996, at approximately 1500 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 120, N2965N, sustained substantial damage when it nosed over during an aborted takeoff at Tieton State Airport near Rimrock, Washington.
The private pilot received a minor injury; his single passenger was uninjured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR 91 local flight.
The pilot was attempting to take off on runway 20, which according to the U.S. Government Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD)  is a 2,471 by 140 foot turf runway with a rough surface.
The airport elevation is 2,961 feet above sea level.
The pilot reported that the takeoff proceeded normally until the airplane reached an indicated airspeed of 40 to 45 MPH, but that "after that the indicated airspeed didn't increase."
This was not happening.
Even though the airspeed indicator had not risen over about 40 or 45 I was still attempted [sic] to ease the yoke back and see if the airplane wanted to fly....The plane still did not want to lift into ground effect.
Based on previous experience I should have had the plane developing lift before the camp ground [just beyond midfield according to a hand-drawn sketch furnished with the pilot's statement.]
When I passed the camp ground, went a little further and still was not developing lift, I pulled all the power...and started applying the [brakes].
I eased back on the yoke lowering the tail to the ground and then continued to hold the yoke in my gut while applying brakes.
As we slowed I applied more brakes....The tail rose and I saw the nose go down as we nosed over the front and  came to rest upside down...approximately 200 [feet] from the end of the strip.
The pilot reported the weather at the airport as clear, 30 miles visibility, temperature 72 degrees F, and altimeter setting 30.80 inches Hg, with no precipitation or restrictions to visibility.
He stated in his narrative that the wind sock at the top of the field "was hanging limp at the time I launched."
Based on the reported temperature and altimeter setting and the field elevation, density altitude was computed by the investigator to be 3,424 feet.
The pilot made the following recommendations on his accident report as to how the accident could have been prevented:  "(1) greater power  (2) less weight  (3) abort sooner  (4) go easier on the brakes as airplane slows."
The A/FD and the Pilot's Guide to Washington Airports (published by the Washington State Department of Transportation Aeronautics Division, which also maintains the unattended airport) both indicate that Tieton State Airport is closed from October 1 through June 1.
The A/FD contains an instruction to contact the state Aeronautics Division prior to use of the airport.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 38, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
