National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WILLIAMSTOWN, NJ
Accident Number: NYC96LA118
Date & Time: 06/01/1996, 1630 EDT
Registration: N8186G
Aircraft: Piper PA-32R
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that while in cruise flight at 2500 feet '.
.
.
just past the [Cedar Lake] VOR .
.
.
there was a loud 'pop' from the engine compartment and an immediate loss of power.'
During a subsequent forced landing, the aircraft struck a large fence post causing the right wing to separate.
The aircraft rotated 90 degrees and the landing gear collapsed.
Examination of the aircraft revealed the magneto had disconnected from the accessory gear box.
An inspection disclosed the upper magneto hold down stud was intact and the associated hardware consisting of the nut, washer, lock washer, and hold-down clip were installed; however, the same pieces of hardware for the lower hold down stud were missing.
Also noted was that a significant section of the magneto housing hold-down flange was fractured.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: inadequate maintenance, which resulted in a failure of the magneto housing hold-down flange, a disconnect of the magneto from the engine, and loss of engine power.
The obstruction (fence post) in the emergency landing area was a related factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL Findings 1.
(C) MAINTENANCE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO - FAILURE 3.
(C) IGNITION SYSTEM,MAGNETO - DISCONNECTED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 4.
(F) OBJECT - FENCE POST Factual Information On June 1, 1996, at about 1630 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-32R, N8186G, was substantially damaged during a forced landing near Williamstown, New Jersey.
The private pilot and two passengers were not injured.
The personal flight originated from Kinston, North Carolina (ISO), at 1400 with Trenton, New Jersey as the intended destination.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that while in cruise flight at 2500 feet "...just past the [Cedar Lake] VOR ...there was a loud 'pop' from the engine compartment and an immediate loss of power."
The pilot said he trimmed the airplane for best glide speed, located the nearest airport with his Loran, and turned the airplane to the heading provided by the Loran.
The front seat passenger announced over the Trenton tower frequency the engine power loss, aircraft location, and aircraft status throughout the forced landing sequence.
The pilot explained that he chose a "...large pair of adjoining fields..." for landing when he could not visually confirm the airport cited by the Loran, and after he determined that all other airport options were outside of the airplane's gliding distance.
He said, "We touched down near the end of the first field, which was separated from the second field by a barbed wire fence.
Unfortunately, one of the posts was, as I learned later, a large railroad tie.
The right wing struck the post at the location of the inner fuel tank, causing separation of the tank and other significant damage to the right wing.
The impact turned the plane about 90 degrees, the landing gear collapsed, and the plane skidded on its belly to a stop in the middle of the second field."
Examination of the aircraft revealed the magneto had disconnected from the accessory gear box.
The inspection disclosed the magneto hold down stud was intact and the associated hardware consisting of the nut, washer, lock washer, and hold-down clip were installed; however, the same pieces of hardware for the lower hold down stud were missing.
Also noted was a significant section of magneto housing hold-down flange was fractured.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 53, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
