National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: KODIAK, AK
Incident Number: ANC96IA077
Date & Time: 06/01/1996, 1430 AKD
Registration: N9608G
Aircraft: Cessna 206
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was landing on a beach near a remote river to pick up fishermen.
During the landing roll-out, the pilot slowed the airplane to about 5 knots and was beginning to turn the airplane around.
The nose wheel encountered an area of soft sand during the turn and the nose wheel strut fractured.
The airplane was equipped with 10.5 X 28.5 X 15 tundra tires, wheels, and hubs that were installed on the main landing gear under an FAA Supplemental Type Certificate.
The STC requires that the airplane must be equipped with an FAA approved nose wheel/tire installation.
The airplane had an oversized 8.50 nose wheel tire and tube installed that was approved by an FAA FSDO inspector under a field approval.
The FAA's handbook for airworthiness inspectors indicates that modifications to landing gear are major alterations and require an STC.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be: The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for landing.
Factors in the accident were: soft terrain, the use of an oversize nose wheel tire, and the FAA's inadequate field approval process for tundra tires.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 2.
(C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) INADEQUATE CERTIFICATION/APPROVAL,AIRCRAFT - FAA(ORGANIZATION) Factual Information On June 1, 1996, about 1430 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire equipped Cessna 206, N9608G, sustained a broken nose wheel strut during landing on a remote beach, about 74 miles southwest of Kodiak, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country positioning flight under Title 14 CFR Part 91 when the incident occurred.
The airplane, registered to Redemption Inc., Kodiak, Alaska, and operated by Island Air Service, sustained minor damage.
The certificated airline transport pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated at the Kodiak airport about 1350.
The pilot reported that he was landing on a beach near the Ayakulik River to pick up fishermen.
During the landing roll-out, the pilot slowed the airplane to about 5 knots and was beginning to turn the airplane around.
The nose wheel encountered an area of soft sand during the turn and the nose wheel strut fractured.
The airplane received damage to the engine cowling and propeller.
The airplane is equipped with Bushmaster Management Company, 10.5 X 28.5 X 15 (Model SWS-1100-A) tundra tires, wheels, and hubs that were installed on the main landing gear under a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) SA3611NM.
The STC requires that the airplane must be equipped with an FAA approved nose wheel/tire installation.
The airplane did have an 8.50 tire and tube installed that was field approved by an FAA airworthiness inspector from the Anchorage Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) on 5/11/89.
A review of the FAA's Airworthiness Inspectors Handbook, order 8300.10, revealed that in Volume 2, Chapter 1, Perform Field Approval of Major Repairs and Major Alterations, Paragraph 7, Required Engineering Approval, states in part: "...A.
Many alterations that are commonly called major alterations are actually major design changes and will require a Supplemental Type Certificate.
Previously unapproved major changes to structural strength, reliability, and operational characteristics affect the airworthiness of the product and therefore require engineering approval.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 21 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 8091 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-520-F48B Registered Owner: REDEMPTION INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
