National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Blythe, CA
Accident Number: GAA16CA411
Date & Time: 08/01/2016, 0045 PDT
Registration: N6728X
Aircraft: BEECH F33
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was conducting a night, visual meteorological conditions flight from a rural desert airport, and reported that prior to the flight, she did a weight and balance, checked the temperature, and did performance calculations.
The pilot reported that after rotation, the airplane was not producing "sufficient power and not climbing as anticipated" and the stall warning horn was audible.
She lowered the airplane's nose, and the stall warning horn silenced.
The pilot further reported that she heard "scraping" [ground impact] against the airplane, but she could not see the terrain due to the night conditions.
Subsequently, the airplane impacted the ground off of the airport, which resulted in substantial damage to the fuselage.
In a follow up email conversation with the pilot's attorney, the attorney said that the pilot reported that the engine was producing power at the time that the aerodynamic stall warning horn was audible and just before impact, but noted that the power was not sufficient.
A photograph of the accident airplane provided by the FAA inspector that responded to the accident, showed all three blades exhibited tip curl, torsional twisting and S-bending, consistent with the engine producing power at the time of impact.
The airplane performance and weight and balance calculations that the pilot performed prior to the accident flight were requested by the National Transportation Safety Board investigator- in-charge (IIC), but were not provided.
The pilot stated she was unaware of any preaccident mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
It is likely that the pilot exceeded the critical angle of attack during takeoff at night resulting in an aerodynamic stall.
The Federal Aviation Administration has published the Airplane Flying Handbook FAA-H- 8083-3A (2004).
This handbook discusses aerodynamic stalls and states in part: The key to stall awareness is the pilot's ability to visualize the wing's angle of attack in any particular circumstance, and thereby be able to estimate his/her margin of safety above stall.
This is a learned skill that must be acquired early in flight training and carried through the pilot's entire flying career.
The pilot must understand and appreciate factors such as airspeed, pitch attitude, load factor, relative wind, power setting, and aircraft configuration in order to develop a reasonably accurate mental picture of the wing's angle of attack at any particular time.
It is essential to flight safety that a pilot takes into consideration this visualization of the wing's angle of attack prior to entering any flight maneuver.
Stall accidents usually result from an inadvertent stall at a low altitude in which a recovery was not accomplished prior to contact with the surface.
Many stall accidents result when a pilot is momentarily distracted from the primary task of flying, such as while maneuvering in the airport traffic pattern, during an emergency, or when fixating on ground objects.
An aerodynamic stall can happen at any airspeed, at any altitude, and with any engine power setting.
Pilots need to be honest with themselves about their knowledge of stalls and preparedness to recognize and handle a stall situation.
Training can help pilots fully understand the stall phenomenon, including angle-of-attack (AOA) concepts and how weight, center of gravity, turbulence, maneuvering loads, and other factors can affect an airplane's stall characteristics.
The stall characteristics may be different in each type of airplane, so learn them before you fly.
The stall airspeeds marked on the airspeed indicator (for example, the bottom of the green arc and the bottom of the white arc) typically represent steady flight speeds at 1G at the airplane's maximum gross weight in the specified configuration.
Maneuvering loads and other factors can increase the airspeed at which the airplane will stall.
For example, increasing bank angle can increase stall speed exponentially.
Reducing AOA by lowering the airplane's nose at the first indication of a stall is the most important immediate response for stall avoidance and stall recovery.
This may seem counterintuitive at low altitudes, but is a necessary first step.
See http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/safety-alerts/documents/SA_019.pdf for additional resources.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents.
Note that this should not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations (FARs).
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Jackie L Vanover Adopted Date: 01/18/2017 Additional Participating Persons: Patrick W Gates; FAA; Riverside, CA Publish Date: 01/09/2017 Note: This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93750
