Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Montgomery, NY
Accident Number:
NYC03LA096
Date & Time:
05/04/2003, 2300 EDT 
Registration:
N55854
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28-180
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
During the nighttime departure, the airplane accelerated normally, with the engine producing 
full power during the takeoff roll and initial climb.  Upon reaching approximately 300 to 400 
feet above the ground, the engine began to lose power.  The CFI took the flight controls and 
performed a forced landing.  During the landing rollout, the airplane rolled through a shallow 
drainage swale, collapsing the nose and right main gear assemblies.  The airplane rotated to the 
right and came to rest upright.  Examination of the wreckage revealed that the fuel line, which 
ran between the fuel pump and the carburetor, was loose at the connection point on the 
carburetor.  When the electric fuel pump was activated, fuel was observed spraying from the 
connection point.  The airplane had accumulated about 20 hours of operation since a 100-hour 
inspection was performed 10 days prior to the accident.  According to 14 CFR Part 43 Appendix 
D - Scope and Detail of Items (as Applicable to the Particular Aircraft) To Be Included in 
Annual and 100 Hour Inspections, "Each person performing an annual or 100 hour inspection 
shall inspect (where applicable) components of the engine and nacelle group..."
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The inadequate 100-hour inspection by maintenance personnel, which resulted in a loose fuel 
line and loss of power.  A factor related to the accident was the dark night conditions.
Page 2 of 7NYC03LA096
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE FITTING - LOOSE
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,100-HOUR INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
4. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
Page 3 of 7NYC03LA096
Factual Information
On May 4, 2003, about 2300 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-180, N55854, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing, after experiencing a partial loss of power while 
departing from the Orange Country Airport, Montgomery, New York.  The certified flight 
instructor (CFI) and student pilot were not injured.  Night visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed the instructional flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the CFI, after completing a 1-hour cross-country flight, the airplane was taxied to 
runway 3, with the intention of practicing takeoffs and landings.  The CFI estimated that the 
fuel on board at the time of departure was approximately 34 gallons, and the fuel selector was 
placed on the right tank because the right fuel gauge was indicating slightly more fuel.
After the student completed the pre-takeoff checklist, the CFI confirmed that the fuel boost 
pump was on, the mixture was full rich, the carburetor heat was off, and the airplane was 
configured for takeoff.  During the departure, the airplane accelerated normally, with the 
engine producing full power during the takeoff roll and initial climb.  Upon reaching 
approximately 300 to 400 feet above the ground, the engine began to lose power.  The CFI took 
the flight controls and immediately executed the emergency checklist, which consisted of 
switching fuel tanks, confirming that the mixture was rich, the fuel boost pump on, and 
applying carburetor heat.  The CFI requested that the student attempt to switch the magnetos, 
which had no effect.  The CFI cycled the throttle several times, which made the engine surge 
briefly, but not produce enough power to maintain altitude.  The CFI advised the student that a 
landing would be made to a field, and instructed him to turn the fuel selector off, turn the boost 
pump off, and pull the mixture to lean.  As the ground came into view, the CFI observed a ditch 
approximately 8 feet deep, and extended the glide so the touchdown point would be beyond the 
ditch.  The airplane touched down clear of the ditch; however, during the landing rollout, the 
airplane rolled through a shallow drainage swale, collapsing the nose and right main gear 
assemblies.  The airplane rotated to the right and came to rest upright.
The wreckage was examined by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector.  He observed that 
the fuel line, which ran between the fuel pump and the carburetor, was loose at the connection 
point on the carburetor.  When the electric fuel pump was activated, fuel was observed 
spraying from the connection point.
Fuel was observed in both wing tanks, and was absent of debris and contamination.
Examination of the gascolator and the fuel line which ran between the fuel selector and the fuel 
pump, revealed an absence of fuel.
Blue stains were observed on the outer skin of the airplane, from the firewall area, extending 
about 4 feet aft.
The airplane had accumulated about 20 hours of operation since a 100-hour inspection was 
performed on April 25, 2003.
According to 14 CFR Part 43 Appendix D - Scope and Detail of Items (as Applicable to the 
Particular Aircraft) To Be Included in Annual and 100 Hour Inspections:
"Each person performing an annual or 100 hour inspection shall inspect (where applicable) 
components of the engine and nacelle group as follows:
Page 4 of 7NYC03LA096
(1) Engine section - for visual evidence of excessive oil, fuel, or hydraulic leaks, and sources of 
such leaks.
(2) Studs and nuts - for improper torquing and obvious defects.
(3) Internal engine - for cylinder compression and for metal particles or foreign matter on 
screens and sump drain plugs. If there is weak cylinder compression, for improper internal 
condition and improper internal tolerances.
(4) Engine mount - for cracks, looseness of mounting, and looseness of engine to mount.
(5) Flexible vibration dampeners - for poor condition and deterioration.
(6) Engine controls - for defects, improper travel, and improper safetying.
(7) Lines, hoses, and clamps - for leaks, improper condition and looseness.
(8) Exhaust stacks - for cracks, defects, and improper attachment.
(9) Accessories - for apparent defects in security of mounting.
(10) All systems - for improper installation, poor general condition, defects, and insecure 
attachment.
(11) Cowling - for cracks, and defects."
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
34, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/11/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/28/2003
Flight Time:
607 hours (Total, all aircraft), 468 hours (Total, this make and model), 545 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 77 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 17 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 7NYC03LA096
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
26, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/16/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
34 hours (Total, all aircraft), 34 hours (Total, this make and model), 10 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 14 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 7 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N55854
Model/Series:
PA-28-180 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-7305485
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/25/2003, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
20 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5603 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A4A
Registered Owner:
KS Aircorp
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
KS Aircorp
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7NYC03LA096
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MGJ, 365 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2254 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.17 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Montgomery, NY (MGJ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Newburgh, NY (SWF)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2300 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Orange County Airport (MGJ)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
365 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
3
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5006 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
41.509722, -74.264444
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Stephen M Demko
Adopted Date:
06/30/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Kenneth Symons; FAA; Teterboro, NJ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7NYC03LA096
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
