While in cruise flight the pilot noted a decrease in engine rpm. He began to troubleshoot the 
problem and reversed course to head toward more favorable terrain for a forced landing. After 
completing the turn, the engine seized, and the pilot performed a forced landing to a pasture. 
During the landing roll, the right wing impacted a bale of hay, resulting in substantial damage. 
An examination of the engine revealed that the loss of engine power and resultant seizure was 
due to a loss of engine oil. Further examination revealed that the bolts on the vacuum pump 
were loose and the engine oil was exiting at that location. An examination of the airframe and 
remaining systems revealed no anomalies.
The loss of engine power due to improper maintenance and resultant oil starvation.
On July 1, 2011, approximately 1100 central daylight time, a Piper PA-28-180, N56417, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted a bale of hay during a forced landing near Flippin, 
Arkansas. The pilot was seriously injured. The airplane was registered to Mid-South Specialty 
Construction LLC., and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country flight 
which operated without a flight plan. The flight originated from Mountain Home, Arkansas, 
and was en route to Marshall, Arkansas.
According to the pilot, he was in cruise flight when he noted a decrease in engine rpm. The 
pilot began to troubleshoot the decrease and reversed course to head towards more favorable 
terrain for a forced landing. After completing the turn, the engine seized. The pilot performed a 
forced landing to a pasture. During the landing roll, the right wing impacted a bale of hay, 
separating the right wing from the fuselage.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector reported that the airplane had just undergone 
maintenance. An examination of the engine revealed that the loss of engine power and 
resultant seizure was due to a loss of engine oil. Further examination revealed that the bolts on 
the vacuum pump were loose and the engine oil was exiting at this location. An examination of 
the airframe and remaining systems revealed no anomalies.
