Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MILWAUKEE, WI
Accident Number:
CHI99FA208
Date & Time:
07/02/1999, 0806 CDT 
Registration:
N502ME
Aircraft:
McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
9 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
The lavatory service truck impacted the fuselage of the parked aircraft while the truck was 
being backed into position.  The driver of the lavatory service truck reported that her foot 
slipped off the brake pedal and depressed the accelerator pedal.  Marshallers were not used 
during lavatory servicing. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The vehicle driver's inadvertent application of the accelerator pedal while backing towards the 
aircraft. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: STANDING - ENGINE(S) NOT OPERATING
Findings
1. OBJECT - VEHICLE
2. (C) THROTTLE/POWER CONTROL - INADVERTENT ACTIVATION - DRIVER OF VEHICLE
Page 2 of 5CHI99FA208
Factual Information
 On July 2, 1999, at 0806 central daylight time, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9-32, N502ME, 
operated by Midwest Express Airlines Incorporated (MEA) as Flight 2, received substantial 
damage when a lavatory service truck impacted the fuselage of the aircraft at Gate 41, 
Concourse D, at General Mitchell International Airport (MKE), Milwaukee, Wisconsin.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The through-flight was 
operating under the provisions of CFR Part 121.  The flightcrew, five passengers and the 
lavatory truck driver reported no injuries.  The flight originated at La Guardia Airport, New 
York, New York, with a scheduled stop at MKE, en route to Kansas City International Airport, 
Kansas City, Missouri.
The lavatory truck driver reported that she began a 0530 work shift on lavatories the day of the 
accident.  It was her first time alone and second time servicing aircraft. 
During a telephone conversation, the lavatory truck driver reported the following:  She was 
assigned lavatory service on the day of the accident.  She had waited for Flight 2 to land, which 
was her fourth aircraft that she had serviced that day.  She stated that she was riding the brake 
while maneuvering the lavatory truck backwards.  She would usually stop when the flags, 
mounted on the aft end of the truck, touched the aircraft.  While maneuvering backwards, her 
foot slipped off the brake and hit the accelerator pedal.  She stopped as soon as she could but at 
that time she had already hit the aircraft.  She stated that she would have one arm on the 
steering wheel and one arm on the seat while backing up.  She was taught to ride the brake at a 
walking speed when at a point 4 ft from the aircraft.  From what she noticed, everyone else was 
using the same method.  She also reported that she scooted up in the seat but did not think of 
adjusting it.  She was wearing Occupational Safety and Health Administration approved, steel 
toed, Harley Davidson boots.  She reported that her height was 5 feet 6 inches.
A training record provided by MEA indicates that the driver of the lavatory truck was a ramp 
service agent hired on June 7, 1999.  She received lavatory service training on June 14, 1999.  
The record also indicated that the ramp service agent completed training on June 28, 1999.  
The lavatory truck involved in the accident was manufactured by Wollard Airport Equipment 
Company, Miami, Florida.  The lavatory service truck, model TLS-770, was constructed from a 
Ford F-350 vehicle cab, chassis, a 445-gallon waste tank and a 270-gallon flush water tank.  
The tank assembly was mounted on the rear of the chassis and had a height of 57-3/4 inches 
from the ground.  The truck was also equipped with a service hose which was approximately 5 
feet in length.  A photo included in this report shows that the top of the tank assembly(s) 
extends into the rear windshield.  
During a meeting, MEA representatives reported the policy for minimum distance that service 
vehicles should approach aircraft to be 3 feet for the lavatory service trucks and 4 feet for the 
potable water trucks.  During the field investigation, potable water trucks would service aircraft 
at an estimated distance of 4 feet from the aircraft.  A ramp service agent of 6-1/2 years stated, 
that she did not know the length of the potable water trucks fill hose.  She indicated that in 
servicing the aircraft with potable water she would, at times, use a marshaller to provide 
guidance in the backing the water truck to the aircraft.  She stated that she did not use a 
marshaller when backing the lavatory service truck since there was nobody working on that 
side of the aircraft.  Photos depicting the position she would use in backing the lavatory truck 
were taken along with photos of water and lavatory servicing during the field investigation.  
Page 3 of 5CHI99FA208
The photos are included in this report.
Following the accident, the MEA Ramp Service Manual has been revised to reflect changes 
made to the procedures used in servicing aircraft.  The manual states, "A guide person or 
marshaller shall be utilized when backing a vehicle to or from an aircraft.  It is important for 
the guide person to stand in a location visible to the driver in a rear view mirror or to one side 
(not directly behind the truck) while directing the vehicle.
The Federal Aviation Administration and MEA were parties to the investigation.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/17/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
8000 hours (Total, this make and model), 240 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 54 hours (Last 
30 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
McDonnell Douglas
Registration:
N502ME
Model/Series:
DC-9-32 DC-9-32
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
48132
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
91
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/25/1999, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
110000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
63 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
41567 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
48132
Registered Owner:
MIDWEST EXPRESS AIRLINES 
INC.
Rated Power:
14500 lbs
Operator:
MIDWEST EXPRESS AIRLINES 
INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
MWEA
Page 4 of 5CHI99FA208
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MKE, 723 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0756 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 25000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
253°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
NEW YORK, NY (LGA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
KANSAS CITY, MO (MCI)
Type of Clearance:
Departure Time:
0000 
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
GENERAL MITCHELL INTL (MKE)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
723 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
4 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
5 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
9 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
MITCHELL   F GALLO
Adopted Date:
01/18/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
REXFORD D WHITE; MILWAUKEE, WI
EILEEN D BRUESEWITZ; OAK CREEK, WI
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5CHI99FA208
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
