Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Unalaska, AK
Accident Number:
ANC17LA011
Date & Time:
12/02/2016, 1200 AKS 
Registration:
N7085K
Aircraft:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER R22
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of visual reference
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
The commercial pilot of the helicopter stated that the purpose of the flight was to transport a 
telecommunications technician to a cattle ranch on an island. After departing from the airport, 
while flying overwater, the pilot observed a snow squall with near-zero visibility and decided to 
return to the airport. On the return trip, while flying in a mountainous valley, another snow 
squall moved into the area. He stated that due to the deteriorating flight conditions, he 
conducted a precautionary landing to remote, snow-covered terrain to wait for improved flight 
conditions. Once the squall passed, he continued to the airport. Several minutes later, another 
snow squall arrived, and the pilot decided to conduct another precautionary landing. During 
the landing sequence, the main rotor system downwash resulted in whiteout conditions, and 
the pilot was unable to recognize any topographical features. The main rotor blades impacted 
terrain and the helicopter rolled onto its left side. The pilot reported that there were no 
preimpact mechanical failures or malfunctions with the airframe or engine that would have 
precluded normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate clearance from terrain during a precautionary landing 
in whiteout conditions, which resulted in an in-flight collision with terrain. 
Page 2 of 8ANC17LA011
Findings
Aircraft
Altitude - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Snowy/icy terrain - Effect on operation (Cause)
Whiteout - Effect on personnel (Cause)
Page 3 of 8ANC17LA011
Factual Information
On December 2, 2016, about 1200 Alaska standard time, a Robinson R-22 Beta helicopter, 
N7085K, collided with remote snow-covered terrain while landing, about 10 miles southwest of 
Unalaska, Alaska. The commercial pilot sustained no injury, the passenger sustained minor 
injuries, and the helicopter sustained substantial damage. The helicopter was registered to, and 
operated by, Bering Pacific Ranches Ltd., Calgary, Alberta, Canada, as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) flight under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Deteriorating 
visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no flight plan was 
filed. The flight originated from the Unalaska Airport, Unalaska, about 1100. 
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on December 7, the pilot stated that the purpose of the flight was 
to transport a telecommunications technician to the Fort Glenn cattle ranch on Umnak Island. 
After departing from the Unalaska Airport, while flying overwater past Makushin Bay near 
Cape Starichkof, he observed a snow squall with near zero visibility. The pilot decided to return 
to Unalaska. On the return trip, while flying in a mountainous valley, a snow squall moved into 
the area. He stated that due to the deteriorating flight conditions, he conducted a 
precautionary landing to remote snow-covered terrain to wait for improved flight conditions. 
Once the snow squall passed, he departed to head back to Unalaska. Several minutes later, he 
encountered a second snow squall and decided to conduct another precautionary landing. 
During the precautionary landing sequence, whiteout conditions were present from the main 
rotor system downwash from the previous snow squall, and the pilot was unable to recognize 
any topographical features. The main rotor blades impacted terrain and the helicopter rolled 
onto its left side. Both occupants egressed from the wreckage, a personal locator beacon was 
activated, and the occupants were extracted from the accident site via a U.S. Coast Guard MH-
65D helicopter. 
The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the fuselage, main rotor system, tail boom, and 
tail rotor system.
The pilot reported that there were no preimpact mechanical failures or malfunctions with the 
airframe or engine that would have precluded normal operation. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
In the NTSB Accident/Incident Reporting Form 6120.1, the pilot reported that he held a 
helicopter instrument rating in addition to instructor ratings for helicopter and instrument 
helicopter. He additionally reported 70 hours of simulated instrument flight time and no hours 
were reported for actual instrument flight time. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter had no onboard weather capability and it was not instrument flight rules-
equipped and certified. The helicopter had a standard skid configuration with no emergency 
floatation system installed.
Page 4 of 8ANC17LA011
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest official weather observation station is located at the Unalaska Airport, about 10 
miles northeast of the accident site. At 1200, an Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) 
was reporting, in part: wind 220° (true) at 18 knots, gusting 25 knots; visibility 10 statute 
miles; clouds and sky condition, broken clouds at 1,600 feet; temperature 37° F; dew point 27° 
F; altimeter 30.19 inHg.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The accident helicopter was not equipped, nor was it required to be equipped with an 
emergency locator transmitter. The pilot and passenger were not wearing flight helmets for the 
flight. The helicopter was equipped with 3-point restraint systems for the two seats.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Naval Research Laboratory has published the Forecaster's Handbook for the Bering Sea, 
Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska (1993). This document discusses snowfall and snow cover 
on the Aleutian Islands and states in part:
During winter, snow frequently covers the ground but the depth of coverage rarely exceeds 1 
foot (30 centimeters). High winds, however, cause snow to drift so that depth at an individual 
location is highly dependent on topography. Some depressions may fill to depths exceeding 6 
feet (1.8 meters), and other areas remain relatively free of snow. Because of the relatively mild 
temperatures, the snow is frequently of the wet, heavy type. Annual rainfall for the islands 
averages 40 to 50 inches (102 to 152 centimeters), and, again is heavily influenced by 
topography so that individual locations may have quite different rainfall amounts even though 
they are separated by only a short distance.
History of Flight
Landing
Loss of visual reference (Defining event)
Collision during takeoff/land
Post-impact
Roll over
Page 5 of 8ANC17LA011
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/28/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/23/2016
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1940 hours (Total, all aircraft), 943 hours (Total, this make and model), 1800 hours 
(Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 185 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 45 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER
Registration:
N7085K
Model/Series:
R22 BETA
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
1999
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2923
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid;
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/12/2016, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1370 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3726.8 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-J2A
Registered Owner:
Bering Pacific Ranches Ltd.
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
Bering Pacific Ranches Ltd.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 8ANC17LA011
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PADU, 10 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
9 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2100 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
42°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 1600 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
18 knots / 25 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.19 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
3°C / -3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Snow
Departure Point: 
UNALASKA, AK (DUT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Unalaska, AK 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1100 AKS
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
53.785000, -166.709722 (est)
Preventing Similar Accidents
Understanding Flat Light and Whiteout Conditions
Flight operations in geographic areas that are susceptible to flat light and whiteout conditions 
can lead to accidents, as visual references are greatly reduced for pilots.

Flat light occurs when the sky is overcast, especially over snow-covered terrain and large 
bodies of water. In flat light conditions, no shadows are cast and terrain features and 
other visual cues are masked, making it difficult for pilots operating under visual flight 
rules (VFR) to perceive depth, distance, or altitude. These conditions combine to create 
an environment where it is difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish the sky from the 
ground.

Similarly, whiteout conditions can occur in areas with snow cover. Pilots can experience 
a loss of depth perception and become spatially disoriented, unable to maintain visual 
reference with the ground and unaware of their actual altitude.
What Can Pilots Do?
Page 7 of 8ANC17LA011

If possible, look for, use, and don™t lose sight of multiple visual reference points.

Obtain an instrument rating and become proficient and comfortable with operating in 
instrument meteorological conditions (IMC). Trust the cockpit instruments and develop 
good cross-check practices.

Understand that the ability to judge the height and determine the contour of terrain is 
difficult in conditions where the sky and ground (or water) are similar in color. When 
landing on snow-covered terrain, conduct an overflight and consider using weighted 
flags or other markers that can be dropped from an aircraft and provide contrast. 
Shorelines may also provide needed contrast.

If you regularly fly in snowy conditions, become proficient and comfortable with taxiing, 
taking off, landing, and conducting en route maneuvers and go-arounds in areas with 
snow. If visibility drops, use your instruments and land at the nearest suitable airport.

Install instruments that can enhance situational awareness (for example, radar 
altimeters, ground proximity warning systems, onboard weather systems, and GPS 
displays).

Check all available weather sources before and during a flight. Study the flight routes 
and avoid potentially hazardous areas (such as rapidly rising terrain, towers/wires, and 
large open water areas), particularly if the weather is conducive to flat light or whiteout 
conditions.

Set and use personal minimums, taking into account your skill level and the demands of 
a situation. Sticking to your personal minimums helps manage risk.

Use other sources of information during a flight to determine the weather conditions 
(for example: company dispatch, other pilots operating in the area, or weather cameras 
that may be in place, particularly in Alaska).
Interested In More Information?

Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Pamphlet AM-400-00/1, 
ﬁSpatial Disorientation 
Visual Illusions,ﬂ
 explains both phenomena and how to avoid them during flight 
operations.

The FAA pamphlet, 
ﬁFlying in Flat Light and White Out Conditions,ﬂ
 provides 
information about how to safely operate in these conditions.

FAA Pamphlet P-8740-24, 
ﬁWinter Flying Tips,ﬂ
 provides information to remind pilots 
about winter weather operating procedures.

The FAA Safety Team provides access to online training courses, seminars, and 
webinars. The course ﬁWeather Wise: VFR into IMCﬂ and many others can be accessed 
from 
www.faasafety.gov.

FAA Advisory Circular 60-22, 
ﬁAeronautical Decision Makingﬂ
 provides information 
about how to implement the various aspects of aeronautical decision-making into flight 
operations.

FAA Advisory Circular 61-134, 
ﬁGeneral Aviation Controlled Flight into Terrain 
Awareness,ﬂ
 provides information about controlled flight into terrain and mitigation 
strategies.

The NTSB issued Safety Recommendations A-02-33 through -35 and A-79-75 to 
improve, respectively, the safety of helicopter operations in flat light and whiteout 
Page 8 of 8ANC17LA011
conditions and GA safety in Alaska and other regions with similar environmental 
conditions.

NTSB Safety Alert SA-020, ﬁReduced Visual References Require Vigilance,ﬂ provides 
information about operating in reduced visibility conditions and historical accident 
information.
The NTSB™s Aviation Information Resources web page, 
www.ntsb.gov/air,
 provides convenient 
access to NTSB aviation safety products.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents. Note that this should 
not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations 
(FARs). 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael J Hodges
Adopted Date:
11/14/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Peter Alexakis; FAA Anchorage FSDO; Anchorage, AK
Publish Date:
11/14/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94493
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
