Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Mt Vernon, IN
Accident Number:
CEN17FA046
Date & Time:
12/02/2016, 1237 CST 
Registration:
N129LZ
Aircraft:
Gordon PEGAZAIR P 100
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The 64-year-old pilot, who was the airplane owner, departed on a local personal flight in the 
airplane about 45 minutes before the accident. Witnesses saw the airplane at 400-500 ft above 
ground level when it entered a descent, pitched up, rolled right, and then pitched nose down 
impacting the ground. Ground scarring surrounding the airplane was consistent with a near-
vertical nose-down impact attitude, which resulted in the engine separating and coming to rest 
about 20 ft from the airframe. Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed no evidence 
of any mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation of the airplane. 
According to his pilot logbook, the pilot had not completed a flight review since 2012, and the 
pilot's last Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman medical certificate was issued in 
2012. At the time of the accident, he was operating an airplane that required a medical 
certificate, but his certification was no longer valid. 
The pilot's personal medical records showed a history of a chronic progressive 
neurodegenerative disease beginning in 2011 with intermittent worsening of symptoms. The 
disease and its symptoms likely impaired his ability to safely operate the airplane. Toxicology 
testing of samples from the pilot detected ethanol at 0.070 gm/dl in vitreous and 0.038 g/dl in 
blood. Although blood levels of ethanol can change after death, the vitreous from an intact eye 
is not subject to significant postmortem changes. Therefore, it is likely the ethanol detected in 
blood and vitreous was from ingestion. The vitreous blood level was well above the FAA 
prohibited level of 0.04 gm/dl, and mild impairment has been shown at blood levels as low as 
0.020 gm/dl. It is likely that the pilot was experiencing some level of impairment from alcohol 
ingestion and that the combination of the pilot's progressive degenerative neurologic condition 
and his use of alcohol impaired his ability to safely operate the airplane and contributed to the 
accident. 
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 8CEN17FA046
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain airplane control, which resulted in a collision with terrain. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's impairment resulting from the combination of his 
progressive degenerative neurologic condition and his use of alcohol.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Neurological - Pilot (Factor)
Alcohol - Pilot (Factor)
Qualification/certification - Pilot
Page 3 of 8CEN17FA046
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On December 2, 2017, about 1237 central standard time, an experimental amateur-built 
Pegazair P 100 airplane, N129LZ, impacted a field near Mt Vernon, Indiana. The commercial 
pilot was fatally injured, and the airplane was destroyed. The airplane was owned and operated 
by the pilot under Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
(
CFR
) Part 91 as a personal flight. Day 
visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated 
from Carmi Municipal Airport (CUL), Carmi, Illinois, about 1150.
A witness stated that the airplane was flying overhead at about 400 - 500 feet above ground 
level, westbound, when he heard the engine quit running. The airplane then initiated a 
descending right turn, north bound, and then the engine started running again. The airplane 
maintained a northerly heading, for about ¼-1/2 mile, and then the engine quit a second time, 
started a decent, pitched up, rolled right, and then pitched nose down impacting the ground. 
The witness said that he went the accident site and there was a strong odor of gasoline and 
immediately called 911.
A second witness stated that he saw a similar flight path for the airplane but that the engine 
was running on impact.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
64, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/21/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/12/2012
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 2000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 118 hours (Total, this make and model)
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating. He 
reported a total flight experience of 2,500 hours, with 0 hours in last 6 months, at the time of 
his last airman medical exam on March 21, 2012, when he was issued a third-class medical 
Page 4 of 8CEN17FA046
certificate that expired on March 31, 2014.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the pilot did not hold an airframe 
and powerplant mechanic certificate nor did he hold a repairman certificate for the airplane. 
The pilot had no FAA record of previous accidents, incidents, or enforcement actions.
The first and last entries in the pilot's logbook were dated December 2, 1978, and June 29, 
2014, respectively. The logbook indicated that he received a private pilot check ride on June 22, 
1980. The first logbook entry for flight in the accident airplane was dated March 18, 2012, and 
indicated that it was 25-minute local flight from CUL with two landings. The remarks section 
for this entry stated, "High speed taxi + lift (no pattern)." All the subsequent flight entries were 
for flights in the accident airplane.
The memoranda section of the pilot's logbook included an endorsement, dated May 12, 2012, 
by a flight instructor, stating that the pilot received a flight review. The only flight entry dated 
May 12, 2012, was for a 45-minute local flight from CUL in the accident airplane. The remarks 
section of this entry contained an individual's name and did not cite that a flight review was 
performed. There were no subsequent flight review endorsements in the pilot's logbook. Title 
14 
CFR
 61.56 requires pilots to obtain a flight review every 2 years to act as pilot-in-command 
and flight reviews must include a minimum of 1 hour of flight training and 1 hour of ground 
training.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Gordon
Registration:
N129LZ
Model/Series:
PEGAZAIR P 100 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2007
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
9908108
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/15/2013, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
194.65 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Corvair
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
190
Registered Owner:
Deregistered
Rated Power:
120 hp
Operator:
Pilot
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The airplane was a Gordon Pegazair P 100 model, which was manufactured in 2007 and was 
equipped with a Corvair 190 automotive engine.
Page 5 of 8CEN17FA046
According to the Federal Aviation Administration website, FAA Registry, Aircraft Inquiry, the 
airplane was originally registered to the previous aircraft owner, who was also the builder of 
the airplane. That registration expired May 14, 2013. The pilot, who was the owner of the 
airplane, had not reregistered the airplane after he had purchased it, and no subsequent 
application was made for registration.
Aircraft records obtained during the investigation had a special airworthiness certificate issued 
July 14, 2007 to the aircraft builder/previous owner. There was no current airworthiness 
certificate or an application for an updated airworthiness certificate in the aircraft records or in 
the FAA aircraft records database.
The last two logbook entries of the airframe logbook were dated April 2, 2012, at a tachometer 
time of 26.2 hours for a "completed annual conditional inspection" and July 15, 2013, 
tachometer time 194.65 hours for a "completed annual inspection." There were no subsequent 
maintenance entries in the logbook. Both entries were signed by the same the A&P who held an 
inspection authorization (IA).
The engine logbook had the last two entries for an "annual inspection" by the A&P IA, dated 
July 15, 2013, at a tachometer time of 194.65 hours. There were no subsequent inspections 
entered in the engine logbook that were signed by an A&P, but there were 10 later entries dated 
from July 15, 2013 to November 24, 2015, that cited maintenance work involving engine oil 
and filter changes, engine compression check, spark plug changes, the replacement of ignition 
points, and engine timing checks. The last entry dated November 24, 2015 had a tachometer 
time entry of 489.23 hours.
Page 6 of 8CEN17FA046
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CUL, 388 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1235 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
345°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.27 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 0°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Carmi, IL (CUL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1150 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
37.955000, -87.892778 (est)
The accident site was located in a flat dirt field about 17 nautical miles southeast of CUL. The 
power lines and trees adjacent to the field were undamaged.
The engine was separated from the airframe and was about 20 ft south of the airframe. A 
ground scar consistent in shape and length to the wing's leading edge was oriented lengthwise 
north/south on each side of the separated engine. 
[SG1]
 The fuselage was upright, and the tail-
to-nose orientation of the airplane was approximately north/northwest. There was no evidence 
of fire or soot on the engine or airframe.
Examination of the flight control system revealed that the wing flaps and both leading edge 
wing slats were in the retracted positions. Flight control continuity was confirmed from the 
control surfaces to the cockpit controls.
The left- and right-wing fuel tanks were empty, and the fuel lines from the tanks to the fuel 
selector and from the fuel selector to the engine were broken open. The fuel selector panel was 
Page 7 of 8CEN17FA046
damaged by impact forces, and the fuel selector was positioned between the "LEFT" and 
"BOTH" positions. Both fuel tanks exhibited outward expansion consistent with hydraulic 
forces. There was an odor consistent with fuel present at the accident site.
The engine did not exhibit any evidence of mechanical failure. Engine control continuity to the 
cockpit was confirmed through overstress separations of the controls. The cockpit engine 
control positions could not be determined due to impact damage. Both propeller blades were 
broken off at the blade roots and displayed features consistent with overstress.
The airplane was equipped with an MGL Avionics EFIS display that contained an SD memory 
card. The display and memory card were sent to the National Transportation Safety Board 
Vehicle Recorder Division for download. No data pertinent to the event were recovered due to 
the extent of the damage to the SD card.
Medical And Pathological Information
On his most recent medical certificate application, the 64-year-old pilot reported a history of a 
neurology evaluation in September 2011 for memory issues, but no records of the evaluation 
were contained in the FAA records. On that application, he denied any other medical concerns 
or the use of medications. 
The pilot's personal medical records documented a history of a progressive neurodegenerative 
disease beginning in 2011. His symptoms included significant visual-spatial and language 
dysfunction, and he was diagnosed with alterations of consciousness and encephalopathy. In 
August 2015, he was prescribed the Alzheimer's treatment medication donepezil. His most 
recent record of altered consciousness was April 2016 when the pilot reported transient 
episodes of altered mental status, loss of balance, slurred speech, and weakness. At that time, 
he was no longer using any medications. No records of a detailed neurologic evaluation after 
April 2016 were located. 
The Posey County Coroner's Office, Mt Vernon, Indiana, performed an autopsy of the pilot and 
determined that his cause of death was multiple blunt force injuries. No natural disease was 
identified. 
The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
toxicology testing and detected ethanol at 0.070 gm/dl in vitreous and 0.038 g/dl in blood. No 
carbon monoxide or tested-for-drugs were detected. Ethanol is the intoxicant commonly found 
in beer, wine, and liquor. It acts as a central nervous system depressant. After ingestion, at low 
doses, it impairs judgment, psychomotor functioning, and vigilance; at higher doses it can 
cause coma and death. Title 14
 CFR
 91.17(a) prohibits any person from acting or attempting to 
act as a crewmember of a civil aircraft while having 0.040 gm/dl or more ethanol in the blood. 
Because ingested alcohol is distributed throughout the body, levels from different postmortem 
tissues are usually similar. Ethanol may also be produced in body tissues by microbial activity 
Page 8 of 8CEN17FA046
after death. However, vitreous humor from an intact eye and urine do not suffer from such 
production to any significant extent in relation to blood.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Mitchell F Gallo
Adopted Date:
10/01/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Christopher House; Federal Aviation Administration; IND FSDO; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
11/28/2018
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94454
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
