National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CANTON, GA
Accident Number: ATL01LA051
Date & Time: 05/03/2001, 1845 EDT
Registration: N735LX
Aircraft: Cessna 182Q
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot reported the approach to land was going well, but when the airplane touched down, it veered right and then left.
Finally, the airplane veered off  the right side of runway 04 where it contacted a ditch and flipped inverted.
Examination of the airplane failed to disclose any mechanical failures.
The student pilot did not report a mechanical problem with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: THE STUDENT PILOT'S FAILURE TO MAINTAIN DIRECTIONAL CONTROL DURING LANDING ROLL.
A FACTOR IS THE DITCH.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On May 3, 2001, at 1845 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 182Q, N735LX, veered off the right side of runway 04 during an attempted landing at Cherokee County Airport in Canton, Georgia.
The training flight was operated by the student pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The student pilot was not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The training flight departed Canton, Georgia, at 1830.
According to the student pilot, this was the second attempt to land on runway 04 after takeoff.
The  student pilot reported when the airplane touched down, it veered right and then left, and finally veered off the right side of the runway.
The airplane collided with a ditch, and flipped inverted.
The student pilot stated, that prior to the flight she conducted a thorough inspection of the airplane and "all was working well".
Examination of the airplane failed to disclose any mechanical failures.
The student pilot did not report a mechanical problem with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 51, Female Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
