National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lake Wales, FL
Accident Number: ATL01LA050
Date & Time: 05/02/2001, 1030 EDT
Registration: N1491S
Aircraft: Cessna 182P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane was on final approach to land when the pilot experienced a strong crosswind.
Upon landing the airplane bounced on the runway, the nose of the airplane impacted the ground and the airplane flipped inverted.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's improper use of flight controls during a bounced landing, and subsequent collision with the ground.
A factor of the collision is the rough and uneven terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 2.
(F) FLIGHT CONTROLS - IMPROPER USE OF - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On May 2, 2001, at 1030 eastern daylight time, a Cessna C182P, N1491S, flipped over during a crosswind landing on the grass strip at Chalet Suzanne Air Strip, Lake Wales, Florida.
The personal flight was conducted by the pilot under  provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with an instrument  flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The airline transport  pilot and his three passengers were not injured.
The flight departed Ocala Regional Airport, in Ocala, Florida, at 1000.
According to the pilot, during a crosswind landing on runway 36 at Chalet Suzanne Air Strip, "while making a normal approach, right after the nose lowered to the ground, the nose either hit a rock or hole.
The  nose pitched up and down repeatedly.
The nose of the plane dug into the turf and the airplane flipped on its back".
The airplane came to rest inverted.
The pilot stated that the runway was rough and uneven terrain.
The pilot and passengers then exited the airplane.
The pilot did not report a mechanical problem with the airplane.
Examination of the airplane failed to disclose any mechanical malfunction or component failure.
A review of recorded weather data disclosed that, weather conditions at the time of the accident showed winds 090 at 14 knots.
According to The Pilot Operating Handbook, the maximum demonstrated crosswind is 15 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 66, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
