National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TRUCKEE, CA
Accident Number: LAX01LA164
Date & Time: 05/03/2001, 2040 PDT
Registration: N6425N
Aircraft: Cessna T210N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis After a hard landing, the airplane veered off the runway and collided with airport property.
The pilot executed a go-around then landed without further incident.
Witnesses saw the airplane make a hard landing, veer off the runway into the dirt, hit a light and taxiway sign, then takeoff again with items embedded in the horizontal stabilizer.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain the proper descent and his failure to maintain directioinal control during landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) PROPER DESCENT RATE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
OBJECT - AIRPORT SIGN/MARKER Factual Information On May 3, 2001, at 2040 hours Pacific daylight time, a Cessna T210N, N6425N, veered off the runway while landing on runway 28, and struck a landing light and taxiway sign at the Truckee-Tahoe Airport, Truckee, California.
The airplane was operated by the pilot/owner under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, and sustained substantial damage.
The private pilot and one passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight that departed Oakland, California, at 1920.
The flight was scheduled to terminate at the Truckee-Tahoe Airport.
No flight plan had been filed.
The pilot stated that the airplane landed hard on the first attempt, and the landing was aborted.
On the second attempt, the airplane landed hard again, the pilot lost directional control, and the horizontal stabilizer was damaged after it struck a landing light and taxiway sign.
The Safety Board Investigator-in-Charge (IIC) interviewed a witness to the accident.
The witness stated that the airplane made a hard landing and departed the runway where it struck a sign, and then it took off again with the sign embedded in the airplane.
The airplane went around in the pattern and landed normally.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector conducted an on-scene investigation.
He reported that part of a taxiway sign was embedded in the horizontal stabilizer and compression wrinkles were observed on the left side of the airplane near the baggage door.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 33, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
