National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Santa Maria, CA
Accident Number: LAX01LA163
Date & Time: 05/02/2001, 1320 PDT
Registration: N34168
Aircraft: Cessna 177B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane struck a pipe, cartwheeled, and came to rest inverted, following a go-around from a simulated forced landing.
The pilot reported he had been taking photographs about 1,000 feet above ground level, then decided to practice engine out patterns.
During the go-around from the second pattern he added power, retracted the flaps to 20 degrees, and was unable to prevent contact with the ground.
The pilot further stated that it "felt like the elevator stalled."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A stall/mush inadvertently encountered by the pilot-in-command.
Failure to maintain adequate airspeed for flight and inadequate remedial action contributed to the accident.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(F) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) REMEDIAL ACTION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 4.
OBJECT - OTHER Factual Information On May 2, 2001, at 1320 hours Pacific daylight saving time, a Cessna 177B, N34168, was substantially damaged when it collided with the ground while maneuvering approximately 3 miles east of Santa Maria Airport, Santa Maria, California.
The airplane was operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 by the private pilot/owner who received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the personal flight, which departed from Santa Maria Airport approximately 1250.
The pilot reported he had been taking photographs about 1,000 feet above ground level, then decided to practice engine out patterns.
During the go-around from the second pattern he added power, retracted the flaps to 20 degrees, and was unable to prevent contact with the ground.
The pilot further stated that it "felt like the elevator stalled."
The airplane struck a pipe, cartwheeled, and came to rest inverted.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 71, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
