National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Washington, OK
Accident Number: FTW01LA113
Date & Time: 05/03/2001, 1300 CDT
Registration: N9696B
Aircraft: Cessna 172RG
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis According to the flight instructor and pilot receiving instruction, the student was demonstrating a commercial flight maneuver, at 2,100 feet agl, when they smelled an odor similar to "electrical burning."
The instructor told the student to terminate the maneuver and return to the airport.
While the student was terminating the maneuver, visible smoke appeared in the cabin, and heat was felt coming from beneath the instrument panel.
The instructor assumed control of the airplane.
The engine was shut down and a forced landing was executed to a field.
During the landing, the airplane encountered soft terrain, nosed over and came to rest inverted.
A plastic hydraulic reservoir, from the hydraulic power pack, was found melted and laying on the cockpit floor.
The hydraulic power pack was examined and functionally tested at Aero Electric Inc., Wichita, Kansas, under supervision of the FAA.
According a report from Aero Electric, the power pack and its related components operated within manufacturer's specifications.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the in-flight fire for an undetermined reason, which resulted in a forced landing.
A contributory factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: FIRE Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED 2.
PRECAUTIONARY LANDING - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
ENGINE SHUTDOWN - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On May 3, 2001, at 1300 central daylight time, a Cessna 172RG airplane, N9696B, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following an in-flight fire near Washington, Oklahoma.
The airplane was registered to Christensen Aviation Inc., of Wilmington, Delaware, and operated by Airman Flight School, Inc., of Norman, Oklahoma.
The flight instructor and private pilot receiving instruction sustained minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight.
The local flight originated from the University of Oklahoma Westheimer Airport, Norman, Oklahoma, at 1230.
According to the flight instructor and pilot receiving instruction, the student was demonstrating a commercial flight maneuver at 2,100 feet agl, when they smelled an odor similar to "electrical burning."
The instructor told the student to terminate the maneuver and return to the Westheimer Airport.
While the student was terminating the maneuver, visible smoke appeared in the cabin and heat was felt coming from beneath the instrument panel.
The instructor assumed control of the airplane.
The engine was shut down, and a forced landing was executed to a field.
During the landing, the airplane encountered soft terrain, nosed over and came to rest inverted.
According to an FAA inspector, who examined the airplane, a plastic hydraulic reservoir from the hydraulic power pack was found melted and laying on the cockpit floor.
He stated that the left wing-tip, the right wing strut, and the vertical stabilizer were structurally damaged.
He added that the engine firewall was buckled.
The hydraulic power pack was examined and functionally tested at Aero Electric Inc., Wichita, Kansas, under supervision of the FAA.
According a report from Aero Electric, the power pack and its related components operated within manufacturer's specifications.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor Age: 24, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine; Instrument Airplane Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2658 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 97 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-360-F1A6 Registered Owner: Christensen Aviation Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
