National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Watkins, CO
Accident Number: DEN01LA100
Date & Time: 05/02/2001, 1330 MDT
Registration: N72582
Aircraft: Cessna T206H
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While in cruise flight, the airplane encountered icing conditions.
The pilot contacted ARTCC and requested various altitudes to avoid further icing.
However, the airplane was unable to maintain altitude, and the pilot requested vectors to the nearest airport.
Approach control cleared him to intercept the ILS.
At approximately 15 feet above the ground, he flared and the airplane "dropped hard onto the runway."
As he added power, the airplane drifted to the left and struck a runway and a taxiway light.
The pilot stated that he was able to taxi the airplane back onto the runway and then park it on the ramp.
An initial inspection of the airplane revealed that it had an accumulation of ice on the leading edges of both wings, that in some places was up to as much as 2 and 1/2 inches thick.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain the proper decent rate during the flare resulting in a hard landing.
Contributing factors icing conditions and accumulations of wing ice.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - ICING CONDITIONS ---------- Occurrence #2: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
(F) WING - ICE 3.
(C) PROPER DESCENT RATE - EXCEEDED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
(F) OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT 5.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On May 2, 2001, at approximately 1330 mountain daylight time, a Cessna T206H, N72582, was substantially damaged during landing at Front Range Airport, Watkins, Colorado.
The instrument rated private pilot and passenger were not injured.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed.
An IFR flight plan was filed for this personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight departed Marv Skie-Lincoln County Airport, Tea, South Dakota, at approximately 1000.
According to the pilot, he encountered icing conditions while en route to Centennial Airport, Englewood, Colorado.
He contacted Denver Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and requested various altitudes to avoid further icing.
However, he was unable to maintain altitude and requested vectors to the nearest airport.
Denver approach control cleared him to intercept the ILS for runway 26 at Front Range.
It was his first time landing at the airport, and at approximately 15 feet above the ground, he flared and the airplane "dropped hard onto the runway."
As he added power, the airplane drifted to the left and struck a runway and a taxiway light.
The airplane sustained damage to the nose and right landing gear wheel pants, the elevator's right hand balance weight skin, the cargo door and substantial damage to the underside of the fuselage and empennage.
The pilot stated that he was able to taxi the airplane back onto the runway and then park it on the ramp.
An initial inspection of the airplane revealed that it had an accumulation of ice on the leading edges of both wings, that in some places was up to as much as 2 and 1/2 inches thick.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 43, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
