National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Chefornak, AK
Accident Number: ANC01LA053
Date & Time: 05/03/2001, 1050 AKD
Registration: N4089W
Aircraft: Piper PA-32-300
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The commercial air taxi pilot related he was attempting to land on a gravel runway in a direct crosswind of approximately 15 knots.
During the final approach to land, he said the airplane stalled, and landed hard.
The airplane went off the side of the runway and received substantial damage.
The pilot indicated there were no preimpact mechanical problems with the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadvertent stall/mush during the final phase of the landing approach.
A factor associated with the accident is a crosswind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - RUNWAY Factual Information On May 3, 2001, about 1050 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Piper PA-32-300 airplane, N4089W, operated under 14 CFR Part 135 as an on-demand cargo flight by Bellair, Inc., received substantial damage while landing at the Chefornak Airport, Chefornak, Alaska.
The solo commercial-certificated pilot was not injured.
The  flight operated in visual meteorological conditions, and a VFR and company flight plan were in effect.
The flight departed Bethel, Alaska, about 1000, en route to Chefornak.
During a telephone interview with the NTSB investigator-in-charge on May 3, the pilot of the accident airplane related that he departed Bethel with 1,000 pounds of U.S. mail for Chefornak.
It was his intent to deposit the mail at Chefornak, and return to Bethel.
He said the flight to Chefornak was uneventful.
He elected to land on runway 34, and noted the surface wind  was nearly a direct crosswind from the west, at 10-15 miles per hour.
As he approached the landing threshold, he said his indicated airspeed was about 80 miles per hour, when the airplane suddenly stalled, landed hard, and bounced off the right side of the runway.
The pilot said the airplane received substantial damage to the right wing and fuselage.
He also said there were no preimpact mechanical problems with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 34, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 3400 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 60 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 7593 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-540 Registered Owner: Aero Lease of America, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
