National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MAIZE, KS
Accident Number: CHI99LA172
Date & Time: 06/03/1999, 1007 CDT
Registration: N9393
Aircraft: de Havilland TIGER MOTH DH82A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis He stated the local winds were gusty and alternating between east and southeast, and he used runway 17 for takeoff.
He stated engine power was normal, but he was unable to maintain a climb when he reached the south end of the runway which was bordered by trees.
The airplane began a descent near the end of the runway.
The lower right wing contacted a tree just south of a highway which bordered the south end of the airport.
The pilot stated that after the accident he noted the winds at the south side of the airport were out of the south and the wind sock at the north end of the airport was indicating winds from the northeast.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's inability to maintain a climb after takeoff as a result of wind shear.
Factors associated with the accident were the variable, gusty wind conditions, and the tree which was contacted.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - VARIABLE WIND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 3.
(C) WEATHER CONDITION - WINDSHEAR 4.
(C) CLIMB - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 5.
The pilot received minor injuries and the sole passenger was not injured.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The flight was originating when the accident occurred and the intended destination was Bartlesville, Oklahoma.
The pilot stated that he received a weather briefing prior to taking off.
He stated the local winds were gusty and alternating between east and southeast.
The pilot reported that the winds being reported at Wichita, 9 statue miles south of the Maize Airport, were from 150 degrees at 14 knots.
The takeoff was being made on runway 17 (2,000' x 70', grass).
The pilot stated that engine power was 2,100 rpm and oil pressure was normal during the takeoff.
The airplane seemed initially to climb well."
The pilot stated the runway had trees along the left side and he was looking out of the cockpit to assure clearance with them.
The pilot stated that as they reached the south end of the runway, which is lined on both sides by trees, the airplane seemed as though it would not climb.
He stated he looked at the tachometer and the needle was bouncing between 2,100 rpm and 2,200 rpm so he applied full throttle.
The pilot stated he maintained just enough back pressure to keep the airplane airborne.
The pilot stated, "As we approached the area of trees south of the runway and across the highway, the airplane simply had gained no altitude, and was continuing a slight descent."
The right lower wing on the airplane contacted an 8-inch diameter tree about 20 yards south of highway K-96, which borders the south end of the runway.
The airplane rotated to the right and descended to impact with the terrain.
The pilot stated that after the accident, while standing south of the airport, the wind was from the south.
He noticed the wind sock at the north end of the runway at this same time and it was indicating that the wind in that location was out of the northeast.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
