National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MONAVILLE, TX
Accident Number: FTW99LA157
Date & Time: 06/02/1999, 1315 CDT
Registration: N73PB
Aircraft: Grumman G-164A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot reported that while landing at a privately owned airstrip, the runway 'appeared to be in good shape and dry.'
However, when the agricultural airplane's main landing gear touched down, 'the wheels sunk into the soft ground,' and the airplane nosed over onto its back.
The pilot reported that the landing area was 'dry in the middle and soft on the sides.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to touch down on the dry area of the landing strip.
A factor was the soft terrain condition on the sides of the grass strip.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS Factual Information On June 2, 1999, at 1315 central daylight time, a Grumman G-164A agricultural airplane, N73PB, owned and operated by Double L Flying Service, of Wallis, Texas, was substantially damaged during landing near Monaville, Texas.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the aircraft, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 local aerial application flight.
The pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, that while landing at a privately owned airstrip, the runway "appeared to be in good shape and dry."
However, when the airplane's main landing gear touched down, "the wheels sunk into the soft ground," and the airplane nosed over onto its back.
The pilot reported that the landing area was "dry in the middle and soft on the sides."
Examination of the aircraft by the FAA inspector revealed that an upper wing spar, the engine mounts, and the vertical stabilizer were damaged.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 55, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
