Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Latangai Island, PO
Accident Number:
WPR13LA137
Date & Time:
03/02/2013, 1320 UTC 
Registration:
N471M
Aircraft:
HUGHES 369HS
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Inflight upset
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
The pilot reported that, as he was flying toward a school of fish, he observed a nearby fishing 
vessel moving in the same general direction. He flew over the vessel then continued toward a 
fish aggregating device (FAD), which is a floating object designed and strategically placed to 
attract fish; it was located about 0.7 mile away from the vessel. As the pilot approached the 
FAD, he circled twice and then descended the helicopter into a low hover over the FAD. The 
helicopter was positioned into the wind, and the vessel was approaching the helicopter from 
behind. With the helicopter still in a low hover, the fish spotter reached out of the helicopter to 
attach a radio buoy to the FAD. Shortly after, the helicopter was struck from behind by the 
vessel. The helicopter subsequently plunged into the ocean. 
The fish master, who was at the controls of the vessel, reported that he observed the helicopter 
circle twice before it appeared to fly out of the area. He was slowing the vessel when it was 
about 500 meters (0.3 mile) from the FAD when he observed the helicopter in front of the 
vessel. The captain of the vessel reported that he was on the vessel™s helicopter deck when he 
noticed the helicopter circle twice and then descend to a hover. He stated that he was unsure 
what the helicopter was doing until he saw the fish spotter reach for the FAD. At this time, he 
felt the fish master reverse the vessel; however, it still impacted the helicopter™s tail. 
The Federal Aviation Administration Model Civil Aviation Regulations, Version 2.7, Part 11 
states, ﬁEach operator shall conduct operations so as not to endanger persons or property on 
the surface nor aircraft in flight.ﬂ The U.S. Department of Homeland Security, United States 
Coast Guard Navigation Rules state, ﬁevery vessel shall at all times maintain a proper look-out 
by sight and hearing...as to make a full appraisal of the situation and of the risk of collision.ﬂ 
Both the pilot and the fish master of the vessel should have been adequately monitoring their 
environment and their failure to do so resulted in a collision.
Page 2 of 6WPR13LA137
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of both the pilot and the fish master of the vessel to adequately monitor their 
environment, which resulted in a collision. 
Findings
Personnel issues
Monitoring environment - Pilot (Cause)
Monitoring environment - Other/unknown (Cause)
Page 3 of 6WPR13LA137
Factual Information
On March 2, 2013, about 1320 Universal coordinated time (UTC), a Hughes 369HS, N471M, 
impacted the Pacific Ocean after being struck by a commercial fishing vessel in international 
waters near Latangai Island, Papua New Guinea. The airline transport pilot sustained serious 
injuries, and the one fish spotter (passenger) sustained fatal injuries. The helicopter's main 
rotor assembly and tail rotor assembly were substantially damaged. The aircraft was registered 
to and operated by Jerry's Helicopter Service, Inc. under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. Day, visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight and no flight 
plan had been filed. The flight originated from the helicopter's designated vessel (MV FK 869) 
at approximately 1220 UTC.  
The pilot reported that while flying the fish spotter found a fish formation. The pilot was flying 
towards it when he observed a fishing vessel motoring nearby, and in the general direction of, 
where the fish were spotted. The pilot circled over the vessel and identified it as the Pacific 
Ranger before it proceeded to circle over the fish formation. When the fish spotter found the 
fish aggregating device (FAD), which are floating objects designed and strategically placed to 
attract fish, the pilot approached the FAD and hovered over it at a low altitude about 0.7 miles 
away from the Pacific Ranger. During this time, the helicopter was positioned into the wind, 
with the Pacific Ranger approaching from behind. The fish spotter reached out of the 
helicopter and attempted to attach a radio buoy to the FAD when the helicopter suddenly 
shook violently and plunged into the ocean, coming to rest upside down.  
The fish master of the Pacific Ranger was at the controls at the time of the accident. He 
reported that prior to seeing the helicopter he observed it on radar when it was about 20 miles 
away. The helicopter approached the Pacific Ranger and circled around it twice. The fish 
master reported that it appeared that they did not find the FAD and flew out of the area. When 
the vessel was about 500 meters from the FAD he was slowing down the vessel when he 
observed the helicopter in front of them.
The captain of the Pacific Ranger reported that he was on the helicopter deck of the Pacific 
Ranger watching for tuna and FADs when he noticed the helicopter circle twice and descend to 
a hover about five ship lengths in front of, and facing away from, the Pacific Ranger. He was 
unsure what the helicopter was doing until he observed the fish spotter climb onto the float of 
the helicopter and reach for the FAD. At this time, he felt the fish master reverse the Pacific 
Ranger, however, they still impacted the tail of the helicopter.    
A GPS, which contained waypoints the pilot created during the flight, was recovered from the 
helicopter and taken to the manufacturer for analysis. The GPS data indicated that when the 
helicopter initially flew in front of the Pacific Ranger, the helicopter was about 1.7 nautical 
miles (nm) (about 2 miles) away from the FAD and the Pacific Ranger was about 1.9 nm (2.3 
miles) away. The helicopter continued toward the FAD and made one large circle, followed by a 
smaller circle, before descending to a low hover. The GPS did not indicate time nor did it show 
the speed of the helicopter or Pacific Ranger.  
According to The Federal Aviation Administration's Model Civil Aviation Regulations 
(MCARS), Version 2.7, Part 11 states under Fish Spotting Operating Rules, "Each operator shall 
conduct operations so as not to endanger persons or property on the surface nor aircraft in 
flight."
Page 4 of 6WPR13LA137
According to the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, United States Coast Guard 
Navigation Rules state "every vessel shall at all times maintain a proper look-out by sight and 
hearing as well as by all available means appropriate in the prevailing circumstances and 
conditions so as to make a full appraisal of the situation and of the risk of collision." 
History of Flight
Maneuvering-hover
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) 
Inflight upset (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Foreign
Age:
50
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/17/2012
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/08/2012
Flight Time:
7475 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3518 hours (Total, this make and model), 6372 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 165 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 102 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
HUGHES
Registration:
N471M
Model/Series:
369HS HS
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1140671S
Landing Gear Type: 
Unknown
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/27/2013, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
11 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
9921 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
250-C18
Registered Owner:
JERRYS HELICOPTER SERVICE 
INC
Rated Power:
317 hp
Operator:
JERRYS HELICOPTER SERVICE 
INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6WPR13LA137
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 2000 ft agl
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 20 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.84 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Latangai Island, PO 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Latangai Island, PO 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1220 UTC
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
-0.511111, 156.538333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Samantha A Link
Adopted Date:
12/15/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Harold E Kernahan; FAA International Field Office; Los Angeles, CA
Publish Date:
12/15/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86351
Page 6 of 6WPR13LA137
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
