After turning downwind following takeoff, the gyrocopter lost forward speed and began to 
descend.  It touched down on the left tire, rolled over, and the main rotor blades contacted the 
ground.  The pilot reported there was no mechanical malfunction.  He stated the engine and 
propeller combination was not providing sufficient performance to operate the gyrocopter 
safely, and he had been modifying it since it was built 2 years previously.  This was the second 
flight of the day after he had shifted the occupant seats to provide better airflow to the 
propeller.
The pilot's inability to maintain altitude because of the gyrocopter's inadequatly designed 
performance capability.
On September 1, 2001, at 1830 hours Pacific daylight time, a Sparke Air Command 582 Dual, 
N301CS, descended to the ground during the takeoff initial climb from a dry lake bed, 10 miles 
north of Gerlach, Nevada.  The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was uninjured, and the 
gyrocopter was substantially damaged.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
flight conducted by the pilot under 14 CFR Part 91.  The experimental gyrocopter's flight was 
originating at the time, and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot stated that the gyrocopter was still in the testing phase of the certification process.  
He had built it about 2 years ago and had been modifying it in order to reach an acceptable 
performance level.  It had been flown approximately 10 times since construction, but the pilot 
stated that the engine and propeller combination was not giving him the performance needed 
to operate the gyrocopter safely.  He had recently moved the pilot and passenger seats closer 
together to improve the airflow to the propeller, and was testing this latest modification at a 
dry lake bed near Gerlach.  The gyrocopter was taken to the lake bed by trailer and assembled 
on site.  The pilot made one test flight and returned to readjust the propeller pitch setting.  On 
the second flight, the pilot departed upwind and climbed to 30 feet.  When he turned to a 
downwind heading, he lost forward speed and the gyrocopter began to descend.  The 
gyrocopter contacted the ground on the left tire, which resulted in a rollover.  The rotor blades 
then contacted the ground and were destroyed.  The pilot did not note any mechanical 
malfunction prior to or after the accident.
A report of the accident on NTSB Form 6120.1/2 was not provided.
