The commercial certificated pilot was back-taxiing on a runway in preparation for takeoff, and 
then began a 180 degree turn on the runway.  During the turn, the pilot said he heard a 
scraping sound, the airplane wobbled and shimmied, and the right brake was not functioning.  
The right main landing gear strut collapsed near the axle attach point, and the right main 
wheel and tire rolled away from the airplane.  The right wingtip and the propeller struck the 
ground, and the right gear strut was torn loose from its upper attach point.  A postexamination 
of the right wheel and strut by the owner revealed the axle assembly separated from the lower 
end of the landing gear strut.  There are four hex head bolts utilized to secure the axle to the 
landing gear strut.  Each are inserted through the axle assembly and gear leg, and have a nut 
threaded and then torqued onto the bolt shaft.  All four of the bolts were bent.  Two of the nuts 
were stripped off their respective bolt shafts.  The remaining two bolts were broken about mid-
shaft.  The owner of the airplane reported that about five days before the accident, new brake 
assemblies were installed on the airplane. The original bolts were re-used for the installation.  
One of the broken bolts was submitted to the National Transportations Safety Board's 
Materials Laboratory for examination.  According to an NTSB materials engineer, the bolt was 
bent about 35 degrees, it had necking deformation adjacent to the fracture, and displayed 
features consistent with an overstress fracture in bending.
An overload failure of the main axle attaching bolts, and subsequent separation of the axle 
from the landing gear strut.
On September 2, 2001, about 1430 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire-equipped Cessna 185F 
airplane, N177BM, sustained substantial damage while taxiing for takeoff at the King Salmon 
Airport, King Salmon, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) 
cross-country personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The 
airplane was operated by Bill Martin, Fish Alaska Inc., King Salmon.  The commercial 
certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on September 7th, the pilot reported that he was preparing to 
depart and was back-taxiing on runway 11 at King Salmon.  He then began a 180 degree turn to 
depart on runway 29.  During the turn, the pilot said he heard a scraping sound, the airplane 
wobbled and shimmied, and the right brake was not functioning.  The right main landing gear 
strut collapsed near the axle attach point, and the right main wheel and tire rolled away from 
the airplane.  The right wingtip and the propeller struck the ground, and the right gear strut 
was torn loose from its upper attach point.
A postexamination of the right wheel and strut by the owner revealed the axle assembly 
separated from the lower end of the landing gear strut.  There are four hex head bolts utilized 
to secure the axle to the landing gear strut.  Each are inserted through the axle assembly and 
gear leg, and have a nut threaded and then torqued onto the bolt shaft.  All four of the bolts 
were bent.  Two of the nuts were stripped off their respective bolt shafts.  The remaining two 
bolts were broken about mid-shaft.
The owner of the airplane reported that about five days before the accident, new brake 
assemblies were installed on the airplane.  The original bolts were re-used for the installation.
One of the broken bolts was submitted to the National Transportations Safety Board's 
Materials Laboratory for examination.  According to an NTSB materials engineer, the bolt was 
bent about 35 degrees, it had necking deformation adjacent to the fracture, and displayed 
features consistent with an overstress fracture in bending.
