The pilot was transporting bags of seismic equipment by long line to a remote site. While he 
hovered into the wind waiting for a flagger, the helicopter was struck by a wind gust and 
started turning right. The pilot applied left pedal, but was unable to stop the rotation. The 
helicopter struck terrain, breaking off both skid legs, tail rotor blades, and tail rotor gearbox. 
FAA's Advisory Circular 90-95 defines the loss of tail rotor effectiveness as "a critical, low-
speed aerodynamic flight characteristic that can result in an uncommanded rapid yaw rate 
which does not subside of its own accord and, if not corrected, can result in the loss of aircraft 
control." Some of the conditions conducive to LTE include (1) a high power setting, (2) low 
airspeed, and (3) a tailwind or left crosswind.
loss of tail rotor effectiveness while hovering. A contributing factor was the wind gust.
On September 2, 2001, approximately 1150 mountain daylight time, a McDonnell Douglas 
369E helicopter, N440TJ, operated by Omni Aviation of Carencro, Louisiana, was substantially 
damaged when it collided with terrain while hovering near Kemmerer, Wyoming. The 
commercial pilot, the sole occupant aboard, was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for this work use flight being conducted under Title 
14 CFR Part 133. The helicopter departed a nearby landing zone approximately 1145.
According to the pilot, he was transporting bags of seismic equipment by long line to a remote 
site. He said while he hovered into the wind and waited for a flagger, "a [wind] gust caused the 
helicopter to start to turn right." He applied "more left pedal," but was unable to stop the 
rotation. He jettisoned the external load, lowered the collective control, and attempted to fly 
out of the condition. He was able to stop most of the rotation but not before the helicopter 
struck the terrain. Both skid legs, tail rotor blades, and tail rotor gearbox broke off. The left 
horizontal stabilizer was struck by one of the blades, and the tail boom buckled when it struck 
the ground. The pilot said the winds were "generally light and variable, with [an] occasional 
gust."
According to FAA's Advisory Circular (AC) 90-95, loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE) "is a 
critical, low-speed aerodynamic flight characteristic that can result in an uncommanded rapid 
yaw rate which does not subside of its own accord and, if not corrected, can result in the loss of 
aircraft control. Some of the conditions conducive to LTE include (1) a high power setting, (2) 
low airspeed, and (3) a tailwind or left crosswind
