The pilot and his passenger took off in the balloon, leveled off at 1,000 feet, and flew south.  
The wind velocity increased to about 15 mph and the pilot decided to land.  He chose a field in 
which two balloons had already landed.  He briefed his passenger on the position to assume for 
a high wind landing.  The pilot made a "stand up" landing, but a thermal caused the balloon to 
ascend about 30 to 40 feet.  It touched down a second time and the pilot vented the envelope.  
According to the pilot, the "passenger's foot was out of position and twisted on impact."  X-rays 
taken later indicated the ankle was fractured.
the passenger's failure to follow instructions given to brace for a high wind landing, and the 
pilot's failure to adequately monitor the passenger's actions.  A contributing factor was the 
thermal lift.
On September 2, 2001, approximately 0815 mountain daylight time, a Balloon Works Firefly 
8B-15, N2575P, sustained minor damage during a hard landing near Colorado Springs, 
Colorado.  The private pilot was not injured, but his passenger received a serious injury.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight 
being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight originated in Colorado Springs 
approximately 0745.
The following is based on a telephone interview with the pilot and the accident report he 
submitted.  The pilot said he and his passenger were participating in the Colorado Springs 
Balloon Classic.  They took off, leveled off at 1,000 feet, and flew south.  The wind velocity 
increased to about 15 mph and the pilot decided to land.  He chose a field in which two 
balloons had already landed.  He briefed his passenger on the position to assume for a high 
wind landing.  The pilot made a "stand up" landing, but a thermal caused the balloon to ascend 
about 30 to 40 feet.  It touched down a second time and the pilot vented the envelope.  
According to the pilot, the "passenger's foot was out of position and twisted on impact."  X-rays 
taken later indicated the ankle was fractured.
