National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Dwight, IL
Accident Number: CHI08CA175
Date & Time: 07/01/2008, 1745 CDT
Registration: N6051M
Aircraft: Beech A36
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis During initial descent the pilot selected the right fuel tank for the practice instrument approach procedure.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time.
The pilot performed a procedure turn to align with the instrument approach.
The engine lost power while turning inbound onto the final approach course.
The airplane was at 2,300 feet mean sea level (~1,600 feet above ground level) when the engine lost power.
The pilot switched back to the left fuel tank but the engine did not respond.
The pilot performed a forced landing onto Interstate Highway 55.
During the landing rollout the right wing impacted a mile-marker signpost.
A post-accident investigation showed that the left and right fuel tanks were approximately 1/8 and 1/2 full, respectively.
No anomalies were encountered during a post accident engine test run.
The engine started without hesitation and responded to throttle inputs.
The engine ran without difficulty on each fuel tank for a period of 4 minutes, on each magneto individually, and with the electric fuel pump turned off.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Contributing to the accident was the highway signpost that the airplane impacted during the landing rollout.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 1871 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Teledyne Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-520-BB Registered Owner: E.B.E, Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
