National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Coeur d'Alene, ID
Accident Number: LAX08CA210
Date & Time: 07/01/2008, 1000 PDT
Registration: N4776U
Aircraft: Cessna TU206G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the departure roll, as the airplane became airborne, the left main landing gear collided with a large rock on the left side of the pilot's private airstrip.
From the cockpit the pilot visually confirmed that the damage seemed to be confined to the left wheel fairing, which was torn off, but could not discern any other damage.
The airplane operated normally and the pilot landed without further incident.
After landing, the pilot noted that the left tire was flat and the left main landing gear strut was damaged, including the gear box.
The pilot stated that accident could have been prevented if he had ensured there were no rocks on the airstrip, and if he had maintained runway centerline.
The pilot added that there were no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or failures with the airframe or engine.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain proper runway alignment and clearance from a large rock on the side of the runway.
Contributing to the accident was the failure of the pilot to maintain the runway environment of his private strip clear of obstructions.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - ROCK(S)/BOULDER(S) 2.
(F) RUNWAY MAINTENANCE - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) PROPER ALIGNMENT - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
