The airplane, which was built by the pilot, was a replica of the Wright Brothers 1905 airplane. 
The purpose of the flight was to practice in preparation for the 104th Anniversary of Practical 
Flight celebration. The accident occurred on the second flight of the day. After takeoff, the 
airplane climbed to an altitude of 15 to 20 feet, then entered a shallow descending right bank. 
The wings of the airplane leveled and the nose pitched up. The nose of the airplane then 
dropped and the airplane impacted the terrain. The airplane received substantial damage to 
the fuselage, wings, and elevator. A 4-knot tailwind prevailed at the time of the accident. 
Postaccident inspection of the airplane failed to reveal any preimpact failures or malfunctions.
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during the flight, which resulted in an 
aerodynamic stall.
On October 1, 2009, at 0930 eastern daylight time, an amateur built experimental Dusenberry 
1905 Wright Flyer, N3635N, collided with the terrain following a loss of control shortly after 
taking off from the Huffman Prairie Flying Field at the Wright-Patterson AFB (FFO), Dayton, 
Ohio.  The pilot received serious injuries.  The airplane received substantial damage to the 
fuselage, wings, and elevator.  The local flight was being operated under Title 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed.  The flight originated just prior to the accident.
The accident occurred on the second flight of the day.  A series of photos were submitted 
documenting both flights.  On the accident flight, the photos show the airplane prior to takeoff 
up to and including the accident.  After takeoff, the airplane climbed to an altitude of 15 to 20 
feet.  The airplane then entered a shallow descending right bank.  The wings of the airplane 
leveled and the nose pitched up.  The nose of the airplane then dropped and the airplane 
impacted the terrain.  
The airplane, which was built by the pilot, was a replica of the Wright Brothers 1905 airplane.  
The purpose of the flight was to practice in preparation for the 104th Anniversary of Practical 
Flight celebration.  
The pilot's logbook shows that he flew a total of 39 flights in the airplane.  These flights totaled 
approximately 27 minutes of flight time.
A 4 knot tailwind prevailed at the time of the accident. A post accident inspection of the 
airplane failed to reveal any pre-impact failures/malfunctions.
