The pilot reported that he started the engine and waited for about 10 minutes for the oil 
temperature to rise before he departed from a grass airstrip. During takeoff, he reported that 
the airplane ﬁfelt slow.ﬂ He turned the carburetor heat on, but the engine lost partial power and 
the airplane "started to sink." He banked to the left to avoid trees.  He reported losing altitude, 
and then the airplane experienced a ﬁstall spin to the left,ﬂ impacting a mature corn field. 
Postaccident inspection of the engine and airframe revealed no preexisting anomalies that 
would preclude normal operation of the airplane. The observed temperature was 11 degrees 
Celsius (C) and the dew point was 6 degrees C. The Transport Canada Carburetor Icing chart 
indicated that at the observed weather conditions the engine was susceptible to ﬁSerious Icing 
Œ Any Power.ﬂ
The pilot's delayed use of carburetor heat while operating in conditions conducive to 
carburetor icing. 
On October 3, 2009, at 1547 central daylight time, a Piper J3C-65, N70585, sustained 
substantial damage when it impacted terrain after a loss of engine power after takeoff from a 
grass airfield in Rosemount, Minnesota. The pilot received minor injuries and the front seat 
passenger received serious injuries. The 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight 
was departing from Jensen Airfield, a private grass airstrip, on a local flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  
The pilot reported that there was a fly-in at the private airstrip and he decided to take a friend 
for a flight ﬁaround the patch.ﬂ  After he preflighted the airplane, he started the engine and 
waited for about 10 minutes for the oil temperature to rise. He taxied out and did a run-up 
prior to departure. During takeoff, he added power slowly to full power, got the tail up, and 
slowly rotated.  He reported that the airplane "felt slow." He tried to land, but he was too fast 
and there was ﬁnot enough room.ﬂ He pulled the carburetor heat on, but the engine lost partial 
power and the airplane ﬁstarted to sink.ﬂ He banked to the left to avoid trees.  He reported 
losing altitude, and then the airplane experienced a ﬁstall spin to the left.ﬂ The airplane 
impacted a mature corn field. The pilot shut off the airplane™s magnetos and fuel, and exited 
the airplane with the passenger.  
A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector examined the airplane. The 
inspection revealed that the magnetos and fuel selector were turned off. The fuel tank was 
ruptured. The primer was in and locked. The carburetor heat was out (on). The propeller was 
bent aft. The airplane was equipped with a seat belt and shoulder harness for the rear seat. The 
front seat was equipped with a seat belt, but no shoulder harness, although there was a hard 
attachment point for a shoulder harness. The flight controls exhibited cable continuity to the 
ailerons, elevator, and rudder. 
The inspection of the 65-horsepower Continental A-65-8 engine revealed that the carburetor 
was broken in half, top to bottom. The carburetor air box was crushed from impact forces. The 
spark plugs were clean and clear. The left and right magnetos produced spark. The engine was 
rotated and it exhibited continuity in the drive train, and there was compression on all four 
cylinders.  
At 1553, the observed weather at the Minneapolis-St Paul International Airport (MSP), located 
about 12 miles northwest of the accident site, was: Wind 320 degrees at 7 knots, visibility 10 
miles, few clouds at 2,100 feet, broken ceiling at 3,400 feet, temperature 11 degrees Celsius (C), 
dew point 6 degrees C, altimeter 29.81 inches of Mercury. 
The Transport Canada Carburetor Icing chart indicated that ﬁSerious Icing Œ Any Powerﬂ 
conditions existed with a temperature of 11 degrees C and a temperature dew point of 6 degrees 
C.
