Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Clear, AK
Accident Number:
ANC01LA039
Date & Time:
03/03/2001, 1300 AST 
Registration:
N42DC
Aircraft:
Helio H-295
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
The certificated airline transport pilot reported that while in level, cruise flight, the engine 
began to run rough and lose power.  The pilot said that while performing the engine emergency 
procedures, he smelled smoke in the cabin, and noted a substantial amount of engine oil on the 
windscreen.  The airplane collided with trees during a subsequent forced landing.  A 
postaccident investigation revealed that the number two connecting rod had sustained a 
complete fracture.  The number 2 connecting rod journal displayed significant amount of heat 
induced bluing.  The fractured connecting rod, main journal bearing shells (7 halves), and rod 
bearing shells (7 halves) were sent to the NTSB's Materials Laboratory for examination.  A 
Senior Safety Board metallurgist reported that the separated connecting rod displayed 
evidence of low cycle, high stress fatigue cracking.  A scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
examination of the rod bearing shells disclosed pitting, with irregular-shape metal particles 
embedded on the surface of the bearing material.  The area around the pits showed evidence of 
metallic flow from the pits.             
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The shifting of engine connecting rod bearings, and the fracture of an engine connecting rod.
Page 2 of 6ANC01LA039
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,CONNECTING ROD - FRACTURED
2. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,BEARING - SHIFTED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6ANC01LA039
Factual Information
On March 3, 2001, about 1300 Alaska standard time, a wheel/ski equipped Helio H-295 
airplane, N42DC, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing about 20 miles south 
of Clear, Alaska. The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) positioning 
flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91,  when the accident occurred.  The airplane was registered to, 
and operated by, Wright Air Service, Inc., Fairbanks, Alaska.  The solo airline transport pilot 
was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was filed.  
The flight originated about 1245, from the Stampede Airstrip, located about 37 miles west of 
Healy, Alaska, and was en route to Fairbanks.    
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on March 5, the pilot reported that while in level, cruise flight, the engine began to 
run rough and lose power.  The pilot said that while performing the engine emergency 
procedures, he smelled smoke in the cabin, and noted a substantial amount of engine oil on the 
windscreen.  The airplane collided with trees during a subsequent forced landing, and 
sustained substantial damage to the wings, fuselage, and empennage.
The pilot stated that a postaccident inspection revealed a fist-sized hole on the left side of the 
engine crankcase.   
The director of maintenance for the operator reported that at the time of the accident, the 
engine had accrued a total time in service of 1,143.0 hours since overhaul, and was installed in 
the accident airplane in late August of 1999.  The engine maintenance records note that the 
engine was "overhauled" and reassembled per Lycoming overhaul manual 60294-5-6 on 
August 17, 1999.  All work was performed by the operator, at the operator's maintenance 
facility, in Fairbanks.      
The airplane was eventually recovered by the operator and insurance personnel, and moved to 
the operator's maintenance facility in Fairbanks. 
On April 12, 2001, in the presence of a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness 
inspector from the Fairbanks Flight Standards District Office, an engine tear down and 
inspection was conducted at the operator's maintenance facility in Fairbanks.  According to the 
FAA inspector, the inspection revealed that the number two connecting rod had sustained a 
complete fracture.  The fracture surfaces displayed postfailure circumferential scoring, and 
damage.  In addition, the FAA inspector noted a significant amount of heat induced, bluing of 
the number 2 connecting rod journal. 
The fractured connecting rod, main journal bearing shells (7 halves), and rod bearing shells (7 
halves) were sent to the National Transportation Safety Board's Materials Laboratory for 
examination.  A Senior Safety Board metallurgist reported that the separated connecting rod 
displayed evidence of low cycle, high stress fatigue cracking. He noted that a scanning electron 
microscope (SEM) examination of the rod bearing shells disclosed irregular-shape metal 
particles that were embedded on the surface of the bearing material.  He added that the rod 
bearing shells displayed many pits. The area around the pits showed evidence of metallic flow 
from the pits.             
Page 4 of 6ANC01LA039
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Engineer
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/28/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/31/2000
Flight Time:
18800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5500 hours (Total, this make and model), 18300 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Helio
Registration:
N42DC
Model/Series:
H-295 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1454
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/15/2000, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
96 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7519 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
GO-480-G1D6
Registered Owner:
Wright Air Service,Inc.
Rated Power:
295 hp
Operator:
Wright Air Service,Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
HYTA
Page 5 of 6ANC01LA039
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
100 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
-15°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Stampede, AK (Z90)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Fairbanks, AK (FAI)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1245 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
64.178611, -149.437500
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Clinton  O Johnson
Adopted Date:
07/02/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Kenneth C Thomas; Federal Aviation Administration; Fairbanks, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC01LA039
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
