Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Telluride, CO
Accident Number:
CEN14FA232
Date & Time:
05/03/2014, 1130 CDT 
Registration:
N407MH
Aircraft:
BELL 407
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Air Medical (Discretionary)
Analysis 
The commercial pilot and two flight crewmembers were conducting a search and rescue 
mission for a local sheriff's department in the helicopter. The pilot reported that, after flying 
five or six lines of the search grid and while in a right turn to begin flying another line of the 
grid, the engine noise changed. Immediately thereafter and while the helicopter was 200 ft 
above ground level, the engine chip detector light illuminated, followed by a full authority 
digital electronic control degrade light. The pilot started to descend toward an open snow-
covered meadow for landing, but the engine rpm degraded, so he initiated an autorotation. The 
helicopter touched down with little forward airspeed and bounced, and the left skid then 
became caught on an object under the snow. The helicopter rolled onto its left side and then 
came to rest.
 A postaccident examination of the  engine showed that the engine gas producer and power 
turbine drive train had continuity, but there was resistance to the gas producer and scraping of 
the power turbine when rotated. Further examination of the engine revealed that the gearbox 
cover had been modified by a repair, which included an insert being threaded into the oil 
delivery tube port. The insert was blocking the oil flow to the power turbine thrust (No. 5) 
bearing, which resulted in the bearing overheating and failing due to the lack of lubrication and 
the subsequent engine failure. No records were found regarding any repair to the gearbox cover 
oil delivery tube port.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the power turbine thrust (No. 5) bearing due to overheating as a result of oil 
starvation, which led to the engine failure. Also causal to the accident was an undocumented 
repair to the gearbox cover oil delivery tube port during which an insert was threaded into the 
oil delivery tube port that subsequently restricted the oil flow to the power turbine thrust 
bearing. 
 
Page 2 of 7CEN14FA232
Findings
Aircraft
Turbine section - Failure (Cause)
Oil system - Damaged/degraded (Cause)
Oil system - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Oil - Not specified
Environmental issues
Hidden/submerged object - Contributed to outcome
Page 3 of 7CEN14FA232
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 3, 2014 about 1130 mountain daylight time, a Bell 407 helicopter, N407MH, 
experienced an engine chip light followed by a loss of engine power. The pilot executed a forced 
landing to snow-covered mountainous terrain (above 10,000 ft MSL) near Telluride, Colorado. 
The commercial pilot and two crew members were not injured. The helicopter sustained 
substantial damage during the landing. The helicopter was registered to and operated by 
Classic Helicopters, Incorporated, of Odgen, Utah, on a company visual flight rules flight plan 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 as a search and rescue flight. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed in the vicinity of the accident. The flight originated 
from Moab, Utah.
The pilot stated that they were conducting a search and rescue mission for the San Miguel 
Sheriff's Department, searching for a person who had been missing overnight. After flying 5 or 
6 lines of the search grid, the pilot made a right turn to begin another line when there was 
change in engine noise. Almost immediately the engine chip detector light illuminated followed 
by a full authority digital engine control (FADEC) degrade light. The helicopter was about 200 
ft AGL. The pilot started to descend toward an open snow-covered meadow for a landing, but 
the engine RPM degraded so he initiated an autorotation. The helicopter touched down with 
little forward airspeed, bounced, and the left skid became hung up on an object under the 
snow. The helicopter rolled onto its left side and came to rest. All three occupants exited 
without injuries.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The helicopter was a Bell Helicopter Textron, Incorporated model 407, serial number 53100. It 
was configured for emergency medical use. The helicopter was powered by one Rolls Royce 
Incorporated M250-C47B turboshaft engine, serial number 847016, rated at 650 shaft horse 
power. The helicopter had undergone a 150 hour engine inspection on April 30, 2014. The 
airframe time at the inspection was 10,724.6 hours. The total airframe time recorded at the 
accident was 10,730.1 hours.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot, age 32, held a commercial pilot certificate with helicopter and instrument helicopter 
ratings. Additionally, the pilot held a flight instructor certificate with helicopter and instrument 
helicopter ratings. The pilot reported having 4,300 total flying hours with 740 hours in the 
make and model of the accident helicopter. He also reported having flown 42 hours in the 30 
days preceding the accident. The pilot completed a flight review with his company on March 
31, 2014.
The pilot reported having a second-class medical certificate dated April 22, 2014 with no 
restrictions or limitation.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The left side of the helicopter passenger compartment showed inward buckling and skin 
wrinkles. Inward crushing damage was also observed to the upper rear engine cowling and 
engine exhaust. The lower left forward and lower right forward Plexiglas windows were broken 
out. The helicopter's tailboom was severed just aft of the main fuselage body. The tail rotor 
Page 4 of 7CEN14FA232
gear box was torn out at the end of the boom. The main rotor system remained attached at the 
mast and transmission. Three of the four main rotor blades were bent and broken. Part of the 
trailing edge of one blade was torn out. An examination of the helicopter's flight control system 
revealed no preimpact anomalies. A post-accident examination of the helicopter's engine 
showed the engine gas producer and power turbine drive train had continuity, but there was 
resistance to the gas producer and scraping of the power turbine when rotated. Additionally, 
ferrous debris was found in the engine scavenge oil filter. The helicopter's engine was removed 
and shipped to the engine manufacturer for further examination.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The helicopter's engine was examined at Rolls Royce Corporation, Indianapolis, Indiana, on 
June 3-4, 2014. The examination showed that the power turbine thrust (No. 5) bearing was 
dry, gray/black in color, and heavily worn. The races and separator were in place, but no 
recognizable ball elements were present. The bearing and outer races were smeared with 
melted metal deposits. The ball separator was heavily scored with worn/enlarged ball pockets. 
The remaining power turbine components exhibited rotational contact damage consistent with 
a loss of radial and axial positioning, which is normally provided by the No. 5 bearing.
No. 4/5 Bearing Oil Jet
A small amount of oil was present underneath the No. 4/5 bearing oil jet at the gearbox port. 
The jet appeared to be in good condition. Unmetered alcohol was flowed through the jet at low 
pressure and exited the nozzle jets with no evidence of obstruction.
GEARBOX COVER OIL TRANSFER PASSAGE
Visual Inspection
Light directed into the gearbox cover oil delivery tube port was not observable at the passage 
exit. Unmetered alcohol squired into the passage did not pass through in either direction. The 
expected opening to the cast passage in the sidewall of the bore could not be observed under 
magnification or detected using a soft wire inserted into the port.
Radiographic Inspection
The gearbox cover was submitted for radiographic inspection. X-ray images revealed that the 
cover had been modified by a repair that included an insert being threaded into the oil delivery 
tube port. The insert was restricting the opening into the cast oil passage.
Oil Flow Test
A calibrated flow test of the gearbox passage using typical operating pressure and temperature 
settings was performed using a Rolls Royce production test bench. The initial test was 
performed with the 4/5 bearing oil jet installed. No measurable flow through the passage was 
produced. The piece was removed from the test bench and the No. 4/5 bearing oil jet was 
removed. The passage was ultrasonically cleaned. The cleaning produced some small particles 
consistent with coked oil and scarf. A second flow test performed using the same settings but 
without the 4/5 bearing oil jet installed produced a small amount of flow. The flow measured 
less than 2 percent of the No. 5 bearing 4/5 oil jet design flow specification.
Metallographic Examination
Measurements taken of the circumferential gap between the bottom of the threaded insert and 
Page 5 of 7CEN14FA232
the gearbox cover ranged from between 0.0005 and 0.005 inch. Deposits consistent with coked 
oil were observed in the cast oil passage adjacent to the circumferential gap.
ENGINE HISTORY RELEVANT TO THE GEARBOX COVER INSERT/OBSTRUCTION
The engine was manufactured in 1966. The gearbox cover, P/N23065470, serial number 
44193, was original to the engine. The gearbox cover was marked with a material review board 
(MRB) symbol. The MRB record for the gearbox cover showed that a threaded insert was used 
as part of an oil transfer passage during original manufacture.
Gearbox Cover In-Service Exposure
The gearbox was disassembled seven times during its service life. No entry for additional 
gearbox cover oil delivery tube port repairs were found in the available service records. For 
additional information, see the Powerplant Group Chairman's Factual Report provided in the 
docket for this report.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/22/2014
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/31/2014
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 4300 hours (Total, all aircraft), 740 hours (Total, this make and model), 42 hours 
(Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7CEN14FA232
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N407MH
Model/Series:
407 NO SERIES
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
53100
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid;
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/30/2014, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
5501 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
6 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
10730.1 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ALLISON
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
250-C47
Registered Owner:
CLASSIC MEDICAL INC
Rated Power:
650 hp
Operator:
CLASSIC MEDICAL INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
JAPA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
20 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.91 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
4°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Moab, UT (MOB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
Telluride, CO 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.835000, -107.881667 (est)
Page 7 of 7
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
David C Bowling
Adopted Date:
08/10/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Dave Cawthra; Federal Aviation Administration; Salt lake City, UT
Joan Gregoire; Bell helicopter Textron Incorporated; Irving, TX
Jon-Adam Michael; Rolls Royce Corporation; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
08/10/2016
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=89183
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
