The private pilot departed for a long cross-country flight with the mixture leaned to the high 
field elevation. He then further leaned the mixture for lean-of-peak exhaust gas temperature as 
he climbed the airplane to 10,500 ft mean sea level (msl) for improved fuel efficiency. Thirty 
minutes into the flight, he descended the airplane to about 8,000 ft msl. The pilot did not 
enrich the mixture during the approximate 2,500-ft descent. Shortly after, the engine 
sputtered, followed by a loss of about 700 rpm. He verified the position of the throttle and 
enriched the fuel/air mixture with one full rotation of the control knob, but he never advanced 
the knob to the "full rich" position. The pilot then decided to perform a precautionary landing 
because he was concerned the airplane would not have the power to cross an approaching 
mountain range. He chose a dry river bed despite the availability of two nearby airports with 
dirt runways. During the landing, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted, which 
resulted in substantial damage to the rudder. 
Postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any evidence of preimpact 
mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation, and the engine achieved 
full and continuous power during a test run. 
The Pilot's Operating Handbook (POH) required a mixture adjustment during the descent for 
smooth operation, which the pilot did not do during the 2,500-ft descent. An engine 
manufacturer representative reported that the engine may suffer leaning misfires if the fuel/air 
mixture is not enriched during a descent. Therefore, it is likely that the engine sputtered and 
lost partial power due to the pilot's failure to properly enrich the fuel/air mixture during the 
descent in accordance with the POH. The pilot could have remediated this condition if he had 
advanced the mixture to the "full rich" position in accordance with the POH emergency 
procedures; however, instead the pilot made a minor mixture adjustment, which did not 
restore engine power. 
Page 2 of 9WPR18LA002
The pilot's failure to enrich the mixture during the descent, as required by the Pilot's Operating 
Handbook (POH), and his subsequent failure to follow the POH emergency procedures, which 
resulted in an excessively lean fuel/air mixture and subsequent loss of rpm. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's improper decision to land on unsuitable terrain despite the availability 
of two nearby airports.
