Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Syosset, NY
Accident Number:
ERA16FA176
Date & Time:
05/03/2016, 1542 EDT 
Registration:
N440H
Aircraft:
BEECH V35
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The instrument-rated pilot was conducting a personal cross-county flight and was operating on 
an instrument flight rules flight plan. While he was flying in visual conditions between cloud 
layers at 7,000 ft and heading toward the destination airport, he reported to air traffic control 
that the airplane had experienced a vacuum pump failure and that he had lost the associated 
gyroscopic instruments and part of the instrument panel. The pilot continued toward the 
destination airport because it had the best weather conditions compared to alternate nearby 
airports; however, after accepting radar vectors for the GPS approach to the airport, he 
reported that the airplane had entered instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) and that he 
had lost a "little bit" of control. He then reported that more of the instruments had failed and 
that he was trying to get back to 7,000 ft. Shortly after, the controller provided the pilot with 
the weather conditions at a closer airport and asked him if he would like to try to land there; 
however, no further communications were received from the pilot. Review of radar data 
revealed that the airplane made several course and altitude deviations as it proceeded 
northeast until the end of the data.
The airplane was found separated in multiple pieces along a 0.4-mile-long debris path. Based 
on the radar data and debris path, it is likely that the pilot experienced spatial disorientation 
while maneuvering the airplane in IMC without a full instrument panel, that he subsequently 
lost airplane control, and that the airplane broke up in flight due to overstress during the 
ensuing uncontrolled descent.
Review of a vacuum pump manufacturer's service letter (SL) revealed that the mandatory 
replacement time for the make and model vacuum pump was 500 aircraft hours or 6 years 
from the data of manufacture, whichever came first. Compliance with the SL was not 
mandatory for 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 operations. The vacuum pump was 
manufactured in May 1999, which was 17 years before the accident. Additionally, the airplane 
was not equipped with a backup/standby vacuum pump.
Page 2 of 8ERA16FA176
Metallurgical examination of the vacuum pump revealed that the rotor had separated radially 
in numerous locations. Three vanes remained intact, and three vanes separated into numerous 
pieces. Rotational scoring/rubbing marks were observed on the rotor and pump housing.
Additionally, debris was noted in the inlet screen, but the engine had impacted a dirt field. It is 
likely the rotor's contact with the pump housing caused the failure of the pump rotor and 
vanes; however, it could not be ruled out that debris ingestion contributed to their failure.
The pilot had severe coronary artery disease, and toxicological testing revealed low levels of 
diphenhydramine, a sedating antihistamine allergy treatment and sleep aid, and zolpidem, a 
prescription sleep aid. However, there was no evidence that the pilot's heart disease or sedating 
medications impaired his performance or incapacitated him.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's loss of airplane control while operating in instrument meteorological conditions 
with only a partial instrument panel due to a failure of the airplane's vacuum pump. 
Contributing to the accident were the pilot's spatial disorientation and the operation of the 
vacuum pump beyond the 6-year time limit recommended by the vacuum pump manufacturer.
Findings
Aircraft
Vacuum distribution system - Failure (Cause)
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Vacuum distribution system - Incorrect service/maintenance (Factor)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Spatial disorientation - Pilot (Factor)
Replacement - Other/unknown (Factor)
Environmental issues
Low visibility - Effect on operation (Cause)
Low visibility - Effect on personnel (Cause)
Page 3 of 8ERA16FA176
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
VFR encounter with IMC
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Aircraft structural failure
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On May 3, 2016, at 1542 eastern daylight time, a Beech V35B airplane, N440H, experienced an 
in-flight breakup near Syosset, New York. The airline transport pilot and two passengers were 
fatally injured, and the airplane was destroyed. The pilot was operating the airplane as a 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Part 91 personal flight. Instrument meteorological 
conditions (IMC) existed near the accident site about the time of the accident, and an 
instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed for the planned flight to Robertson Field 
(4B8), Plainville, Connecticut. The flight originated from Grand Strand Airport, North Myrtle 
Beach, South Carolina, about 1240.
According to air traffic control (ATC) transcripts provided by the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA), about 1522, the pilot checked in with ATC and stated that he was level at 
7,000 ft. About 1 minute later, he reported to a controller that the vacuum system had failed 
and that he had lost the associated gyroscopic instruments and part of the instrument panel, 
and he asked for the easiest approach to descend to the destination airport. The pilot then 
stated that the flight was currently operating in visual flight rules (VFR) on top of clouds and 
that he wanted to continue VFR at 7,000 ft to his destination airport because he did not want 
to descend into the clouds. The controller asked the pilot if he wanted to declare an emergency, 
and the pilot stated, "yes," and confirmed that he wanted to proceed to his destination airport 
because the "weather's–better there." The controller then briefed the next controller along the 
airplane's flight route.
The next controller subsequently confirmed that the pilot was declaring an emergency. At 1529, 
the pilot requested the weather for the "Hartford-Bradley area"(near his destination) and the 
controller advised the pilot that the reported weather at Hartford included an overcast ceiling 
of 1,600 ft and that it looked like Hartford had the best weather conditions compared to 
alternate nearby airports. The pilot then requested radar vectors for the GPS approach to 4B8, 
which the controller acknowledged. He then instructed the pilot to proceed direct to 
Bridgeport, Connecticut, which the pilot acknowledged. The pilot then reported that the flight 
had entered IMC. At 1538, the pilot reported that he had just lost a "little bit" of control. The 
controller told him to turn left to 060°, which the pilot acknowledged. At 1539, the pilot 
reported that more of the instruments had failed and that he was turning to 060° and trying to 
get back to 7,000 ft. At 1541, the controller provided the pilot with the weather conditions at 
Republic Airport (FRG), Farmingdale, New York, and asked him if he would like to try to land 
there; however, no further communications were received from the pilot.
Page 4 of 8ERA16FA176
Review of radar data revealed that the airplane made several course and altitude deviations as 
it proceeded northeast over Long Island until the end of the data.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
66, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Sea; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/03/2014
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
4000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 999999 hours (Total, this make and model)
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate with an airplane multiengine land rating. He 
also held a commercial pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating. His most 
recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued on September 3, 2014. At that time, he 
reported a total flight experience of 4,000 hours. The pilot's logbook was not recovered.
Page 5 of 8ERA16FA176
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N440H
Model/Series:
V35 B
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1973
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
D-9464
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/03/2016, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
20 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6166 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The six-seat, low-wing, retractable tricycle-gear airplane was manufactured in 1973. It was 
powered by a 285-horsepower Continental IO-520 engine and was equipped with a three-
bladed, constant-speed McCauley propeller.
Review of maintenance records revealed that the airplane's most recent annual inspection was 
completed on February 3, 2016. At that time, the airframe had accumulated 6,166 total hours 
of operation, and the engine had accumulated 520 hours of operation. The airplane had flown 
about 20 hours from the time of the last inspection until the accident. The vacuum pump was 
installed on February 10, 2000, at a tachometer time of 5,813 hours, which was 373 hours of 
operation before the accident.
Review of the vacuum pump manufacturer's Service Letter (SL) 58A revealed that the 
mandatory replacement time for the make and model vacuum pump was 500 aircraft hours or 
6 years from the data of manufacture, whichever came first. Compliance with the SL was 
mandatory for Part 135 operations, but it was not mandatory for Part 91 operations. The 
accident vacuum pump was manufactured in May 1999, which was 17 years before the 
accident. The airplane was not equipped with a backup/standby vacuum pump.
Page 6 of 8ERA16FA176
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FRG, 80 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
8 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
150°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
40°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.81 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Mist; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
North Myrtle, SC (CRE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Plainville, CT (4B8)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1240 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
FRG was located about 8 miles southeast of the accident site. At 1553, the recorded weather at 
FRG was wind from 040° at 5 knots, visibility 4 miles in mist, broken ceiling at 800 ft, overcast 
ceiling at 1,200 ft, temperature 11°C, dew point 9°C, and altimeter setting of 29.81 inches of 
mercury.
The pilot had telephoned flight service on the morning of the accident, filed an IFR flight plan, 
and received a standard weather briefing. The standard briefing included current conditions 
and a forecast for overcast ceilings with bases between 1,000 and 2,000 ft and multiple cloud 
layers with tops above 18,000 ft.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
40.834444, -73.490278
The wreckage impacted a populated area consisting of residences, fields, and wooded terrain. A 
debris path extended about 0.4 mile on a magnetic heading of about 010°. The outboard 
section of the right ruddervator, remaining right ruddervator, and sections of the interior 
overhead panel were located at the beginning of the debris path. The fuselage, outboard section 
of the left wing, left ruddervator, and right wing were located about 400 ft farther along the 
Page 7 of 8ERA16FA176
debris path. The inboard left wing was located about another 400 ft farther along the debris 
path, and the engine and instrument panel were located at the end of the debris path.
The outboard left wing had separated near the aileron/flap junction and exhibited paint 
transfer marks, consistent with right ruddervator contact. The left aileron had separated and 
fractured into two sections. The left inboard wing remained attached to the carry-through spar, 
and the spar caps displayed deformation damage in an upward direction. The left flap 
remained attached to the inboard left wing section. The right wing had separated near the root, 
and about 8 gallons of fuel remained in the right wing. The right flap and an approximate 15-
inch-long section of inboard right aileron remained attached to the right wing. The right 
ruddervator had separated, and the left ruddervator remained attached to the tailcone. 
Measurement of the elevator trim jackscrew corresponded to an approximate 10°-tab-up 
(nose-down) trim setting. Due to multiple separations and cabin fragmentation, flight control 
continuity could not be verified; however, all recovered flight control cables exhibited 
broomstraw separation, consistent with overstress.
The propeller had separated from the engine at the crankcase, and the engine came to rest 
inverted and was buried in a 3-ft-deep crater. One propeller blade had separated from the hub, 
but the other two propeller blades remained attached. All three propeller blades exhibited 
scoring and bending. The crankshaft could not be rotated due to front engine case damage, but 
borescope inspection of all six cylinders revealed no evidence of any preimpact mechanical 
malfunctions. Both magnetos sustained impact damage and could not be tested. The top and 
bottom spark plugs were removed from the six cylinders, and their electrodes were intact and 
light gray. The engine-driven fuel pump remained attached, and its drive coupling was intact. 
When the drive coupling was rotated by hand, the engine-driven fuel pump shaft rotated. The 
fuel metering unit and manifold valve exhibited impact damage.
The vacuum pump remained attached to the engine and was removed for metallurgical 
examination. The examination revealed that the pump housing was jammed and would not 
rotate. The opposite end of the coupling rotated freely. Disassembly of the pump housing 
revealed that that the rotor had separated radially in numerous locations. Three vanes 
remained intact, and three vanes had separated into numerous pieces. Rotational 
scoring/rubbing marks were observed on the rotor and pump housing. Additionally, debris was 
noted in the inlet screen; the engine had impacted a dirt field.
A panel-mounted GPS was removed from the instrument panel, and examination of the unit 
revealed that it did not store track data.
Medical And Pathological Information
The Nassau County Medical Examiner's Office, East Meadow, New York conducted an autopsy 
on the pilot. The autopsy report noted the cause of death as "multiple blunt impact injuries." 
The autopsy identified significant coronary artery disease.
Page 8 of 8ERA16FA176
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Science Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma performed 
toxicological testing on the pilot's specimens. The toxicology testing detected diphenhydramine 
in his urine, 0.03 (ug/ml. ug/g) diphenhydramine in his blood, ibuprofen in his urine, 0.007 
(ug/ml, ug/g) zolpidem in his urine, and 0.007 (ug/ml, ug/g) zolpidem in his blood. 
Diphenhydramine is a sedating antihistamine used to treat allergy symptoms and as a sleep aid 
and carries the following Federal Drug Administration warning: "may impair mental and/or 
physical ability required for the performance of potentially hazardous tasks (e.g., driving, 
operating heavy machinery)." Zolpidem is a prescription sleep aid and carries a warning about 
sedation and changes in judgment or behavior.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert J Gretz
Adopted Date:
06/26/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Jeffrey J Rose; FAA/FSDO; Farmingdale, NY
Nicole Charnon; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Peter Basile; Textron Aviation; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
06/26/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=93095
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
