Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Burnsville, NC
Accident Number:
ATL06LA041
Date & Time:
02/01/2006, 1145 EST 
Registration:
N814ER
Aircraft:
Cessna 500
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
4 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Executive/Corporate
Analysis 
The right main landing gear collapsed on landing.  According to the flight crew, after departure 
they preceded to Mountain Air Airport, where they performed a "touch-and-go" landing. Upon 
raising the landing gear following the touch-and-go landing, they got an "unsafe gear" light. 
The crew stated they cycled the gear back down and got a "three green" normal indication. 
They cycled the gear back up and again got the "gear unsafe" light. They diverted to 
Greensboro, North Carolina, and upon landing in Greensboro the airplane's right main landing 
gear collapsed. After the accident, gear parts from the accident airplane were discovered on the 
runway at Mountain Air Airport. Metallurgical examination of the landing gear components 
revealed fractures consistent with overstress separation and there was no evidence of fatigue. 
Examination of the runway at Mountain Air Airport by an FAA Inspector showed evidence the 
accident airplane had touched down short of the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's misjudged distance/altitude that led to an undershoot and the pilot's failure to 
attain the proper touchdown point.
Page 2 of 7ATL06LA041
Findings
Occurrence #1: UNDERSHOOT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
1. (C) DISTANCE/ALTITUDE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - NOT ATTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
4. LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - OVERLOAD
5. GO-AROUND - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Page 3 of 7ATL06LA041
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 1, 2006, at 1145 eastern standard time, a Cessna CE-500, N814ER, registered to 
and operated by Flite Services, Inc., touched down short of the runway while performing a 
touch-and-go landing at Mountain Air Airport, Burnsville, North Carolina. The corporate flight 
was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and an Instrument Flight Rules flight plan was filed. The pilot, co-pilot and two 
passengers were not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight 
originated from Asheville, North Carolina, on February 1, 2006, at 1130.
According to the flight crew, the departure from Asheville, was normal. The flight proceeded to 
Mountain Air Airport, Burnsville, North Carolina, where they performed a "touch-and-go." 
Following the touch-and-go, at about 1145, and upon raising the landing gear, they got an 
"unsafe gear" light. The crew cycled the gear back down and got a "three green" normal 
indication. They cycled the gear back up and again got the "gear unsafe" light. They cycled the 
gear three more times with the same results. The crew decided to return to Asheville, and upon 
extending the gear for a visual landing at Asheville, the right main landing gear green light did 
not illuminate. The crew stated that they performed all of the checklist procedures and asked 
the control tower personnel to visually look to see if the gear was down and that tower 
personnel reported that it was. The crew asked the tower personnel if the landing light was on, 
and tower personnel replied that is was not.  According to the flight crew, they went through 
the emergency procedures again, but they had no luck in getting the landing gear to lock down. 
They said that there was no landing light and that they got the gear horn with the gear down 
and full flaps with the throttles at idle. The crew stated they were sure that the gear was out of 
the uplocks but not down and locked.
The crew stated that, after talking with maintenance personnel on the ground at Asheville, they 
decided to divert to Greensboro, North Carolina, where there were better facilities to handle 
the situation. One of the passengers had noticed that after the crew had recycled the gear the 
last time, a panel on the right wing was pushed up. The flight continued to Greensboro, at 150 
knots with the gear down. Greensboro tower personnel cleared the flight for a visual approach. 
According to the crew, the landing was normal for the first 2,000 feet of roll out, then the right 
main landing gear collapsed. The crew said that, when the gear collapsed, they shut down both 
engines and the airplane veered off the right side of the runway into the grass. Both 
crewmembers and passengers exited the airplane through the main door with no injuries. The 
pilot stated that, he examined the right main landing gear after the airplane had been moved to 
the hangar, and it appeared to him that the landing gear failed due to metal fatigue. He said 
that, "where the gear was broken, there was evidence of old cracks with fresh breaks."
According to an FAA inspector the flight crew had attempted a landing at the Mountain Air 
Airport soon after their departure from Asheville. According to statements made to the FAA 
Inspector by the pilot and co-pilot, they performed only a low pass over the airport and did not 
touch down, and that no other landings or takeoffs were attempted prior to the landing at 
Greensboro. However, according to witnesses at the Mountain Air Airport, after seeing the 
airplane on the evening news, the owner of the private airport called the Greensboro FAA 
Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) and reported that the airplane crew talked with him on 
the airport's common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) the afternoon of the accident and that 
Page 4 of 7ATL06LA041
the airplane was observed attempting to land on the northwest runway, but it aborted the 
landing at the last moment. Later that afternoon, airplane landing gear parts were discovered 
on the runway.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
A review of information on file with the FAA Airman's Certification Division, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, revealed the pilot was issued a commercial pilot certificate on December 24, 2003, 
with ratings for airplane multi-engine land and instrument airplane, and he held a private pilot 
certificate for airplane single-engine land. In addition, the pilot held a type rating for the CE-
500. The pilot held a first-class medical issued on March 23, 2005, with a restriction that he 
must have available glasses for near vision. The pilot reported that he had accumulated 2,500 
total flight hours, of which 700 hours were in the Cessna CE-500. The pilot's last flight review 
was conducted on April 10, 2005.
A review of information on file with the FAA Airman's Certification Division, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, revealed that the co-pilot was issued an airline transport pilot certificate on October 
16, 2003, with ratings for airplane multi-engine land, and he held a commercial pilot certificate 
for airplane single-engine land and helicopter. In addition, the co-pilot held type ratings for 
CE-500, HS-125, IA-Jet, and LR-Jet. The co-pilot held a second-class medical certificate issued 
on March 23, 2005, with a restriction that he must have available glasses for near vision. The 
co-pilot reported that he had accumulated 13,000 total flight hours of which 1,000 hours were 
in the Cessna CE-500. The co-pilot's last flight review was conducted on August 25, 2005.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
A review of information provided by the pilot revealed that the last continuous airworthiness 
inspection was conducted on November 30, 2005. The airframe total time at the time of the 
accident was 12,008.3 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The 1317 surface weather observation at Piedmont Triad International Airport was wind 220-
degrees at 6 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, sky clear, temperature 9 degrees Celsius, dew 
point temperature 3 degrees Celsius, and altimeter 30.02.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The CVR was not retained for readout by NTSB due to the elapsed time from the accident to 
the final landing.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the airplane by an FAA Inspector following the landing at Greensboro revealed 
several of the landing gear components were missing.  Following a conversation with the owner 
of the Mountain Air Airport,  the FAA inspector went to the airport, and retrieved the landing 
gear parts found on their runway. He stated that he took one of the large parts, about half of 
the right main landing gear trunnion, to the hangar where the accident airplane was stored, 
and positively identified the part as coming from the accident airplane. The broken trunnion fit 
exactly with the other half of the broken trunnion still attached to the airplane and that the 
trunnion had bent 30-degrees before breaking. While at Mountain Air, the inspector observed 
that the airplane had touched down short of the runway and below the airport grade on the 
side of the mountain.
Page 5 of 7ATL06LA041
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Examination of photographs of the failed landing gear component fracture surfaces by the 
NTSB Materials Laboratory found no indication of fatigue. The angle brace fracture on the 
landing gear trunnion showed deformation consistent with overstress compression buckling. 
The upper support showed twisting deformation consistent with the direction of the bend in 
the angle brace and downward bending consistent with the wheel moving aft relative to the 
upper support, all consistent with the overstress fracture. 
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/01/2005
Flight Time:
2500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 700 hours (Total, this make and model), 2200 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 90 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
49, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/01/2005
Flight Time:
13000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1000 hours (Total, this make and model), 12750 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 80 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 23 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7ATL06LA041
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N814ER
Model/Series:
500 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
500-280
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/01/2005, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
12000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Jet
Airframe Total Time:
12008.3 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
JT-15D-1A
Registered Owner:
Flite Services, Inc.
Rated Power:
2200 lbs
Operator:
Flite Services, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Asheville, NC (AVL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Greensboro, NC (GSO)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1130 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Mountain Air (2NC0)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4432 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
32
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2900 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Straight-in
Page 7 of 7ATL06LA041
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 None
Latitude, Longitude:
35.870000, -82.347222
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Butch Wilson
Adopted Date:
06/27/2007
Additional Participating Persons:
Linda Falcon; Greensboro FSDO-05; Greensboro, NC
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
