Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
El Dorado, CA
Accident Number:
LAX02FA038
Date & Time:
12/02/2001, 1815 PST 
Registration:
N6946P
Aircraft:
Piper PA-24-250
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
4 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane collided with the ground in a steep nose down attitude at high speed.  There were 
no known witnesses to the accident.  No flight plan had been filed for the personal flight and no 
records were found of an FAA preflight weather briefing or en route communications with any 
FAA facility.  The accident site is about 8 miles east of the flight's intended destination airport.  
Examination of available weather data disclosed that an unusually strong late fall weather 
system was affecting the general accident site area.  Overcast clouds were banked over the 
Sierra Nevada foothills and consisted of a southwest-northeast oriented cloud band with 
scattered light rain showers present in the accident area.  Cloud bases were probably 1,000 to 
2,000 feet above ground level, and cloud tops were probably around 16,000 feet msl.  Winds 
and temperatures at the accident airplane's estimated flight envelope of 3,000 to 4,500 feet 
msl were southwesterly at 30 knots and 34 to 41 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively.  The freezing 
level in the accident area was about 5,000 feet msl with the possibility of moderate to severe 
mixed icing conditions above that altitude.  The presence of a light rain shower near the 
accident site and an upslope flow condition indicated that super cooled large water droplets 
were likely present in the area.  Occasional moderate turbulence was likely in the area with 
severe turbulence possible near convective activity.  A deputy sheriff patrolling near the 
accident site reported that at the time of the accident there was heavy rain and wind.  Local 
accident area residents reported that they were experiencing strong winds and heavy rain with 
lightning and thunder at the time of the accident.  Examination of the wreckage disclosed no 
evidence of a preimpact mechanical malfunction or failure.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's intentional flight into adverse weather conditions and his subsequent failure to 
maintain aircraft control.
Page 2 of 7LAX02FA038
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
2. WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
3. WEATHER CONDITION - TURBULENCE
4. WEATHER CONDITION - RAIN
5. (C) FLIGHT INTO ADVERSE WEATHER - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
6. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7LAX02FA038
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 2, 2001, about 1815 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-24-250, N6946P, was 
destroyed during an in-flight collision with terrain near El Dorado, California.  The private 
instrument rated pilot and three passengers all received fatal injuries.  The personal flight was 
operated by the owner/pilot under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight originated at 
North Las Vegas, Nevada, and was destined for Cameron Park, California.  No flight plan had 
been filed.  There were no records found of a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) preflight 
weather briefing nor en route communications with any FAA facility.  
An airport check revealed that the airplane arrived at the North Las Vegas Air Terminal on 
November 30, 2001, about 1546.  While no records were available to confirm an exact 
departure time, transient parking records established that the airplane likely left North Las 
Vegas just prior to 1600 on December 2, 2001.  The pilot's route of flight and altitudes flown 
between Las Vegas and the accident site are unknown.
There were no known witnesses to the accident.
The accident site is about 8 miles east of the flight's intended destination airport.
PILOT INFORMATION
Examination of the pilot's logbook revealed about 703 total flight hours, with 22 instrument 
hours and 63 night hours.  The front page of the logbook was noted as No. 1, and dated April 1, 
2000.  The pilot's recency of flight could not be determined as the last few pages of his logbook 
were incomplete.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
Examination of the airplane logbooks revealed that the most recent annual inspection occurred 
on April 20, 2001, at 4875 total flight hours.  The most recent altimeter calibration, static 
system check, transponder, and VOR receiver checks occurred on September 21, 2000.  The 
time recording tachometer was destroyed. 
Records at the North Las Vegas airport documented that the pilot made a fueling request to fill 
both main fuel tanks.  A fueling invoice documented 12.1 gallons of 100LL fuel was added to 
the main fuel tanks.  The airplane was fitted with two 30-gallon main fuel tanks and two 15-
gallon auxiliary tip tanks.  The amount of fuel in the tip tanks when the airplane departed Las 
Vegas is unknown.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
There was no FAA record of the pilot requesting a preflight weather briefing prior to the return 
flight to Cameron Park.
Safety Board meteorologists performed a weather study of the accident area and time.  An 
unusually strong late fall weather system was affecting California on December 2.  Overcast 
clouds were banked east of Sacramento over the Sierra Nevada foothills.  A southwest-
northeast oriented cloud band with scattered light rain showers was present from south of 
Sacramento through the accident area.  A light rain shower was likely present in the accident 
area when the accident occurred.  Cloud bases were probably 1,000 to 2,000 feet above ground 
level, and cloud tops were probably around 16,000 feet msl.
Page 4 of 7LAX02FA038
Winds and temperatures at the accident airplane's estimated flight envelope of 3,000 to 4,500 
feet msl were southwesterly at 30 knots and 34 to 41 degrees Fahrenheit, respectively.  The 
freezing level in the accident area was about 5,000 feet msl.  The presence of a light rain 
shower near the accident site and an upslope flow condition indicated that super cooled large 
water droplets were likely present in the area.
Occasional moderate mechanical turbulence was likely in the area with severe turbulence 
possible near convective activity.  National Weather Service aviation forecast and advisory 
products were reviewed and compared to reported weather conditions during the course of the 
investigation with no significant discrepancies noted. 
Local area residents reported that they were experiencing strong winds, and heavy rain with 
lightning and thunder at the time of the accident.  A sheriff's deputy reported that two separate 
weather cells were passing through the area.  About 40 miles north at Blue Canyon, California, 
the weather reporting facility was reporting: wind 200 degrees at 15 with gusts to 28; 1/4 mile 
visibility and heavy snow; altimeter 29.69 inHg.  About 23 miles southwest at Mather, 
California, the weather reporting facility was reporting: wind 180 degrees at 11; 10 miles 
visibility; 5,500 foot broken clouds; and altimeter 29.84 inHg.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was located at 38 degrees 36 minutes 289 degrees north latitude and 120 degrees 
51 minutes 994 degrees west longitude, about 1,615 feet msl.  Most of the airplane was located 
in an impact crater with some scatter uphill about 60 feet on a magnetic heading of 076 
degrees.  The scatter consisted of cabin roof, cabin door, cowl door, radio and instrument parts, 
personal baggage, and interior parts.  A post accident fire consumed most of the airplane 
center section and other parts.  The entire airplane was accounted for at the accident site 
except for the rudder counter weights.  The rudder, vertical stabilizer, horizontal stabilator, and 
trim tab were overhanging the center of the fire area as an assembly.  No evidence of overtravel 
or flutter were noted on the rudder.  The wing flaps and landing gear appeared to be in the 
retracted position. 
Wing span accordioning near parallel to the wing chord center line was evident from wing tip 
to wing tip.  The engine was located below the ground level average.  Of the three propeller 
blades broken from the propeller hub, two were visible in the engine crater.  All three propeller 
blades were examined with two revealing leading edge damage and trailing edge "S" bending.  
The third blade displayed a forward bend.   
Examination of the center section revealed the two fuel selectors pointing to their respective 
wing tips, or left selector to the 9 o'clock and right to the 3 o'clock position.  Traces of blue fuel 
were found in the wing tip fuel tanks.  The main fuel tanks were destroyed.  The recording 
tachometer was still attached to the drive cable in the center section area and was fire 
damaged.  The altimeter was located uphill from the wreckage and damaged with the 
barometric window indicating about 29.83 inHg.  The airplane 8-day clock was indicating 8:50 
with the face glass missing.  The gyro horizon and directional gyro were destroyed by impact 
forces and post accident fire.  No other instrument information was recovered.  The dry air 
vacuum pump was broken open revealing fractured carbon vane blocks.  The vacuum pump 
splined drive coupling was destroyed by fire.    
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The El Dorado County Medical Examiner was unable to perform an autopsy on the pilot nor 
Page 5 of 7LAX02FA038
obtain suitable samples for FAA toxicological analysis. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was released to the insurance company representative on December 19, 
2001.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/01/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/02/2000
Flight Time:
703 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N6946P
Model/Series:
PA-24-250 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
24-2081
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/20/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4875 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-540
Registered Owner:
Fix Signs, Inc.
Rated Power:
250 hp
Operator:
Scott E. Mills
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7LAX02FA038
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MHR
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1845 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Broken / 5500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.84 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
N. Las Vegas, NV (VGT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
El Dorado, CA (O61)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
3 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
38.604722, -120.850000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
GEORGE E PETTERSON
Adopted Date:
04/28/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Charles Little; The New Piper Aircraft; Chino Hills, CA
Mark Platt; Textron Lycoming; Williamsport, PA
Dal Patno; Federal Aviation Administration; Sacramento, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7LAX02FA038
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
