Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
HOMER, AK
Accident Number:
ANC00LA053
Date & Time:
05/01/2000, 1230 AKD 
Registration:
N301MH
Aircraft:
Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
During an on-demand passenger flight, the airline transport certificated pilot was landing a 
helicopter at a lake gauging station.  The gauging station was surrounded by snow-covered 
terrain.  His two passengers were conducting snow pack studies around the lake.  Flat light 
conditions existed at the lake, and light drizzle was falling.  The pilot was utilizing the gauging 
station as his landing reference point, but during the landing approach, he flew past the station 
and had no other visual references.  The skids of the helicopter contacted the snow, and the 
pilot applied upward collective pitch.  He attempted to stabilize the helicopter in a hover, but 
began drifting forward and to the left. The left landing gear skid contacted the snow, and the 
helicopter rolled onto its left side.  A passenger described the weather conditions at the landing 
site as the 'inside of a ping pong ball.'  The pilot recommended additional white-out training as 
a way to prevent the accident. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's misjudging the landing flare in whiteout/flat light conditions.  Factors associated 
with the accident are the whiteout and flat lighting conditions. 
Page 2 of 6ANC00LA053
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
1. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED
2. (C) FLARE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - OTHER
----------
Occurrence #2: ROLL OVER
Phase of Operation: HOVER - IN GROUND EFFECT
Findings
4. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - WHITEOUT
Page 3 of 6ANC00LA053
Factual Information
 On May 1, 2000, about 1230 Alaska daylight time, a high skid equipped Bell 206B helicopter, 
N301MH, was substantially damaged during a collision with snow-covered terrain, about 21 
miles northeast of Homer, Alaska, about latitude 59 degrees, 45 minutes north, and longitude 
150 degrees, 51 minutes west.  The helicopter was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) 
on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The 
helicopter was operated by Maritime Helicopters Inc., Homer, Alaska.  The airline transport 
certificated pilot, and the two passengers, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  A VFR flight plan was filed.  The flight originated at the Homer Airport, Homer, at 
1130.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on May 1, at 1747, the Chief Pilot for the operator reported the 
helicopter was landing at Bradley Lake, located on the Kenai Peninsula.  The helicopter pilot 
was landing next to a gauging station that was surrounded by snow-covered terrain.  Flat light 
conditions existed at the lake, and light drizzle was falling.  The sky conditions were 500 feet 
overcast, and the visibility was about 1 mile.  The pilot was utilizing the gauging station as his 
landing reference point, but during the landing approach, he flew past the station and had no 
other visual references.  The skids of the helicopter contacted the snow, and the pilot applied 
upward collective pitch.  He attempted to stabilize the helicopter in a hover, but began drifting 
forward and to the left.  The left landing gear skid contacted the snow, and the helicopter rolled 
onto its left side.
The Pilot/Operator report (NTSB form 6120.1/2) submitted by the pilot, included a written 
statement.  In the statement, the pilot said that during the landing approach, he passed the 
gauging unit that he was using as a reference.  After passing the unit, he focused his attention 
on the snow in front of the helicopter.  When the helicopter touched down on the snow, the 
pilot said he thought the helicopter was still one or two feet above the snow surface.  He 
brought the helicopter to a hover, but the helicopter drifted forward about 30 feet, and about 
60 to 75 feet to the left.  The left skid contacted the snow, and the helicopter rolled over.  In the 
Recommendation Section of the 6120.1/2 form where comments can be added about how the 
accident could have been prevented, the pilot noted "additional white-out training."
Both passengers in the helicopter reported that during the landing approach, the helicopter 
developed a high sink rate and touched down hard on the snow, beyond the gauging station.  
The terrain presented no visual references, and one passenger described the visual conditions 
as "the inside of a ping pong ball."  Both passengers said the weather conditions included 
bright, filtered sunlight through overcast skies, and a light rain.
Page 4 of 6ANC00LA053
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
67, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine 
Sea; Single-engine Land; Single-
engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Helicopter; 
Instrument Airplane; Instrument 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/05/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
16622 hours (Total, all aircraft), 966 hours (Total, this make and model), 15219 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 9 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N301MH
Model/Series:
206B 206B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2371
Landing Gear Type: 
High Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20R
Registered Owner:
MARITIME HELICOPTERS INC.
Rated Power:
450 hp
Operator:
MARITIME HELICOPTERS INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
ENRA
Page 5 of 6ANC00LA053
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
1 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
HOMER, AK (PAHO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1130 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
SCOTT        ERICKSON
Adopted Date:
05/09/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
MAURICE   HENDRICKSON (FAA); ANCHORAGE, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC00LA053
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
