While descending through 2,000 feet, the Mooney M20E's Lycoming IO-360-A1A engine 
stopped operating.  The pilot switched fuel tanks and activated the fuel boost pump without 
success, and then executed a forced landing to rough/uneven terrain in an agricultural field.  
On site examination revealed fuel in both fuel tanks.  The FAA inspector assigned to the 
accident reported that in a post-crash examination and test run of the engine the 'fuel control 
servo appeared to be blocked for unknown reason' and that 'fuel pressure going in the fuel 
servo was considerably/extremely low at [the] outlet and would not sustain engine operation.'  
The fuel servo was removed and flow checked with no discrepancies noted.  The servo was then 
re-installed in the aircraft and the FAA inspector observed a second test run during which the 
engine successfully operated with no discrepancies noted. 
A loss of engine power for undetermined reason(s).  A factor was the rough/uneven terrain. 
 On August 1, 2000, approximately 1830 Pacific daylight time, a Mooney M20E, N1927Y, 
registered to Wrightco Motorcycle Accessories, Inc., and being flown by a private pilot, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing six nautical miles southeast of Oregon City, 
Oregon.  The pilot sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions existed and no 
flight plan had been filed.  The flight, which was personal, was operated under 14CFR91, and 
originated from Estacada, Oregon, and was en route to Mulino, Oregon.
The pilot reported in a telephonic interview that he had initiated a descent from 2,000 feet 
above sea level to his destination when the engine abruptly stopped operating.  He then 
attempted to trouble shoot the power loss by selecting alternate fuel tanks, and then boost 
pump operation, without success.  He then executed a forced landing to an agricultural field 
encountering rough terrain during the landing rollout.
Post-crash examination and test run of the engine by the Federal Aviation Administration's 
(FAA) Hillsboro, Oregon, Flight Standards District Office inspector assigned to the accident 
was conducted shortly after the accident.  The aircraft was leveled at the site and both left and 
right fuel tanks were observed to be approximately half full.  The inspector reported that 
during the test run, the "fuel control servo appeared to be blocked for unknown reason" and 
that "fuel pressure going in the fuel servo was considerably/extremely low at [the] outlet and 
would not sustain engine operation."
The fuel servo unit was removed from the aircraft's Lycoming IO-360-A1A engine and shipped 
to the Safety Board's Northwest Regional Office.  It was subsequently flow checked at the 
facilities of Precision Airmotive on October 20, 2000.  No discrepancies were noted during the 
flow check (refer to attached report).
The fuel servo was returned to the maintenance facility that had removed it with instructions to 
re-install it in the aircraft.  The FAA's Hillsboro Flight Standards District Office inspector 
assigned to the investigation returned to the maintenance facility and observed a second test 
run of the engine.  He reported that the engine successfully operated with no discrepancies 
noted.
