The pilot reported he was practicing takeoffs and landings on runway 18 with the winds from 
240 at 7 knots.  The pilot reported that he made two wheel landings and one full stall landing 
without incident.  He reported that on the fourth landing, which was going to be a full stall, the 
airplane bounced and became airborne.  He continued to report that he let the airplane settle 
back to the runway in a three-point attitude.  He reported the next thing he remembered was 
the airplane veered to the right, the left wing tip contacted the ground, and the airplane nosed 
over.  The pilot stated the airplane stayed on the runway and he exited the airplane through the 
left side door. 
The pilot failed to maintain directional control of the airplane while landing.  A factor 
associated with the accident was the crosswind. 
 On August 1, 2000, at 1645 eastern standard time, a Cessna 180, N1774C, experienced a 
bounced landing and nose over during touchdown on runway 18 (5,500 feet by 75 feet, dry 
asphalt) at the Clark County Airport, Jeffersonville, Indiana.  The Airline Transport Rated pilot 
on board was not injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged. Visual meteorological 
conditions existed and no flight plan was filed.  The flight which originated at about 1605 
eastern standard time from Louisville, Kentucky, was being operated as a personal flight under 
14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot reported that he departed Bowman Airport in Louisville and flew to the Clark County 
Airport to practice takeoffs and landings.  He reported that the winds at Louisville were from 
240 degrees at 7 knots and that the winds at Clark County were about the same.  The pilot 
reported that he made two wheel landings and one full stall landing without incident.  He 
reported that on the fourth landing, which was going to be a full stall, the airplane bounced and 
became airborne.  He continued to report that he let the airplane settle back to the runway in a 
three-point attitude.  He reported the next thing he remembered was the airplane veered to the 
right, the left wing tip contacted the ground, and the airplane nosed over.  The pilot stated the 
airplane stayed on the runway and he exited the airplane through the left side door.
