The airplane collided with a tree during a climb-out from a missed approach. The pilot 
declared an emergency, and the controller provided the pilot with vectors to another airport 
4.4 nautical miles southwest; however, prior to reaching the second airport, the airplane's 
engine lost power.  The airplane collided with the ground and nosed over during an off-airport 
forced landing. 
The pilot's failure to follow published instrument approach procedures, and collided with a tree 
while executing a missed approach.  Factors were low clouds, fog and a tree. 
 On August 2, 2000, about 0640 central daylight time (CDT), a Beech A36, N86BC, was 
substantially damaged when it collided with the ground after impacting a tree during a missed 
approach to runway 35 at Outlaw Field in Clarksville, Tennessee.  The airplane was destroyed 
and the instrument-rated private pilot and one passenger received serious injuries.  An 
instrument flight plan was filed for the personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 
91.  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed in the area.  The flight departed 
Dekalb/Peachtree Airport in Chamblee, Georgia, at 0600 eastern daylight time (EDT).  
According to the pilot, at approximately 0620 EDT while en route to Outlaw Field, he 
requested radar vectors from Fort Campbell Approach Control for the localizer 35 approach 
into Outlaw Field.  According to radio transcripts, the controller advised the pilot on several 
occasions during the approach that the airplane was to the right of the localizer approach 
course, to which the pilot acknowledged.  After initiating the approach, the pilot stated that at 
0630, he visually identified the runway threshold; however, the airplane's altitude was "to[o] 
high to make [a] safe landing," and he initiated the published missed approach procedure.  
According to the pilot, during climb out, the airplane struck a tree and he declared an 
emergency.  The controller advised the pilot to fly a heading of 180 degrees and to maintain 
2,500 feet above mean sea level.  The pilot responded, "We're trying, we can't get up... we're 
coming out of the mist here."  The controller attempted to provide vectors to Sabre Army 
Heliport, located 4.4 nautical miles to the southwest; however, approximately one mile from 
the heliport, the engine quit.  The airplane collided with the ground, then nosed over.  
Following impact, a fire initiated in the left wing area.
A postaccident examination of the airplane was conducted by an FAA inspector.  The fuel tank 
on the left wing was ruptured.  The fuel selector was set to the left main fuel tank.  The NAV I 
navigational frequency was set to 110.6 MHz, which is the VOR (Very High Frequency 
Omnidirectional Range) located 800 feet to the right of runway 35 and 500 feet south of 
runway 5/23.  The localizer frequency is 111.7 MHz, and is aligned with runway 35.  According 
to radar data, the airplane's radar track indicated the airplane was aligned with the VOR 
antenna during the approach, and the airplane flew directly over the VOR just prior to the pilot 
initiating the missed approach procedure.
According to the pilot, there were no mechanical malfunctions with the airplane.
