Near the end of a cross-country flight, the student pilot performed an off-airport emergency 
landing 3 miles from his intended destination following loss of engine power.  During the 
landing, the airplane collided with ground obstructions.  The pilot later acknowledged that he 
exhausted the aircraft's fuel supply.  He said that a fueler was supposed to have filled the 
aircraft to capacity prior to his departure but did not.  During his preflight inspection of the 
aircraft the pilot did not remove the fuel caps and visually check that the tanks were full. 
A loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion, which resulted from the pilot's inadequate 
preflight inspection and failure to verify the fuel supply onboard the airplane. 
 On August 1, 2000, at 1253 hours Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 150J, N60764, lost engine 
power and collided with ground obstructions during an off-airport forced landing 3 miles 
northeast of Morgan Hill, California.  The student pilot, the sole occupant, was seriously 
injured.  The aircraft, operated by the pilot under 14 CFR Part 91, received substantial damage.  
The flight departed Fresno Yosemite International Airport, Fresno, California, at an unknown 
time, and was scheduled to terminate at South County Airport of Santa Clara, San Martin, 
California.  Visual meteorological conditions existed for the instructional flight and no flight 
plan was filed. 
According to an inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) San Jose 
(California) Flight Standards District Office, the pilot acknowledged in an interview that he ran 
out of fuel.  The accident location was about 3 miles from his intended destination.  The pilot 
said that a fueler was supposed to have filled the aircraft to capacity before his departure but 
evidently did not.  During his preflight inspection of the aircraft the pilot did not remove the 
fuel caps and visually check that the tanks were full.  
The Safety Board mailed an NTSB form 6120.1/2, Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report on 
August 1, 2000, to the pilot's FAA address of record.  A follow-up letter and copy of the form 
were sent August 25, 2000.  Neither form was returned.
