The pilot reported that during cruise flight at 1,100 to 1,200 msl in the vicinity of a lake, she 
'blacked out' and that she had 'no pre-warning of impending danger physical or otherwise.'  
The experimental amphibious airplane impacted the lake and came to rest floating upside 
down in the water.  Review of the pilot's medical records revealed the pilot had a heart 
condition diagnosed as PSVT (paroxysmal supraventricular tachcardia), and for over ten years 
had experienced episodes of symptomatic atrial fibrillation.  At the time of the accident, the 
pilot's experience was consistent with a transient ischemic attack (TIA or 'mini-stroke') as a 
result of a clot that formed in her heart. Such clots typically form during periods of atrial 
fibrillation and are propelled into the brain when the heart resumes beating normally again.  
The pilot had not complied with physician instructions regarding the use of medication.  On 
her FAA medical certificate applications (third class and second class), the pilot had not 
provided a complete medical history. 
The loss of control by the pilot due to incapacitation for unknown reasons. 
 On August 1, 2000, at 1000 central daylight time, a Romero Sea Rey, homebuilt experimental 
amphibious airplane, N817R, sustained substantial damage when it impacted the water at Lake 
Keystone, approximately 15 nautical miles west of Tulsa, Oklahoma.  The airplane was owned 
and operated by private individuals under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The 
commercial pilot, sole occupant, received serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the local personal flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The flight departed the 
Richard Lloyd Jones Jr Airport, Tulsa, Oklahoma, at 0845.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot reported her 
intentions to fly over and around Lake Keystone with no intentions for landing.  The pilot 
reported that she had retracted the landing gear following the departure from Tulsa.  She 
remembered the airplane was configured at a power setting of 4,800 rpm and the airspeed of 
75 mph, with 10 degrees of flaps extended for the flight.  The airplane was at an altitude of 
1,100 to 1,200 msl.  The pilot further stated that "I blacked out," and that she had, "no pre-
warning of impending danger physical or otherwise."
Local authorities reported that the airplane was found intact and floating upside down in water 
approximately 7 to 10 feet deep, and it "appeared that the main landing gear was extended."  
The pilot completed dual flight training in Florida in the same make/model of aircraft.  The 
FAA airworthiness certificate was issued for the airplane on April 4, 2000.  The pilot had 
accumulated a total of 28 flight hours in the aircraft.  The pilot held a second class medical 
certificate, issued December 23, 1999, at the time of the accident.     
The following information was extracted by the NTSB Medical Officer from medical records 
maintained on the pilot by the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute Aeromedical Certification 
Division and from personal medical records supplied by the pilot.  The pilot was diagnosed 
with an abnormal heart rhythm in 1987.  By May 1990, following a full cardiac workup, the 
pilot was placed on medication.    
In August 1990, the pilot applied for a third-class medical.  The pilot's physician(s) reported to 
the FAA that the pilot's PSVT (paroxysmal superventricular tachycardia) was under control 
with medication.  In a letter submitted to the FAA, one of the physicians wrote that the heart 
condition "would not handicap her in any way in the operation of an airplane."  
The pilot was issued an FAA third-class medical certificate in November 1990, and an FAA 
second-class medical certificate in 1994.  Each time a medical certificate was issued, the pilot's 
eligibility letter from the FAA stated that the pilot's operation of an aircraft was prohibited any 
time new symptoms or changes occurred, or if the pilot experienced side effects or required a 
change in medication.
The pilot had several episodes of atrial fibrillation that were not reported to the FAA.  In 1996, 
the pilot did not report to the FAA an episode of a sudden loss of vision in one eye, which was 
attributed to cardiac embolization secondary to PSVT.  Following the loss of vision, she was 
prescribed Coumadin (a blood thinner).  The pilot continued to experience episodes of 
paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.  The use of Coumadin was not reported to the FAA.  
Emergency room records, following the accident, said "she [pilot] is supposed to be on 
Coumadin, but she refuses to take it."  The pilot demonstrated "intermittent atrial fibrillation, 
rapid ventricular response during the hospitalization."  
In a letter to the NTSB Medical Officer dated February 22, 2001, the pilot stated "I would 
always have warning when an episode of atrial fibrillation would be coming on.  Of course I 
never flew when I had any symptoms, nor did I have any symptoms the day of the accident."
