The pilot made an abrupt course change while repositioning the airplane during an agricultural 
application flight.  The pilot failed to maintain adequate clearance from a nearby 300-foot-tall 
transmission line, and a collision ensued.  During the impact sequence, a portion of the 
airplane™s right wing was severed.  The airplane descended uncontrollably and caught on fire 
seconds after impacting the ground.  Tetrahydrocannabinol carboxylic acid (marihuana) was 
detected at a level of 0.018 ug/ml in the pilot's blood, and it was also found in his urine.  
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate clearance from obstacles while maneuvering during an 
aerial application flight.
On August 1, 2000, about 1147 Pacific daylight time, a Grumman G-164B, N6737K, collided 
with an electrical tower approximately 5 miles north of Tracy, California.  The airplane was 
destroyed in the collision sequence.  The certificated commercial pilot, the sole occupant, 
received fatal injuries.  Haley Flying Service, Inc., operated the airplane during the agricultural 
flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 137.  The flight departed the Haley Flying Service 
private agricultural strip about 1143.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan had been filed.
Witnesses stated that the airplane was making a turn when it appeared to stall, roll to the right, 
and collide with the top of a 300-foot-tall electrical transmission tower.  The airplane's right 
wing was partially severed.  Thereafter, they observed the airplane continue traveling about 
130 yards before finally impacting the ground in an inverted attitude in an adjacent 
agricultural field.  A fire erupted about 10 seconds after the airplane came to rest, and it 
partially consumed the wreckage.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) personnel, when the pilot initiated the 
flight the airplane was carrying 60 gallons of fuel and 300 gallons of nonflammable pesticide.  
The FAA reported that according to the pilot's ground-based "flagger" (who was also a pilot), 
the spray application flight profile called for the pilot to execute his first pass on the east side of 
the crop.  After commencing the flight in this direction, the pilot made an abrupt midcourse 
directional change, as though he had elected to spray from another direction first.  According 
to the flagger, following the abrupt course change, the airplane was headed toward the 
transmission tower.  The flagger additionally reported that the pilot then raised the nose of the 
airplane to clear the tower.  The airplane appeared to stall just before the collision.
During the subsequent wreckage examination, a portion of the airframe was found lodged in 
the top of the electrical tower at the point of initial impact.  A wing segment was found severed 
and lay near the tower's base.  Two transmission lines were downed and lay strewn about the 
main wreckage area.  Pacific Gas and Electric Company personnel reported that, at the time of 
the accident, the lines were energized with 230,000 volts of electricity.
The manager of the FAA's Toxicology and Accident Research Laboratory reported finding 
evidence of tetrahydrocannabinol carboxylic acid (marihuana) in the pilot's blood at a level of 
0.018 ug/ml.  It was also found in his urine.
