The pilot said he had gotten airborne and was approximately 300 feet above the ground when 
"the aircraft engine had a sudden loss of power.  I was already in a slight right hand turn, so I 
sharpened the turn, in an attempt to return to the runway.  The attempt failed."  An 
examination of the fuel system showed negligible fuel in the left main tank.  The right main 
tank showed approximately 10 gallons  of fuel.  The fuel selector was on the right tank.  Fuel 
was observed in the gascolator.  During a post- crash examination, the engine was started and 
ran at idle power.  Examination of the remaining airplane systems revealed no anomalies. 
loss of engine power for undetermined reasons and the pilot's failure to maintain clearance 
from the   fence during the forced landing attempt.  Factors relating to the accident were the 
pilot's improper  in-flight planning and decision to turn back toward the runway during the 
forced landing attempt, the  airport fence, and the corn crop. 
 On August 1, 2000, at 1800 central daylight time (cdt), a Piper PA-28-160, N5293W, operated 
by a private pilot, was substantially damaged when the airplane struck a fence and impacted 
terrain during a forced landing.  Prior to the forced landing attempt, the airplane experienced a 
loss of engine power on initial climb after takeoff from runway 29 (4,300 feet by 75 feet, dry 
asphalt), at the Burlington Municipal Airport, Burlington, Wisconsin.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The personal flight was operating under the 
provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, and was not operating on a flight plan.  The pilot reported no 
injuries.  The flight was originating at the time of the accident with a planed destination of the 
Lake Geneva Aire Estates Airport, Lake Geneva, Wisconsin.
In his written statement, the pilot said he had gotten airborne and was approximately 300 feet 
above the ground when "the aircraft engine had a sudden loss  of power.  I was already in a 
slight right hand turn, so I sharpened the turn, in an attempt to return to the runway.  The 
attempt failed."
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane at the accident site.  
The airplane was resting upright on the edge of a cornfield and an east-west running gravel 
road, 1/4 mile north of the departure end of runway 29.  The airplane was oriented on a 055-
degree magnetic heading.  The airplane's left outboard wing leading edge was bent aft to the 
spar.  The right outboard wing leading edge was bent downward.  The left main landing gear 
was broken aft.  The left and right wings were bent aft at the roots.  The left and right forward 
wing attach points were broken.  The fuselage, beginning beneath the airplane's cabin, and 
running aft to just forward of the empennage, was buckled aft.  An examination of the airplane 
showed little to no fuel in the left main fuel tank.  The right main fuel tank showed 
approximately 10 gallons of fuel.  The fuel selector switch was observed to be positioned to the 
right tank.  Fuel was observed in the gascolator.  Flight control continuity was confirmed.  
During the post-crash examination, the engine was started and ran at idle power.  An 
examination of the other airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
