The airline transport pilot was conducting a business flight with six passengers on board. 
Radar data showed that, after crossing the final approach fix for an instrument approach at the 
destination airport, the airplane descended below the minimum descent altitude (MDA) of 
2,480 ft mean sea level (msl); dark night, instrument meteorological conditions existed at that 
time. Subsequently, when the airplane was about 2 miles from the airport and about 2,070 ft 
msl, the airplane impacted a utility pole, which was 10 ft above ground level (agl). After 
impacting the pole, the pilot executed a missed approach, and about 40 minutes later, he 
landed the airplane without further incident at another airport. On-scene examination showed 
that the impact had scattered debris from the separated utility pole for about 200 ft into a 
snow-covered field. Examination of the airplane revealed that the impact resulted in 
substantial damage to the nose structure, lower and upper fuselage, and horizontal stabilizer. 
Further examinations of the airplane, including its static system, both altimeters, both vertical 
speed indicators, and the radar altimeter system revealed no evidence of preaccident 
mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation.
The pilot reported that he thought he had leveled the airplane at an altitude above the MDA 
and that at no time during the descent and approach did the airplane™s radar altimeter sound 
an alert indicating that the airplane was below 400 ft agl radar altitude. He also reported that 
he never saw the terrain, any obstructions, nor the runway lights or airport environment. 
Despite the pilot™s statement, given the radar data and the impact evidence, it is apparent that 
he descended the airplane below the MDA, which resulted in the subsequent impact with the 
utility pole. It could not be determined why the radar altimeter did not alert the pilot that the 
airplane was only 10 ft above the ground.
The pilot™s second-class medical certificate, which had been issued more than 20 months 
before the accident, had expired. The medical certificate limitation section in the expired 
certificate stated, ﬁNot valid for night flying or by color signal control.ﬂ There is no evidence 
that these restrictions contributed to the accident. 
Page 2 of 7CEN14LA129
The pilot™s descent below the published minimum descent altitude for the instrument approach 
procedure, which resulted in impact with a utility pole.
On February 3, 2014, at 2300 central standard time, N61YP, a Cessna 525, multi-engine 
turbofan airplane, was substantially damaged after striking an obstruction during an 
instrument approach at Elk City Regional Business Airport (ELK), Elk City, Oklahoma. The 
pilot and 6 passengers were not injured. The airplane was registered to Yankee Papa, LLC, and 
operated by Brink Constructors, Inc., both in Rapid City, South Dakota. Dark night instrument 
meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed at the time of the accident and an instrument flight 
rules flight plan had been filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 business 
flight. The airplane departed Rapid City Regional Airport (RAP), Rapid City, South Dakota, 
about 2000 mountain standard time and was destined for ELK. 
The airplane was on an instrument approach to runway 17 when it impacted a 29-foot tall 
electric utility pole about 10 feet 7 inches above ground level (agl) at a GPS estimated elevation 
of 2,070 feet mean sea level (msl). The impact scattered debris from the separated utility pole 
for about 200 feet into a snow covered wheat field. Evidence at the scene showed the airplane 
did not touch the surface of the ground during the accident sequence and the unbroken electric 
wires remained attached to the top portion of the completely separated utility pole. After 
impact with the pole the pilot successfully executed a missed approach. About 2340 the 
airplane landed without further incident at Will Rogers World Airport (OKC), Oklahoma, City, 
Oklahoma. 
Federal Aviation Administration air traffic control radar data showed that after crossing the 
final approach fix the southbound airplane descended below the minimum descent altitude of 
2,480 feet msl. At 2300:23 the airplane was at a transponder reported altitude of 2,100 feet 
msl when the airplane was about 0.3 mile north of the accident location. 24 seconds later radar 
data showed the airplane was 0.5 mile south of the accident location at a transponder reported 
altitude of 2,200 feet msl. The radar data showed the airplane then continued to climb to an 
altitude of about 12,000 feet msl while proceeding eastbound toward OKC. 
The pilot reported that he thought he had leveled the airplane at an indicated altitude 2,500 
feet msl and at no time during the descent and approach did the airplane's radar altimeter 
sound an alert indicating that he was below 400 feet agl radar altitude. He also reported that 
he never saw the terrain, never saw any obstructions, and he never saw the runway lights or 
airport environment. 
An examination of the airplane after landing at OKC showed substantial damage to the nose 
structure, lower and upper fuselage, and the left side of the horizontal stabilizer. The right side 
of the radome had impact damage and there was a penetrating impact in the right side of the 
forward avionics bay. There was also evidence that both engines had ingested foreign objects, 
but there was not a resulting significant loss of engine power. Evidence at the accident scene 
showed that one separated and impact damaged navigation receiver from the airplane and 
several paint chips were recovered from the wheat field south of the impact point. 
The surface weather observation site at ELK, was located 2 miles south of the accident site, at 
an elevation of 2,013 feet msl. At 2245 the surface weather observation site at ELK reported 
wind from 130 degrees at 4 knots, visibility of 4 miles in mist, and overcast clouds at 500 feet 
agl, temperature and dewpoint at -1 degree Celsius (C), with an altimeter setting of 30.05 
inches of Mercury. 
At 2305, the surface weather observation site at ELK, reported wind from 110 degrees at 5 
knots, visibility of 2 and 1/2 miles in mist, and overcast clouds at 500 feet agl. 
The next closest surface weather observation site at Clinton-Sherman Airport (CSM), Clinton, 
Oklahoma, was located 11 miles east-southeast from the accident site at an elevation of 1,922 
feet msl. 
At 2253, the surface weather observation site at CSM reported wind from 100 at 5 knots, 
visibility of 2 and 1/2 miles in light freezing rain, overcast clouds at 600 feet agl, with an 
altimeter setting of 30.02 inches of Mercury. Remarks indicated that freezing rain began at 
2253 and the ceiling was variable between 200 feet and 600 feet. 
At 2256, the surface weather observation site at CSM reported wind from 100 at 6 knots, 
visibility of 1 and 3/4 miles in light freezing rain, and overcast clouds at 600 feet agl. 
At 2310, the surface weather observation site at CSM reported wind from 090 at 5 knots, 
visibility of 3/4 mile in light freezing rain, and overcast clouds at 200 feet agl. 
Data from the U. S. Naval Observatory showed that sunset occurred at 1808 and moonset 
occurred at 2248. At the time of the accident both the sun and moon were more than 15 
degrees below the horizon and provided no illumination. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION: 
The pilot held an FAA airline transport pilot certificate with ratings in airplane single and 
multi-engine land and he held pilot type ratings in CE-500, CE-525S, and CE-650 airplanes. 
He had satisfactorily completed the proficiency check required by 14 CFR 61.58 on June 6, 
2013. 
The pilot's second class medical certificate was issued on May 19, 2012, and contained the 
limitations: "not valid for night flying or by color signal control," and, "must have available 
glasses for near vision."
