The pilot, copilot, and two additional crewmembers were preparing to depart on a night 
medical transport flight. The copilot was at the controls of the airplane while the pilot 
monitored the airplane™s systems and prepared for takeoff. During the engine start, one of the 
two linemen providing ground services to the airplane departed the ramp area leaving one 
lineman alone, which the operator allowed for normal ground servicing operations. After 
completing the engine start, the copilot gave the disconnect ground power hand signal to the 
lineman. The lineman responded with the hold hand signal and then moved to the left and rear 
of the airplane to disconnect the ground power unit (GPU). The pilot stated that he monitored 
the airplane's voltmeter to verify that the GPU was disconnected by observing a drop in the 
voltage current. However, although the drop in voltage could confirm that the GPU was no 
longer supplying power, it could not confirm that the GPU cable was disconnected. The pilot 
then looked out the window and realized that the airplane was moving forward. The pilot took 
the controls, applied the brakes, and set the parking brake. The pilot did not have visual 
contact with the lineman, so he asked the two crewmembers seated in the cabin to locate him, 
and one of the crewmembers reported that she saw him standing next to the GPU. The pilot 
then began to taxi the airplane for departure within the nonmovement area of the ramp; the 
pilot did not realize that the GPU was still connected to the airplane. As the airplane turned 
right, the GPU was pulled onto its side, and it then fell onto the lineman™s right leg, which 
resulted in a serious injury. The pilot stopped the airplane and shut down the engines without 
further incident. The pilot should have ensured that the GPU was disconnected from the 
airplane via hand signals from the lineman providing ground services before taxiing the 
airplane and his failure to do so resulted in the lineman™s injury.
The pilot™s failure to ensure that the ground power unit was disconnected from the airplane via 
hand signals from the lineman providing ground services before taxiing, which resulted in an 
injury to the lineman. 
On February 2, 2014, about 2230 eastern standard time, a Gates Learjet Corporation L35A, 
N979RF, sustained minor damage while taxiing in preparation for a flight at Fort Lauderdale 
International Airport (FLL), Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The pilot, copilot, and two additional 
crewmembers were not injured. A lineman sustained serious injuries. The airplane was owned 
and operated JEDAMI Air, LLC, under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135, as a medical 
transport flight. Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight 
rules flight plan was filed for the flight that was destined for Owen Roberts International 
Airport (MWCR), Cayman Islands.
According to the pilot, he occupied the left seat and the copilot occupied the right seat. The 
copilot was at the controls of the airplane. During engine start, the copilot observed one of the 
two linemen depart the ramp area, leaving one lineman remaining to assist the airplane with 
ground operations. After completion of the engine start, the copilot gave the disconnect ground 
power hand signal to the lineman. The lineman moved to the left and rear of the airplane to 
disconnect the ground power unit (GPU). The pilot monitored the airplane's voltmeter to verify 
disconnect by observing a drop in the voltage current. After placing the airplane's two 
generators on line, the pilot looked up and outside to find that the airplane was rolling forward 
at idle power. The pilot applied the brakes and set the parking brake. After about 5 minutes, 
the flight crew still did not have visual contact with the lineman; however, the additional 
crewmembers seated in the cabin observed the lineman standing next to the GPU. The pilot 
took controls of the airplane and began a right turn to taxi in the ramp area. The copilot 
glanced out of the right cockpit window and notified the pilot that the lineman was lying on the 
ground. The pilot stopped the airplane and shut down the engines. When the occupants exited 
the airplane, they observed that the GPU was lying on top of the lineman, and were able to 
move lift it off of him.
According to a statement provided to police, the lineman gave the pilot the "HOLD" signal and 
proceeded to the GPU that was still connected to the airplane. The lineman stated that as he 
attempted to disconnect the GPU from the airplane, the airplane began moving forward, 
pulling the GPU over, and knocking him down to the ground. The GPU came to rest on his 
right leg.
Examination of the airplane did revealed minor damage to the GPU connector points and to 
the airplane skin. The lineman was transported to the hospital for further treatment.
According to the manager of the operator, normal ground servicing operations were conducted 
utilizing either one or two lineman depending on availability.
In the NTSB Pilot/Operator Accident Report Form, the operator noted that an observed drop 
in voltage confirmed that the GPU was no longer supplying power to the airplane; however, it 
would not confirm that the GPU cable had been disconnected.
