The instrument-rated private pilot was conducting a personal cross-country flight in the 
multiengine airplane under instrument flight rules (IFR). As the flight neared its destination, 
the controller issued clearance for a GPS approach, and, shortly thereafter, the pilot informed 
the controller that he needed to review the approach procedure before continuing the 
approach. The controller acknowledged, and, after the pilot reported that he was ready to 
proceed with the approach, the controller again issued clearance for the GPS approach. Radar 
data showed that, during the approach, the airplane tracked a course that was offset about 0.5 
miles right of the final approach course until it was about 1 mile from the runway threshold. 
The airplane then turned left towards the threshold and descended to an altitude of about 145 
ft above ground level over the runway threshold before the pilot performed a missed approach. 
It is likely that the pilot performed the missed approach because he was unable to align the 
airplane with the runway before it crossed the threshold. 
The controller provided radar vectors for the airplane to return to the approach course and 
cleared the airplane a third time for the GPS approach to the runway. Radar data showed that 
the airplane was established on the final approach course as it passed the initial approach fix; 
however, before it reached the final approach fix, its airspeed slowed to about 111 knots, and it 
began a left turn with a 25 degree bank angle. About 18 seconds later, while still in the turn, the 
airplane slowed to 108 knots and began descending rapidly. The airplane's rate of descent 
exceeded 10,000 feet per minute, and it impacted the ground about 9 miles from the 
destination airport. 
Examination of the accident site showed that the airplane was severely fragmented and fire 
damaged with debris scattered for about 450 feet. Postaccident examination of the wreckage 
did not reveal evidence of any preimpact failures; however, damage to the left engine indicated 
that it was not producing power at the time of the accident. The severity of impact and fire 
damage to the airplane and engine precluded determination of the reason for the loss of left 
engine power. 
Weather conditions present at the time of the accident were conducive to super cooled liquid 
Page 2 of 10ERA14FA112
water droplets, and the airplane likely encountered moderate or greater icing conditions. 
Several pilot reports (PIREPs) for moderate, light, trace, and negative icing were reported to 
air traffic control but were not distributed publicly into the national airspace system, and there 
was no airmen's meteorological  information (AIRMET) issued for icing. However, the pilot 
received standard and abbreviated weather briefings for the flight, and his most recent weather 
briefing included three PIREPs for icing conditions in the area of the accident site. Given the 
weather information provided, the pilot should have known icing conditions were possible. 
Even so, the public distribution of additional PIREPs would have likely increased the weather 
situational awareness by the pilot, weather forecasters, and air traffic controllers. 
The airplane was equipped with deicing and anti-icing systems that included wing and 
empennage deice boots and engine inlet heaters. Due to impact damage to the cockpit, the 
positions of the switches for the ice protection systems at the time of the accident could not be 
determined. Although the airplane's airspeed of 108 knots when the steep descent began was 
above its published stall speed of 77 knots, both bank angle and ice accretion would have 
increased the stall speed. In addition, the published minimum control airspeed was 93 knots. It 
is likely that, after the airplane passed the initial approach fix, the left engine lost power, the 
airplane's airspeed began to decay, and the asymmetric thrust resulted in a left turn. As the 
airspeed continued to decay, it decreased below either stall speed or minimum control 
airspeed, and the airplane entered an uncontrolled descent.
 
The pilot's failure to maintain airspeed with one engine inoperative, which resulted in a loss of 
control while on approach. Contributing to the accident were airframe ice accumulation due to 
conditions conducive to icing and the loss of engine power on one engine for reasons that could 
not be determined due to the extent of damage to the airplane.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 3, 2014, about 1655 central standard time, a Gulfstream Commander 690C, 
N840V, operated by a private pilot, was destroyed when it impacted the ground near Bellevue, 
Tennessee, while on approach to the John C. Tune Airport (JWN), Nashville, Tennessee. The 
private pilot and three passengers were fatally injured. Instrument meteorological conditions 
prevailed and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed for the flight that 
departed Great Bend Municipal Airport (GBD), Great Bend, Kansas. The personal flight was 
conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to information obtained from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the 
airplane was based at GBD. On the date of the accident, the pilot flew the airplane from the 
undergoing maintenance, which included a 150-hour periodic inspection, to GBD. The pilot 
and three passengers then departed for JWN about 1445, and planned to attend a convention 
and trade show that was being held in the Nashville area.
The flight progressed toward Nashville and the pilot was cleared for a GPS (RNAV) approach to 
runway 2 at JWN, about 1628. At 1629:27, the pilot stated, "I'd like to climb and uh review the 
approach and uh do it again."
At 1629:28, the pilot was directed to maintain 3,000 feet and turn right to a heading of 020 
degrees. The pilot acknowledged the clearance correctly; however, turned to a heading of 200 
degrees. The controller reported that she did not correct the pilot because the incorrect 
heading did not create a conflict with any other traffic.
About 1631, the pilot stated "you can directed me back–" and reported that he had the initial 
approach fix (IAF) for the approach "–on my system." The pilot was subsequently provided a 
clearance for the GPS runway 2 approach.
At 1637, the controller asked the pilot if he was established on the approach and the pilot 
responded that he was. The controller then advised the pilot that the airplane was about 1/2 
mile east of the final approach course, and the pilot replied, "That's correct I'm a little east of 
course."
At 1642, the pilot reported that he was executing a missed approach. About 1653, the pilot was 
cleared for a third GPS approach to runway 2 at JWN.
At 1655:37, the controller informed the pilot that radar services were terminated, instructed 
him to report cancellation of IFR in the air or on the ground, and advised him that traffic was 
ten miles in trail. The pilot did not respond, and there were no further transmissions received 
from the pilot.
According to radar data, during the accident approach, the airplane was on the final approach 
course when it veered to the left and began a descent. The airplane had turned to a heading of 
about 210 degrees before radar contact was lost.
The airplane impacted trees and a field adjacent to a building, about 9 miles south of JWN.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 62, held a private pilot certificate, with ratings for airplane single-engine land, 
multiengine land, and instrument airplane. The pilot's logbook was not located. His most 
recent FAA third-class medical certificate was issued on February 23, 2012. At that time, he 
reported a total flight experience of 3,000 hours, which included 30 hours during the previous 
6 months.
According to training records, the pilot successfully completed a turbo commander 690 
recurrent course during May 2013. At that time, the pilot reported 3,205 hours of total flight 
experience, which included 1,392 hours in multiengine airplanes, and 436 hours of instrument 
flight experience. In addition, he reported 719 hours flown in the accident airplane, and 20 
hours flown during the previous 12 months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The pilot was the President of an agricultural company that purchased the airplane on August 
29, 2000.
The high wing, all-metal, pressurized airplane, serial number 11727, was manufactured in 1982. 
It was powered by two Executive Wings Inc. supplemental type certificate modified Garrett 
TPE331-5-511K, 715-horsepower engines, equipped with Hartzell three-bladed constant speed 
propeller assemblies.
According to maintenance records, the airplane's most recent inspection was a 150-hour 
periodic inspection, which was performed on February 1, 2014. At the time of the accident, the 
airframe and both engines had been operated for about 4,460 total hours since new. The 
airplane had been operated for about 70 hours during the 13 months that preceded the 
accident.
According to the pilot operating handbook, the airplane was equipped with deicing and anti-
icing systems. The deice system included the wing and empennage deice boots and the 
propeller deice system. The function of the deice systems was to eliminate ice after it 
accumulated. The anti-icing system included heated stall warning, rudder horn anti-ice, rudder 
tab anti-ice, generator inlet anti-ice, electrically heated wind shield, and pitot-static heaters. 
The anti-icing systems were designed to prevent ice accumulation and should be placed in 
operation prior to entering flight conditions conducive to the formation of ice. Engine inlet 
heaters utilized hot engine compressor bleed air to prevent icing. The ice protection systems 
were controlled by switches in the "ICE PROTECTION" group of the cockpit overhead switch 
panel.
The following warning was included under the Engine Inlet Anti-Ice Systems:
"Warning: When icing conditions may be encountered, do not delay operation of the engine 
inlet heat systems. Turn the systems on before any ice accumulates. Engine inlet heat must be 
on if icing conditions exist or are anticipated."
The airplane was also equipped with a Negative Torque Sensing (NTS) system which was 
designed to reduce drag caused by a wind milling propeller in the event of a loss of engine 
power by moving the blades toward the feathered position to reduce drag and yaw.
Honeywell Operating Information Letter OI331-11R11, issued on September 16, 2013, 
emphasized proper use of engine inlet anti-ice and provided additional information on the use 
of engine ignition in icing conditions. The operating letter stated in part, that engine inlet anti-
ice should be used during all flight in potential icing conditions and icing conditions should be 
considered to exist when flying in precipitation or visible moisture (including clouds or fog) 
with an outside air temperature 10 degrees Celsius or 50 degrees Fahrenheit (F), or colder. In 
addition, "If the use of anti-ice is inadvertently delayed after encountering icing conditioning, 
ice may accumulate on engine and airframe inlet surfaces. In such instances, subsequent 
application of engine inlet anti-ice can cause ice shedding and ingestion, which may cause 
flameout–."
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A weather observation taken at JWN, which was located 9 miles north-northeast of the 
accident site, at an elevation of 495 feet, at 1655, reported wind from 360 degrees at 5 knots; 
visibility 5 statute miles; overcast ceiling at 800 feet; temperature 41 degrees F; dew point 25 
degrees F; altimeter 30.29 inches of mercury.
AIRMET Sierra issued at 1445, was valid at the time of the accident, and forecasted IFR 
conditions around the accident site with ceilings below 1,000 feet and visibilities below 3 miles. 
There were no AIRMETS for icing conditions valid at the time of the accident. The pilot 
received standard and abbreviated weather briefings from Lockheed Martin Flight Service. The 
last weather briefing requested by the pilot was at 1538, and included three pilot reports 
(PIREPs) for icing conditions in the Nashville area that were applicable to the pilot's flight.
The National Weather Service (NWS) surface analysis chart around the time of the accident 
depicted a frontal system located across the southeastern United States with a surface trough 
in the vicinity of the accident site. Station models around the accident site depicted air 
temperatures in the mid-20's to mid-30's F, with temperature-dew point spreads of 3 degrees F 
or less, a north to northeast wind less than 10 knots, cloudy skies, and fog.
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite number 13 (GOES-13) data indicated 
abundant cloud cover over the accident site with approximate cloud-top heights of 19,500 feet 
around the time of the accident.
A review of pilot weather reports (PIREPs) that were publicly available in the National Airspace 
System (NAS) for the vicinity of the accident site revealed that, from about 3 hours before the 
accident to about the time of the accident, there were seven PIREPs that contained icing 
information that ranged from trace rime to a light to moderate mixed icing, with the reported 
icing conditions only occurring between 2,000 and 3,500 feet.
Review of Current Icing Potential (CIP) images produced by the NWS Aviation Weather Center 
depicted light to moderate icing was likely at 2,000 to 3,000 feet around the time of the 
accident. It was noted that CIP data was intended to be supplemental to other icing advisories 
(e.g. AIRMETS and SIGMETS).
A witness driving around areas south and southwest of the Nashville between 1400 and 1730 
reported that he noticed ice on some street signs and noted the vehicle outside temperature 
senor indicated 34 degrees F.
A review of recorded audio information from the Nashville terminal radar approach control 
(TRACON) revealed that, from about 90 to 55 minutes before the accident, the radar west 
controller received seven verbal PIREPs, six of which included icing information that ranged 
from negative icing to clear ice. None of these PIREPs were communicated to the radar west 
controller (who was handling the accident flight), and none were distributed publicly in the 
NAS. The recordings also revealed that, about the time of the accident, the Nashville tower 
controller received two PIREPs of moderate rime ice, and the tower controller called Nashville 
flight data to relay one of the PIREPs for distribution in the NAS.
During interviews, TRACON personnel stated that, once receiving a PIREP, the standard 
procedure was for the supervisor to call Lockheed Martin Flight Service (LMFS) for LMFS to 
distribute the PIREP publicly into the NAS; however, TRACON personnel said that, 20 to 30 
percent of the time, LMFS would not answer the phone or LMFS was unavailable to receive the 
PIREP information. In addition, TRACON personnel stated that when receiving an icing report 
in one sector, they did not believe that that pilot report would be valid in an adjacent sector and 
therefore would not necessarily distribute the PIREP internally.
[Additional information can be found in the NTSB Meteorology and Air Traffic Control Factual 
Reports located in the public docket.]
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The airplane's impact with the ground created an 11-foot-long, 11-foot-wide, 6-foot-deep 
impact crater. Broken tree branches that contained 45-degree angled cuts were observed at a 
height about 50 feet. The airplane impacted the ground at an approximate 70-degree angle, 
consistent with being in an inverted position. It was severely fragmented with debris scattered 
on a course about 320 degrees, for about 450 feet. In addition, a postcrash fire consumed a 
majority of the airframe. Portions of both outboard wings, the nose section, empennage and all 
flight control surfaces were located at the accident site; however, fragmentation of the 
wreckage precluded the ability to confirm control continuity to the respective flight control 
surfaces. A portion of the outboard left wing approximately 15 feet in length from the wing tip 
was located, as well as fragments of the left and right wing that exhibited crushing completely 
to the rear spar assemblies. The left main landing gear was in the retracted position, the right 
and nose landing gear were separated from their surrounding structure. Due to impact damage 
to the cockpit, the positions of ice protection system switches at the time of the accident could 
not be determined. Portions of the deice boot system were observed on wing debris and 
portions of the horizontal stabilizer. The boots were destroyed by impact forces and fire 
damage.
Both propellers remained attached to their respective gearboxes, which separated from their 
respective engines. All three left propeller blades separated from the hub. Two right propeller 
blades remained attached to the hub, and one blade had separated. Both propeller assemblies 
were severely impact damaged and displayed evidence of rotational scoring; however, it was 
noted that the right propeller blades displayed significantly greater degree of rotational 
scoring, tears, and missing blade tips, then the left propeller blades.
Both engines were impact and fire damaged. Their respective fuel pumps and fuel control units 
were separated. They did not display any evidence of catastrophic failure and were forwarded 
to the engine manufacturer for further examination under the supervision of an NTSB 
investigator.
A subsequent teardown examination of both engines did not reveal any preimpact conditions 
that would have prevented normal operation. The type and degree of damage to the left engine 
was indicative of an engine that was not operating, with rotation consistent with a wind milling 
propeller at the time of impact. Static impact marks were observed on the first and second 
stage centrifugal compressor shrouds and no evidence of rotational scoring was noted on the 
turbine section. The type and degree of damage to the right engine was indicative of an engine 
that was operating under power at the time of impact. Rotational scoring was observed on the 
first and second stage centrifugal compressor shrouds and the first, second, and third stage 
turbine shroud. Almost all of the vanes on the first stage centrifugal compressor impeller were 
deformed and or separated. In addition, the forward curvic coupling of the second stage 
centrifugal compressor impeller was heavily smeared.
The left engine fuel control unit was examined at Woodward, Rockford, Illinois, under the 
supervision of an FAA inspector. The fuel control unit was extensively damaged and could not 
be functionally tested. Subsequent disassembly did not reveal evidence any preimpact 
malfunctions.
Computed Tomography scans of the left and right engine fuel shutoff valves revealed that they 
were both in the closed position; however, their respective preimpact position could not be 
confirmed. A subsequent teardown of the valves under the supervision of an NTSB investigator 
did not reveal evidence of any preimpact failures. The left engine fuel shutoff valve solenoids 
could be opened and closed by applying electrical power directly to the solenoids. The right 
engine fuel shutoff valve solenoids did not function when electrical power was applied.
Examination of a vertical and directional gyro recovered from the wreckage was performed by 
the NTSB Materials Laboratory. The examination revealed that although both gyros were 
impact and fire damaged, internal damage was consistent with rotation at the time of the 
accident.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Office of the Medical Examiner, Center for 
Forensic Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee. The autopsy report listed the cause of death as 
"multiple blunt force injuries."
Toxicological testing was performed on the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical Science Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma with no anomalies noted.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Radar Performance Study
A performance study of the airplane's flight path was created by an NTSB airplane performance 
specialist. The study revealed that the airplane's airspeed was nominally 150 knots during the 
approach prior to the accident and showed good acceleration after the pilot declared a missed 
approach. During the accident approach, the airplane's airspeed had slowed to 111 knots, when 
it began a left 25 degree turn away from the final approach course, and 18 seconds later, while 
still in the turn, the airplane slowed to 108 knots and descended at over 10,000 feet per minute 
until impacting the ground.
The study further noted that while the airplane's published stall speed for straight and level 
flight with the flaps and gear retracted was 77 knots, the stall speed would increase to 
approximately 108 knots in a 60 degree level turn. In addition, all speeds assumed a clean wing 
with no ice accretion.
The airplane pilot operating handbook listed the minimum control airspeed as 93 knots.
