National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Rio Vista, CA
Accident Number: LAX02LA078
Date & Time: 02/02/2002, 1300 PST
Registration: N2221X
Aircraft: Robinette Ultra Pup
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The experimental, amateur-built airplane landed off-airport following a total loss of engine power on climbout.
The pilot reported that during the initial climb after a slow-flight, low pass down the 4,200-foot-long runway and while about 200 feet above ground level, the engine lost all power although the propeller continued to windmill.
After the accident, there was about 9 gallons of 100-octane aviation fuel aboard.
Earlier the same day he had flown a prior flight leg on the same tank of fuel.
The pilot suspected that carburetor icing was the cause of the engine loss of power.
The airplane was equipped with a Mosler converted automotive engine, and was equipped with carburetor heat.
The carburetor heat control was in the "on" position when engine power was lost.
A generic carburetor icing probability chart used by the Safety Board showed the ambient temperature and dew point conditions to have been within the region marked "serious icing - cruise or climb power."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
WEATHER CONDITION - CARBURETOR ICING CONDITIONS ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On February 2, 2002, at 1300 Pacific standard time, a Robinette Ultra Pup, N2221X, landed off-airport following total a loss of engine power on climbout from Rio Vista Municipal Airport, Rio Vista, California.
The private certificated pilot and pilot-rated passenger were not injured.
The experimental, amateur-built  airplane was substantially damaged.
The local area personal flight was operated by the owner under 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that during the initial climb after a slow-flight, low pass down runway 25 (4,200feet long by 75 feet wide), while about 200 feet above ground level, the engine lost all power although the propeller continued to windmill.
After the accident, there was about 9 gallons of 100-octane aviation fuel aboard.
Earlier the same day he had flown from Concord, California, to Rio Vista on the same tank of fuel.
The pilot suspected that carburetor icing was the cause of the engine loss of power.
The airplane was equipped with a Mosler converted automotive engine, and was equipped with carburetor heat.
The carburetor heat control was in the "on" position when engine power was lost.
A generic carburetor icing probability chart used by the Safety Board showed the ambient temperature and dew point conditions to have been within the region marked "serious icing - cruise or climb power."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 56, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Rear Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
