National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Molino, FL
Accident Number: MIA02LA058
Date & Time: 02/01/2002, 1630 CST
Registration: N140V
Aircraft: Harleman Tornado II
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to witnesses, the powered glider was observed making a low pass down runway 36 of a private, sod agricultural airstrip.
The aircraft next entered a left downwind leg for an approach and landing to the runway.
While on final approach, the powered glider's undercarriage collided with static wires strung between two power transmission line towers, and the aircraft impacted the ground.
The aircraft was destroyed and the pilot suffered fatal injuries.
It is likely that the pilot was under continuing treatment for his bipolar disorder and sleep disorder at the time of his accident and may have been on two different antidepressants.
Mirtazapine is substantially sedating, and interferes with certain skilled performance tasks.
In addition, mirtazapine and fluoxetine may interact to cause severe restlessness, confusion, incoordination, abdominal pain, and other symptoms.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain obstacle clearance, resulting in the in-flight collision with a static wire and an uncontrolled descent and collision with the ground.
A factor in the accident was the pilot's impairment resulting from the use of unapproved medication.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) IMPAIRMENT(DRUGS) - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
DEPRESSION - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
OTHER PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITION - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
OBJECT - WIRE,STATIC ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 6.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft received substantial damage and the private-rated glider pilot sustained fatal injuries.
The aircraft departed Coastal Airport, Pensacola, Florida, about 30 minutes before the accident.
According to a brother of the pilot, an eyewitness stated that he observed the aircraft over fly the north-south oriented agricultural airstrip and make a left course reversal to enter a downwind leg and approach for a landing in a northerly direction.
At about 700 feet south of the runway's southern threshold, the aircraft's fixed landing gear collided with one of two side by side static wires strung between the tops of two power transmission line towers, and the aircraft impacted the ground.
The towers support east-west running power transmission lines that are easily seen and avoided, however, the static wires run above the power lines and are thinner in cross section.
According to an FAA inspector, two additional eyewitnesses stated that the aircraft actually made two approaches to the airstrip.
The first approach and landing was uneventful.
It was the second approach that resulted in the wire collision and plunge to the ground.
According to the FAA aircraft registry report, N170V is classified as a fixed wing, single engine, amateur-built, experimental motor glider.
According to the FAA airman's registry report, the pilot possessed a private-pilot certificate for gliders, and no medical certificate.
According to Federal Air Regulation, 61.23, (b), "A person is not required to hold a medical certificate when exercising the privileges of a pilot certificate with a glider category rating."
The pilot's first and only Application for Airman Medical Certificate and Student Pilot Certificate, completed on March 8, 1998, noted a history of bipolar disorder treated with Depakote (valproate) and insomnia treated with Ambien (zolpidem).
The pilot was denied a medical certificate.
The FAA instructs aviation medical examiners (AMEs) that the use of "mood ameliorating" medications is considered disqualifying.
Factory personnel had knowledge of the accident of N140V, and confirmed that factory records revealed the aircraft was built as a motor glider.
This procedure ensures the appropriate application of 14 CFR Part 61, Certification: Pilots, Flight Instructors, and Ground Instructors, concerning the medical requirements for the operation of such aircraft.
Such an identification was not appended to the Form 8130-7 for the accident aircraft.
A copy of the applicable parts of FAR Part 21.191, as well as the Special Airworthiness Certificate for the accident aircraft are attachments to this report.
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. William R. Bell, Associate Medical Examiner, District I, Florida, on February 2, 2002.
The cause of death was attributed to multiple blunt force trauma sustained in an airplane accident.
A toxicological examination was negative for ethanol in the blood.
Tests were positive for fluoxetine and mirtazapine in the blood.
The brand name for fluoxetine is Prozac and the brand name for mirtazapine is Remeron.
Both of these prescription-only medications are used to treat mental depression.
The wife of the pilot stated that the pilot used the Remeron for insomnia, and the Prozac for depression.
The following warnings for the medications are stated, " Fluoxetine may cause drowsiness, restrict the ability to think clearly, and cause poor muscle control."
For the compound, mirtazapine, the following warning is noted, "Mirtazapine may cause drowsiness or trouble in thinking.
Dizziness, light-headedness, or fainting may occur".
Material extracted from the pilot's medical records, as well as records of telephone conversations with the pilot's wife are attachments to this report.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
