National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CLAREMORE, OK
Accident Number: FTW99LA129
Date & Time: 05/01/1999, 1918 CDT
Registration: N3732C
Aircraft: Piper J3C-65
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot rated passenger (PRP) was flying the airplane from the rear seat, and was on final approach to land to the north at a grass strip.
The PRP turned the airplane to the northeast when he observed an ultralight departing the grass strip to the south.
At that point the commercial pilot in the front seat took control of the airplane and pitched the airplane's 'nose up to climb a little and reduce speed.'
He was turning the airplane left from downwind to base when the airplane's 'nose pitched down sharply and impacted the ground.'
The pilot reported that as the airplane turned, the 'engine died,' and he continued turning toward an open area.
Examination of the wreckage revealed that one propeller blade 'exhibited evidence of power.'
There were also deep gouges in the ground that 'appear to be propeller slashes.'
Continuity was established to all flight controls.
The PRP stated that 'he did not observe any problems with the aircraft or engine performance.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain minimum airspeed for flight while maneuvering, which resulted in an inadvertent stall.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - BASE TURN Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED(VS) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
The commercial pilot and his pilot rated passenger were seriously injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.
The local flight originated from the Sam Riggs Airpark at 1830.
The commercial pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report, NTSB Form 6120.1/2, that when the pilot rated passenger aligned the aircraft with runway 36 for landing, "an ultralight did a very aggressive landing procedure."
The pilot further reported that he "took sole command of the aircraft," and flew to the east side of the runway for "a downwind leg" to land south.
As the aircraft approached a road, which crosses the approach end of the runway, he "pitched the nose up to climb a little and reduce speed."
He then "turned for a rounded base and final."
As the aircraft turned, the "engine died," and he "continued to turn to get to open ground."
He attempted an emergency landing, but the aircraft "hit too hard."
The pilot rated passenger reported to the FAA inspector that he was in the back seat and was landing the aircraft to the north on a grass strip.
The aircraft was approximately 50 feet above a line of trees that run east and west when he "noticed an ultralight taking off to the south on the same runway."
He then made a right turn to 040 degrees and leveled off.
The passenger further reported that the pilot in the front seat "took over control of the aircraft and pitched the nose up and began a left turn to land to the south."
He "noticed that the airspeed was low and then the aircraft began to stall."
The pilot was able to get the wings level before the aircraft's "nose pitched down sharply and impacted the ground."
The passenger stated that "he did not observe any problems with the aircraft or engine performance."
Examination of the aircraft wreckage by the FAA inspector revealed that the inboard section of both wings and the fuselage, except for the tail, were destroyed by fire.
One propeller blade was destroyed by fire, and the other blade "exhibited evidence of power."
There were also deep gouges in the ground that "appear to be propeller slashes."
Continuity was established to all flight controls.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 26, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1220 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 105 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 6327 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: M-A-65-8 Registered Owner: SAM RIGGS FLYING SERVICE, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
