National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SENECA, SC
Accident Number: ATL99LA079
Date & Time: 05/01/1999, 1715 EST
Registration: N50943
Aircraft: Cessna 150J
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot established a final approach for a touch and go landing.
The pilot landed with 40 degrees of flaps, and during the takeoff phase of the touch and go procedure, he retracted the flaps to 10 degrees.
He continued the climbout and retracted the remanding flaps in increments.
As he retracted the flaps, the airplane lost altitude and collided with trees.
No mechanical problems with the airplane were reported by the pilot.
According to the pilot's handbook takeoff should not be accomplished with 30 or 40 degrees of flaps.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed which resulted in a stall and subsequent impact with trees.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) OBJECT - TREE(S) 2.
(C) AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On May 1, 1999, about 1715 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 150J, N50943, collided with trees during climbout from a private airstrip near Seneca, South Carolina.
The flight was operated by the private pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The private pilot and passenger received minor injuries and the airplane was substantially damaged.
The flight departed Pickens County Airport in Pickens, South Carolina, at 1700, enroute to Clemson, South Carolina.
After refueling at Pickens, the pilot and his son flew to a friend's private airstrip near, Seneca, South Carolina.
After takeoff, the pilot flew directly to his friend's airstrip.
Upon arriving at his friend's airstrip, they noticed that his friend's car was not there, so the pilot's son suggested they make a touch and go landing before returning home.
The pilot established a final approach for a normal landing with 40 degrees of wing flaps.
After the touch down the pilot stated that he retracted the flaps, but noticed during the initial climb that the flaps had only retracted to 30 degrees.
As he continued the climb the pilot retracted the flaps another ten degrees.
Shortly after retracting the flaps to 20 degrees the airplane lost lift and altitude, and collided with trees on the departure end of the runway.
No mechanical problems with the airplane were reported by the pilot.
According to the Cessna 150 pilot's handbook, "flap deflections of 30 and 40 degrees are not recommended at any time for takeoff".
Ten degrees of flap may be used for short or soft field takeoffs.
The pilot stated that " in the future, wherever possible, I intend to stay off grass runways"; the departure runway was grass.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
