National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WEST ALTON, MO
Accident Number: CHI99LA143
Date & Time: 05/01/1999, 1130 CDT
Registration: N313N
Aircraft: Narzinski AVID FLYER MARK IV
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The engine experienced an uncommanded loss of power from 6,000 rpm to 5,400 rpm over a period of 4-seconds.
The pilot reported that he established the airplane on best glide speed and prepared for an off-field landing while the engine experienced a constant depletion of power, finally loosing all power after a period of approximately 30 seconds.
The pilot stated that he executed a forced landing into a farm field that had, 'modest furrows'.
Substantial damage to the airplane was sustained during the landing.
External visual inspection of the engine revealed a hole in the lower engine case on the Power Takeoff (PTO) cylinder side.
Internal examination of the engine revealed metal deposits on the PTO cylinder dome, cylinder wall, and piston head.
Examination of the PTO connecting rod revealed that the connecting- rod bearing had failed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the connecting rod bearing, and the rough/uneven terrain condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,BEARING - FAILURE ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
(C) TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.
The pilot reported no injuries.
The local flight departed Creve Coeur Airport, Creve Coeur, Missouri at 1100.
According to the pilot's written statement, after approximately 30-minutes of flight time, at an altitude of 1,400 feet above mean sea level, the engine experienced an uncommanded loss of power from 6,000 rpm to 5,400 rpm over a period of 4-seconds.
The pilot reported that he established the airplane on best glide speed and prepared for an off-field landing while the engine experienced a constant depletion of power, finally loosing all power after a period of approximately 30 seconds.
The pilot stated that he executed a forced landing into a farm field that had, "modest furrows".
Substantial damage to the airplane was sustained during the landing.
The Rotax 582 engine, serial number 4084252, was subjected to a tear-down inspection conducted by the NTSB Investigator-in-Charge and a representative of the engine manufacture.
External visual inspection of the engine revealed a hole in the lower engine case on the Power Takeoff (PTO) cylinder side.
Internal examination of the engine revealed metal deposits on the PTO cylinder dome, cylinder wall, and piston head.
Examination of the PTO connecting rod revealed that the connecting-rod bearing had failed.
Photos of the hole in the lower engine case, cylinder dome, cylinder wall, piston head, and connecting-rod are attached to this factual report.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
