National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MT. PLEASANT, MI
Accident Number: CHI99LA141
Date & Time: 05/01/1999, 1415 EDT
Registration: N4659T
Aircraft: BARRETT BENSEN B-8
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was attempting a go-around from a private airstrip.
In a written statement, the pilot reported, 'I was coming in for a landing at my son-in-laws private airstrip.
The strip has his house and a power line on the west end and woods on the east end.
His strip is 1,200 feet long, plenty long for a gyro.
I had made several landings there before.
In the past my landings had been to the west.
Due to the wind this one was from the east.
As I approached I realized I was high and would use up a lot of runway, so I decided to go around.
I then eased the throttle on to full and made a right bank .
(there was a street, house, power line and a river to the left).
At that moment the bird went into a downward roll to the left and nothing I did stopped it.
I was on the ground before I knew it'.
The pilot also stated that his airspeed was 40 mph and he did not recall making a right hand climb out before.
The pilot reported that there was no mechanical malfunction.
Examination of the wreckage revealed the gyroplane's rotor blades exhibited a cone shape.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the inadequate rotor rpm by the pilot.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 1.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot reported minor injuries.
The flight departed from Shepherd, Michigan, at 1400, en route to Mount Pleasant, Michigan.
During an interview the pilot stated that he approached a private airstrip in his gyroplane "a little high", He was going to use a lot of runway and elected to perform a go-around so as not to use a lot of runway.
He stated that he normally turns to the left, but there were houses in that direction, so he turned to the right.
He reported that he could not stop the slow roll to the right and impacted the terrain.
In a written statement, the pilot reported, "I was coming in for a landing at my son-in-laws private airstrip.
The strip has his house and a power line on the west end and woods on the east end.
His strip is 1,200 feet long, plenty long for a gyro.
I had made several landings there before.
In the past my landings had been to the west.
Due to the wind this one was from the east.
As I approached I realized I was high and would use up a lot of runway, so I decided to go around.
I then eased the throttle on to full and made a right bank .
(there was a street, house, power line and a river to the left).
At that moment the bird went into a downward roll to the left and nothing I did stopped it.
I was on the ground before I knew it".
The pilot also stated that his airspeed was 40 mph and he did not recall making a right hand climb out before.
The pilot reported that he held a student pilot certificate.
Federal Aviation Administration records indicate a third class medical certificate on July 14, 1995 was the last medical certificate that the pilot received.
The gyroplane had accumulated a total airframe time of 682 hours since April 5, 1990.
There was no record of an annual condition inspection.
The pilot reported that there was no mechanical malfunction.
Examination of the wreckage by the Federal Aviation Administration revealed the gyroplane's rotor blades to exhibit a cone shape.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
