Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Waterloo, AL
Accident Number:
ATL04LA164
Date & Time:
08/01/2004, 1621 CDT 
Registration:
N970SP
Aircraft:
Cessna 172S
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot told an acquaintance he would fly the airplane over the acquaintance's home and over 
the river. Two witnesses in a boat, both of whom were certificated flight instructors, observed 
the airplane flying low and circling over the river as if searching for a house or a boat. The 
witnesses then saw the airplane slowly descend to approximately 50 feet above the water, level 
off, and continue to fly over the water for about a mile or more. They then saw the airplane 
nose up steeply and climb to approximately 250 to 300 feet. The witnesses stated, "the aircraft 
stalled, made a half turn to the right, and plunged nose-first into the water." Examination of 
the airplane revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunction was observed. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed while maneuvering at low altitude, which 
resulted in a stall and subsequent uncontrolled descent and collision into water.
Page 2 of 7ATL04LA164
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. LOW ALTITUDE FLIGHT/MANEUVER - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER
Page 3 of 7ATL04LA164
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 2004, about 1621 central daylight time, a Cessna 172S, N970SP, registered to and 
operated by Douglas Aviation, Inc., collided into the Tennessee River in the vicinity of 
Waterloo, Alabama. The personal flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 
91 with no flight plan filed. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The private pilot 
received fatal injuries, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight departed 
Savannah - Hardin County Airport, Savannah, Tennessee, about 1600 on August 1, 2004.
The pilot flew the airplane from its base in Olive Branch, Mississippi, to Savannah, Tennessee, 
then utilized the Savannah - Hardin County Airport courtesy car to drive to Pickwick Lake to 
meet an acquaintance at his house for lunch. The acquaintance stated he talked with the pilot 
"about going for a ride, and other flying stories," and the pilot told him the airplane "wanted to 
veer to the left." The acquaintance stated the pilot drove back to the airport sometime after 
1500, and the pilot told him he would fly the airplane over his house then fly over the river and 
take the long way home. The acquaintance stated he was outside later and observed an airplane 
that "flew over and headed to the river." 
Two witnesses in a boat near the Waterloo bridge, both of whom were certificated flight 
instructors, observed the airplane flying low. The witnesses stated, "the aircraft appeared to be 
slow and circling as if searching for a house or perhaps a boat." The witnesses stated they then 
observed the airplane "flying east to west, paralleling the shoreline ... . The [airplane] began a 
slow descent as if on approach to landing.  ... At approximately fifty feet over the water, the 
[airplane] leveled off and flew level for about a mile or more. As [the airplane] neared the 
Waterloo bridge, [it] made a level left turn of about twenty degrees and then started a very 
steep pull-up. ... At approximately 250 to 300 feet, the aircraft stalled, made a half turn to the 
right, and plunged nose-first into the water." The witnesses reported they sped their boat 
toward the downed airplane to try to help, and another boater used a cellular telephone to 
notify the local 911 operator of the accident. The witnesses reported the airplane sank within 15 
to 20 seconds. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land and was issued a first-
class medical certificate on December 2, 2003, with the restriction, "must wear corrective 
lenses." The pilot's logbook was not recovered for examination. On his most recent application 
for airman medical, the pilot reported 650 total civilian flight hours. The chief pilot at Douglas 
Aviation stated the pilot had scheduled an upcoming multi-engine checkride, and on the rating 
application form, the pilot reported 683 hours total time, which included 630 hours pilot-in-
command, 80 hours night, 56 hours simulated instrument, 11 hours multi-engine, and 16.6 
hours within the preceding 90 days. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Cessna 172S was manufactured in 1999 and was powered by a Lycoming IO-360-L2A 180-
horsepower engine. A review of the maintenance log books revealed an annual inspection of 
the airplane was completed January 16, 2004, at a tachometer time of 2195.6 hours, and a 100-
hour inspection was completed May 26, 2004, at a tachometer time of 2292.0 hours. The 
tachometer reading observed in the wreckage was 2363.1 hours.
Page 4 of 7ATL04LA164
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The wreckage was found submerged in approximately 30 feet of water; it was recovered and 
transported to a storage facility for examination. The engine was attached to the firewall, the 
firewall was crushed aft to the cabin, and the nosewheel was displaced aft and to the right. The 
left control yoke was attached to the control tube, and the control tube was bent and extended 
in an approximate full-aft position. The right control tube was bent and separated with the 
control yoke absent. The aileron control cables were observed in place on the control yoke 
assembly. The empennage was attached to the fuselage, and recovery personnel reported 
removing both wings from the fuselage in order to transport the wreckage.
Examination of the left wing revealed the leading edge was crushed aft to the spar, the lower 
end of the strut was attached to the fuselage, and the upper end of the strut was removed from 
the wing by recovery personnel. The flap was attached and in the retracted position. The 
aileron was attached, the push-pull rod was attached, and the bellcrank was in place with the 
direct and crossover cables attached. Cable continuity was established from the bellcrank to the 
area where the cables were separated by recovery personnel. The stall warning port and horn 
were free of obstruction. 
Examination of the right wing revealed the inboard portion of the leading edge of the right 
wing was crushed aft to the spar. The strut was removed from the fuselage and wing by 
recovery personnel. The flap was attached and in the retracted position, and the actuator was 
in place. The aileron was attached, the push-pull rod was attached, and the bellcrank was in 
place with the direct and crossover cables attached. Cable continuity was established from the 
bellcrank to the area where the cables were cut by recovery personnel.
Examination of the empennage revealed the rudder was attached to the vertical fin, and the 
cables were attached to the rudder horn. The right and left sides of the elevator were attached 
to the horizontal stabilizer, and the elevator upper and lower cables were attached to the 
bellcrank. Elevator and rudder cable continuity was established to a crushed area in the 
forward cabin. The elevator trim tab and actuator were in place, and actuator extension was 
consistent with zero-degrees tab deflection.
Examination of the engine revealed the propeller was attached with one blade curled, twisted, 
and bent aft approximately 90 degrees about one-third span from the center. The spinner was 
crushed, separated, and lodged between the bent propeller blade and the top of the No. 1 
cylinder. The leading edge of the curled propeller blade showed cracking and gouges on the 
leading edge in the area where the blade was in contact with the engine cylinder. The propeller 
was removed to facilitate rotation of the crankshaft. The crankshaft was rotated at the propeller 
flange, and continuity to the accessory drive gears and valve train was observed. Compression 
developed on all cylinders. Borescope examination of the cylinder walls, piston tops, and valves 
revealed no evidence of abnormality. The magnetos produced ignition spark on all towers when 
rotated by hand. The spark plugs were contaminated with mud sediment and corrosion, and 
the No. 2 bottom spark plug was bent. All spark plugs displayed wear consistent with the 
"normal" condition on the Champion AV-27 comparison chart. The oil filter and oil suction 
screen were free of debris. The vacuum rotated freely, and the drive was intact. The fuel servo 
inlet screen was free of debris, the fuel injector nozzles were free of obstruction, and the fuel 
flow manifold diaphragm was intact. Fuel was recovered from the fuel line between the fuel 
servo and fuel flow manifold, and from the fuel line between the fuel pump and the fuel servo.
Page 5 of 7ATL04LA164
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Alabama Department of Forensic Sciences, 
Huntsville, Alabama, on August 2, 2004. The report stated the cause of death was "multiple 
blunt force injuries." Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the 
Federal Aviation Administration, Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma 
City, Oklahoma. The report stated no cyanide was detected in the blood, no ethanol was 
detected in the vitreous, and no drugs were detected in the urine.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to a senior claims adjuster of Phoenix Aviation Managers, Inc., 
Dallas, Texas, on March 21, 2005.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
40, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/01/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/01/2004
Flight Time:
683 hours (Total, all aircraft), 630 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 17 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N970SP
Model/Series:
172S 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
172S8172
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2004, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
71.1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2363.1 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-L2A
Registered Owner:
Douglas Aviation, Inc.
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Douglas Aviation, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ATL04LA164
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KMSL, 550 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
24 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
116°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 8000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
10°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.01 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
32°C / 23°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Savannah, TN (KSNH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Olive Branch, MS (KOLV)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1600 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Savannah - Hardin County (KSNH)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
473 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
34.910556, -88.060556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Catherine E Gagne
Adopted Date:
10/27/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Charles R Thompson, Jr.; FAA - Birmingham FSDO - 09; Birmingham, AL
James M Childers; Textron Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Emile J Lohman; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7ATL04LA164
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
