Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Baltimore, MD
Accident Number:
IAD01FA089
Date & Time:
08/01/2001, 1300 EDT 
Registration:
N89FB
Aircraft:
Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
Analysis 
The purpose of the helicopter flight was to take aerial photographs of a large airport expansion 
construction project.  The helicopter approached the construction site in an out-of-ground-
effect hover taxi, with a quartering left tailwind.  The helicopter turned to the right, and slowed 
to a stationary hover about 250 feet above the ground with a direct tailwind.  Once in a hover, 
the helicopter made a right, rapid 180-degree pedal turn around the mast, stopped 
momentarily, then initiated another rapid pedal turn to the right.  The helicopter turned at a 
faster rate than the initial turn, and continued into a spinning, vertical descent to the ground.  
Examination of the helicopter revealed no mechanical anomalies.  The collective was in the full 
up position, and the main rotor blades exhibited signatures consistent with low rotor rpm at 
ground contact.  A review of the pilot's company flight records revealed he had 531 hours of 
total flight experience, 60 hours of which were in airplanes.  The pilot had 87 hours of 
experience in make and model.  A relative wind chart published by the manufacturer depicts a 
helicopter facing 360 degrees over a compass rose.  One shaded area of the chart depicts winds 
from between 120 degrees and 240 degrees, at wind speeds above 5 knots and up to 17 knots.  
According to a note on the chart an unanticipated right yaw may occur when operating in the 
shaded areas of the chart.  According to FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 90-95, "Any maneuver 
which requires the pilot to operate in a high power, low airspeed environment with a left 
crosswind or tailwind creates an environment where unanticipated right yaw may occur."  The 
AC also advised of greater susceptibility for loss of tailrotor effectiveness in right turns and the 
phenomena may occur in varying degrees in all single main rotor helicopters at airspeeds less 
than 30 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper decision to maneuver in an environment conducive to a loss of tail rotor 
effectiveness, and his inadequate recovery from the resultant unanticipated right yaw.
Page 2 of 10IAD01FA089
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: HOVER - OUT OF GROUND EFFECT
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND
2. (C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) LOSS OF TAIL ROTOR EFFECTIVENESS - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. (C) REMEDIAL ACTION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 10IAD01FA089
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On August 1, 2001, at 1300 eastern daylight time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N89FB, operated by 
Helicopter Transport Services, was destroyed during collision with terrain at the Baltimore-
Washington International Airport (BWI), Baltimore, Maryland.  The helicopter came to rest on 
the Alpha taxiway abeam runway 15 Right.  The certificated commercial pilot and 
photographer/passenger were fatally injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for 
the aerial photography flight that originated at the Martin State Airport (MTN), Baltimore, 
Maryland, at 1232.  No flight plan was filed for the flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the operator, the purpose of the flight was to take aerial photographs of a large 
airport expansion construction project at BWI.
During an interview, one witness said he was facing in a northwesterly direction as he observed 
the helicopter flying overhead.  He said the helicopter did a succession of 180-degree turns that 
increased in rate of rotation.  
According to the witness, the helicopter approached from the east at hover-taxi speed.  He said 
the helicopter hovered over his head and turned to the north, which oriented the tail of the 
helicopter into the wind.  The witness said the helicopter came to a stationary hover, about 400 
feet above the ground, with a direct tailwind.
Once at a hover, the helicopter did a rapid 180-degree pedal turn around the mast, stopped 
momentarily, then initiated another rapid pedal turn to the right.  According to the witness, the 
helicopter turned at a faster rate than the initial turn, and continued into a descending turn 
"spinning clockwise, to the right." 
With a model of a helicopter in his hand, the witness demonstrated the nose of the helicopter 
initiating a turn to the right and then continuing a slow spiraling descent to the right.  When 
questioned about the helicopter's engine noise, the witness said:
"I didn't hear anything that was abnormal or out of the ordinary.  It sounded like he wasn't 
having any trouble.  There was nothing out of the ordinary.  I didn't see any smoke, or parts, or 
debris." 
A second witness said he was standing inside the construction site, and viewed the helicopter 
as he faced the northwest.  According to the witness, the helicopter flew slowly around the 
construction site.  He said his attention was drawn to the helicopter because he felt it was 
unusual for the helicopter to be at a hover less than 500 feet above the ground. 
With a model of a helicopter in his hand, the witness described what he saw and maneuvered 
the model at the same time.  He showed the nose of the helicopter pointed to the north, and 
said the helicopter was at a stationary hover.  The witness demonstrated a jerking of the nose 
to the right, turns around the mast, and then a spiraling descent.  
The witness said the helicopter was running "fine", and said the pilot made rapid hand and arm 
movements inside the cockpit during the descent.
A third witness was interviewed at the Martin State Airport on the day after the accident.  The 
witness said he was flying a Bell 206B helicopter in the vicinity of BWI Airport at the time of 
the accident, and then over the airport immediately following to film for a local news station.
Page 4 of 10IAD01FA089
The witness went on to describe his flight over the airport, and the winds he encountered aloft.  
He said the winds were out of the south-southeast and that they were very unstable.  The 
witness said his helicopter would experience an updraft, a good strong downdraft, no wind, 
and then a strong wind.  While in a stationary out-of-ground-effect hover at 1,000 feet, the 
airspeed indicator showed 20 knots.  He said the airspeed indicator would drop to zero and the 
helicopter would descend and shake violently.  According to the witness:
"One minute the winds were from 150 to 180 degrees and then from 240 degrees.  If you were 
in a position where you were flying downwind, it was an ideal situation for LTE (loss of tail 
rotor effectiveness)."
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight approximately 39 degrees, 10 minutes 
north latitude, and 076 degrees, 40 minutes west longitude.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with a rating for rotorcraft/helicopter.  He also 
held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single engine land.  The pilot did not 
posses an instrument rating.
The pilot's logbook was not recovered.  A review of the pilot's company flight records revealed 
he had 531 hours of total flight experience, 60 hours of which were in airplanes.  The pilot had 
87.2 hours of experience in the Bell 206B, and 72 hours in the Bell 206L.  
The pilot's most recent biennial flight review was completed in conjunction with a Part 135 
evaluation on July 11, 2001.  The purpose of the evaluation was so that he could perform Part 
135 operations for his employer.
Further review of the pilot's flight records revealed that he completed the "Bell Helicopter OH-
58 Ground and Flight Procedures Training Course" on August 16, 1996.  The course included 
3.9 hours of flight time.  The pilot received a total of 3.7 hours of instruction in the Bell 206 
from the operator's chief pilot.  The most recent training flight was completed June 28, 2001, 
and was 2 hours in duration.
The pilot's most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) second-class medical certificate 
was issued on June 19, 2001.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION  
Examination of the maintenance records revealed the helicopter was on an annual inspection 
program.  The most recent inspection was a 100-hour inspection that was completed October 
23, 2000, at 10,883 aircraft hours.  The helicopter had accrued 66.4 hours since that date.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1254, the weather reported at the Baltimore-Washington International Airport included few 
clouds at 5,000 feet with variable winds at 6 knots.  At 1249:54, air traffic control (ATC) 
advised landing traffic that the winds were from 130 degrees at 6 knots.  At 1253, ATC advised 
landing traffic that the winds were from 140 degrees at 8 knots.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The helicopter was examined at the site on August 1, 2001, and all major components were 
accounted for at the scene.  The helicopter came to rest upright on taxiway Alpha, north of 
runway 15 Right.  The helicopter came to rest at the initial point of ground contact oriented 150 
Page 5 of 10IAD01FA089
degrees magnetic.
The skid tubes were fractured into three pieces each, and scattered beyond the nose of the 
helicopter.  The cross tubes collapsed forward, and were pinned beneath the wreckage.  The 
fuselage was crushed upwards in compression.
Examination of the cockpit area revealed the pilot's cyclic control stick was broken off about 6 
inches below the cyclic grip.  The collective stick was intact, but separated from the collective 
jackshaft.  The pilot's tail rotor pedals were intact, but the interconnect push/pull tube was 
fractured 2 inches from the mixing unit bearing clevis.
Rescue personnel cut the pilot's windshield post.  The pilot's side doorpost was fractured in 
compression.
The flight control "broom closet", situated vertically between the pilot and copilot seats, was 
crushed upwards, and the cyclic and collective mixing units were exposed.
The floor of the helicopter was crushed upwards and displaced slightly to the left.  The 
empennage was crushed upwards and wrinkled back to the tailboom.  The engine deck was 
wrinkled and deformed.  The isolation mount plate, directly beneath the main drive shaft 
transmission input coupling, displayed a concave dent the approximate size of the coupling.  
There was rotational smearing across the entire radius of the dent.
Examination of the fuel control quadrant revealed the quadrant pointer was at the 90-degree 
full-open position.
The aluminum particle separator baffling above the main drive shaft transmission input 
coupling was punctured and the aluminum was torn and displayed rotational smearing.  The 
puncture was approximately the same width as the input coupling and directly forward of the 
engine air inlet.
The main drive shaft was still attached at both the engine and transmission.  The shaft was 
displaced upward in the transmission input coupling, and coupling grease was ejected around 
the transmission pylon area.  
The #1 tail rotor drive shaft was fractured 18 inches aft of the tail rotor drive shaft output quill 
of the engine accessory case.  The fracture was directly below a puncture in the engine 
combustor.  The fracture surfaces appeared torn, and the torn metal was wrapped 
circumferentially.  At a point aft of the break, the tail rotor drive shaft was rotated by hand.  
The tail rotor rotated freely, with no binding noted in the hanger bearings or the 90-degree 
gearbox.
The tailboom was intact from the empennage back to the vertical fin attach points.  Both 
horizontal stabilizers were intact.  The lower half of the vertical stabilizer was crushed upwards 
about 18 inches.
The tailrotor blades were marked "target" and "blank", respectively.  Both blades displayed 
impact damage and chordwise scratching at the tips.  Both blades were wrinkled at mid span.  
The blank blade was bent over about 90 degrees at a point approximately 6 inches from the 
hub and rested on the ground.
Both main rotor blades displayed chordwise scratching and upward bending on the trailing 
edge.  Both blades displayed chordwise scoring through the blade skin, at a point 
approximately 4.5 feet from the blade grip.  Rotation of the main rotor blades revealed the 
Page 6 of 10IAD01FA089
score marks were aligned approximately over top of the upper Wire Strike Protection System 
(WSPS) cutter.  The cutter was bent and displaced to the left.
Rotation of the main rotor blades also established continuity through the transmission to the 
main drive shaft input coupling with no binding.
Collective, cyclic, and tail rotor control continuity could not be established at the scene.
The helicopter was removed from the scene on the evening of the accident, and examination of 
the helicopter was completed at the Martin State Airport on August 2 and 3, 2001.
Tail rotor pitch control continuity was established from the tail rotor to the top of the broom 
closet where the upper clevis of the push/pull tube was fractured.  Continuity was established 
from the break forward to the copilot's tail rotor pedals and the break in the interconnect 
push/pull tube.
Cyclic control continuity was established from the pilot's cyclic to the top of the broom closet, 
where the vertical push/pull tube was fractured.  The lower 6 inches of the red pitch change 
link was separated from both the link and the swashplate attach point.  The breaks at both ends 
displayed 45-degree fracture surfaces.
Collective control continuity was established from the collective jackshaft to the top of the 
broom closet.  Crushing of the fuselage pinned the jackshaft in the 'full up' position.  
Examination of the collective sleeve on the main rotor mast revealed that it was in the 'full up' 
position.  An undamaged collective stick was attached to the jackshaft on the pilot's side.  
Throttle control continuity was observed through the full range back to the engine.
Examination of the engine air inlet revealed damaged compressor blades and a shredded piece 
of aluminum wedged in the second stage wheel.  Main drive shaft coupling grease was found 
back to the fifth stage of the compressor.
Disassembly of the compressor revealed rotational scoring across 180 degrees of the 
centrifugal impeller shroud.  The vanes on the centrifugal impeller were bent opposite the 
direction of rotation.
Examination of the aluminum fragment removed from the inlet revealed that it was similar in 
gauge and color to the aluminum baffling around the particle separator.  After the fragment 
was removed, the compressor was rotated by hand, and continuity was established through the 
engine and the accessory section.
Examination of the combustion section revealed melted aluminized deposits scattered 
throughout.
Disassembly of the main drive shaft revealed the inside of the main input drive shaft couplings 
displayed radial impact damage.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, Baltimore, Maryland, performed an autopsy on 
August 2, 2001.
Toxicological testing was completed at the FAA Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, on September 11, 2001.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Page 7 of 10IAD01FA089
The #1 tail rotor drive shaft was removed and examined at the Safety Board Materials 
Laboratory in Washington, DC.  Examination of both halves of the drive shaft revealed that the 
drive shaft failed in overload.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
A review of radar data revealed the helicopter hovered around the construction site about 250 
feet above ground level.  Further examination revealed that traffic neither landed nor departed 
BWI in the vicinity of the accident helicopter prior to or at the time of the accident.
On October 31, 1983, Bell Helicopter published an Operations Safety Notice regarding loss of 
tail rotor effectiveness in the Model 206B and similar airframes.  Bell Helicopter describes the 
phenomenon of loss of tail rotor effectiveness as "Unanticipated Right Yaw".  According to the 
Safety Notice:
"When maneuvering between hover and 30 mph:
Be aware that a tail wind will reduce relative wind speed if a down wind translation 
occurs.  If loss of translational lift occurs it can result in a high power demand and an 
additional anti-torque requirement.
Be alert during hover (especially OGE) and high power demand situations.
Be alert during hover in winds of about 8-12 knots (especially OGE) since there are no 
strong indications to the pilot, to the possibility of a reduction of translational lift.  This 
reduction results in an unexpected high power demand and increased anti-torque 
requirements.
Be aware that if a considerable amount of left pedal is being maintained, that a sufficient 
amount of left pedal may not be available to counteract an unanticipated right yaw.
Be alert to changing aircraft flight and wind conditions such as experienced when flying 
along ridgelines and around buildings.
Observe the relative wind conditions set out in the attached chart."
The chart depicts a helicopter facing 360 degrees over a compass rose.  One shaded area of the 
chart depicts winds from between 120 degrees and 240 degrees, at wind speeds above 5 knots 
and up to 17 knots.  According to a note on the chart:
"An unanticipated right yaw may occur when operating in the shaded areas of the chart."
According to FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 90-95, "Any maneuver which requires the pilot to 
operate in a high power, low airspeed environment with a left crosswind or tailwind creates an 
environment where unanticipated right yaw may occur."  
The AC also advised of greater susceptibility for loss of tailrotor effectiveness (LTE) in right 
turns and the phenomena may occur in varying degrees in all single main rotor helicopters at 
airspeeds less than 30 knots.
According to the manufacturer, if a sudden unanticipated right yaw occurs, the following 
recovery technique should be performed.
1.Pedal - Full left; simultaneously, cyclic - forward to increase speed.
2.As recovery is effected, adjust controls for normal forward flight.
Page 8 of 10IAD01FA089
CAUTION
Collective pitch reduction will aid in arresting the yaw rate, but may cause an excessive rate of 
descent.  The subsequent large rapid increase in collective to prevent ground contact, may 
further increase the yaw rate and decrease rotor rpm.
The decision to reduce collective must be based on the pilot's assessment of the altitude 
available for recovery.
3. If the spin cannot be stopped and ground contact is imminent, an autorotation may be the 
best course of action.  Maintain full left pedal until the spin stops, then adjust to maintain 
heading.
The helicopter wreckage was released to Helicopter Transport Services on August 3, 2001.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Private
Age:
37, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/19/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/11/2001
Flight Time:
531 hours (Total, all aircraft), 87 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 9 of 10IAD01FA089
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bell
Registration:
N89FB
Model/Series:
206B 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1980
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/23/2000, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
66 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
10949 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20
Registered Owner:
US Lease Co Inc
Rated Power:
400 hp
Operator:
Helicopter Transport Services
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BWI, 146 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1254 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.36 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 16°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Baltimore, MD (MTN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Baltimore, MD (BWI)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1232 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class B
Airport Information
Airport:
BALTIMORE-WASHINGTON INTL 
(BWI)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
146 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
15R
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
9519 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 10 of 10IAD01FA089
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.184722, -76.677500
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Brian C Rayner
Adopted Date:
04/15/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Bob Henley; FAA; Washington, DC
Matthew Rigsby; Bell Helicopter Textron; Fort Worth, TX
Scott Scheurich; Rolls-Royce Allison; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
