The twin-engine corporate jet impacted terrain while maneuvering to land after a global 
positioning system (GPS) approach.  The pilot reported that the airplane entered icing 
conditions during the approach and that the airplane descended out of instrument 
meteorological conditions between 300-400 feet above ground level (agl).  The pilot reported 
that his windshield had become obscured by ice accumulation during the approach and that he 
"had difficulty seeing the runway."  The pilot elected to land the airplane instead of executing 
the published missed-approach procedure.  The airplane impacted terrain 439 feet short of the 
runway threshold while in a right turn.  After the accident, there was ice accumulation on all 
booted airframe surfaces measuring 2-4 inches wide and 1/4 to 3/8 inch thick.  The upper 
portions of the windscreens were contaminated with ice measuring about 3/8 inch thick.  The 
remaining airframe portions, including the heated surfaces, were free of ice accumulation.  The 
windshield bleed air switch was selected on "High" with the pilot's side windshield heat control 
knob approximately mid-range.  Windshield alcohol was selected "On", but the alcohol 
reservoir was still full upon inspection.  At the time of the accident, there was an overcast 
ceiling of 500 feet agl, 1-3/4 statute mile visibility with mist, and an outside temperature of -08 
degrees Celsius.  The published minimum descent altitude (MDA) for the GPS runway 17 
approach is 500 feet agl, for an airplane equipped with a lateral navigation only GPS receiver.  
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with multi-engine land, instrument airplane, and 
Cessna 500 type rating.  The pilot reported having 2,200 hours total flight time and 475 hours 
in the same make/model as the accident airplane.
The pilot's decision to continue below the minimum descent altitude (MDA) and his failure to 
fly the published missed-approach procedure.  A factor to the accident was the pilot's improper 
use of windshield heat which resulted in the windshield becoming obscured with ice during the 
instrument approach in icing conditions.
On January 1, 2005, around 1120 central standard time, a Cessna 551 (Citation II), N35403, 
piloted by an instrument rated private pilot, was substantially damaged during an in-flight 
collision with terrain while attempting to land at Ainsworth Municipal Airport (ANW), 
Ainsworth, Nebraska.  Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed at the time of the 
accident.  The personal flight was being operated under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91 while on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan.  The pilot and 
three passengers were not injured.  Two passengers reported minor injuries.  The cross-
country flight departed Reading Regional Airport (RDG), Reading, Pennsylvania, at 0808 
eastern standard time.
At 1113:16 (hhmm:ss), the accident airplane was cleared for the Global Positioning System 
(GPS) Runway 17 instrument approach into ANW.  The pilot stated that the airplane started to 
accumulate ice around 4,000 feet mean sea level (msl) during the approach.  The pilot reported 
that he had "all of the anti-ice and deicing equipment working" during the approach.  The pilot 
stated that "at some point the icing conditions became more than the equipment could handle" 
and the windscreen became obscured by ice.  The pilot reported that he descended out of IMC 
"between 300 and 400 feet" above ground level (agl).  The pilot stated that he "had difficulty 
seeing the runway" due to the accumulation of ice on the windscreen and he elected to land the 
airplane instead of executing the published missed-approach procedure.
A witness to the accident reported seeing the "aft end of a jet heading to the north in a slight 
bank to the right, I didn't notice the wheels down so I assumed that the jet was making a go-
around for another attempt at the approach."  The witness stated he didn't see the airplane 
impact the terrain but did "hear three loud audible pops and saw [what] appeared to be smoke 
rising over the hangar."
On January 2, 2005, a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector and an airframe 
representative performed an on-scene investigation.  The first point of impact was about 439 
feet north of the approach end of runway 17 (6,824 feet by 110 feet, asphalt).  The aircraft 
traveled south about 18 feet prior to contacting an airport access road.  The aircraft then 
became airborne and touched down for the second time after traveling south about 54 feet.  
The aircraft then slid in a right arc about 700 feet and came to rest parallel to a taxiway that 
services runway 17.
Temperatures at the accident site had remained well below freezing from the time of impact 
until the on-scene investigation.  Pieces of rime ice were found along the wreckage path.  These 
ice pieces were 1/4 to 3/8-inch thick and were shaped similar to the leading edge of a wing.
First responders had sprayed the airplane with fire suppression foam after the accident as a 
precaution.  There was no evidence of an in-flight or post-impact fire.  The foam had degraded 
the condition of the ice in some areas along both wings.  However, photographs taken by first 
responders show ice accumulation on all booted surfaces measuring 2-4 inches wide and 1/4 to 
3/8 inch thick.  The upper portions of the windscreens were contaminated with ice measuring 
about 3/8 inch thick.  The remaining airframe portions, including the heated surfaces, were 
free of ice accumulation.
The windshield bleed air switch was selected on "High" with the pilot's side windshield heat 
control knob approximately mid-range.  Windshield alcohol was selected "On", but the alcohol 
reservoir was still full upon inspection.
The closest weather reporting station to the accident site was located at ANW.  The airport is 
equipped with an Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS).  The following weather 
conditions were reported prior to and after the time of the accident:
At 1110:  Wind 020 degrees true at 3 knots, visibility 2-1/2 statute miles (sm) with mist, 
overcast ceiling at 500 feet agl, temperature -08 degrees Celsius, dew point -09 degrees 
Celsius, altimeter setting 30.03 inches of mercury.
At 1130:  Wind 030 degrees true at 3 knots, visibility 1-3/4 sm with mist, overcast ceiling at 
500 feet agl, temperature -08 degrees Celsius, dew point -09 degrees Celsius, altimeter setting 
30.02 inches of mercury.
The published minimum descent altitude (MDA) for the GPS runway 17 approach is 500 feet 
agl, for an airplane equipped with a lateral navigation only GPS receiver.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with multi-engine land, instrument airplane, and 
Cessna 500 type ratings.  The pilot reported having 2,200 hours total flight time and 475 hours 
in the same make/model as the accident airplane.
