Following the in-flight separation of a main rotor control link, the pilots lost control and the 
helicopter hit the ground hard and rolled over.  The pilots reported that as they turned base in 
the traffic pattern for landing at the airport, the helicopter pitched up violently and rolled to 
the right, followed by a hard roll to the left.  Both pilots got on the controls and tried to regain 
control of the helicopter.  The pilots lowered the collective and started down for a landing.  
During the descent, the pitching and rolling continued intermittently with the roll attitude 
reaching beyond 60 degrees.  As the helicopter neared the ground, the pilots flared and the 
helicopter hit the ground in a tail low attitude and rolled over.  A post accident examination of 
the helicopter, and examination of maintenance records by a Federal Aviation Administration 
inspector, occurred on site and after recovery.  During the course of the examination it was 
determined that maintenance personnel had removed cyclic control links from the cyclic 
control levers to check the ball joints for excess free play during an inspection.  The links are 
attached to the cyclic levers with bolts and castle nuts with cotter pins through the castle nuts 
as a safety locking device.  The right lateral cyclic control link was found broken.  The nut on 
the upper bolt was 1/4-inch away from the side of the attachment point.  There was no 
evidence of the cotter pins having been added to the castle nuts after the link 
inspection/reinstallation.
the separation of a main rotor control link due to improper maintenance installation.
On January 3, 2005, at 1346 mountain standard time, a Eurocopter EC135T1 helicopter, 
N135NW, sustained a loss of control in flight and collided with terrain at Casa Grande, Arizona.  
The flight was operated by Omni Flight Helicopters, Inc., d.b.a. Native American Air 
Ambulance, under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The helicopter was substantially damaged.  
The certificated commercial check pilot received a minor injury and the certificated airline 
transport pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company 
flight plan was filed.  The local area training flight originated at Mesa, Arizona, about 1330.
The pilots reported that as they turned base in the traffic pattern for landing at the airport, the 
helicopter pitched up violently and rolled to the right, followed by a hard roll to the left.  Both 
pilots got on the controls and tried to regain control of the helicopter.  The pilots lowered the 
collective and started down for a landing.  During the descent, the pitching and rolling 
continued intermittently with the roll attitude reaching beyond 60 degrees.  As the helicopter 
neared the ground, the pilots flared and the helicopter hit the ground in a tail low attitude and 
rolled over.
A post accident examination of the helicopter, and examination of maintenance records by a 
Federal Aviation Administration inspector, occurred on site and after recovery.  During the 
course of the examination it was determined that maintenance personnel had removed cyclic 
control links from the cyclic control levers to check the ball joints for excess free play during an 
inspection.  The links are attached to the cyclic levers with bolts; castle nuts with cotter pins 
through the castle nuts as a safety locking device.  The right lateral cyclic control link was 
found broken.  The nut on the upper bolt was 1/4-inch away from the side of the attachment 
point.  There was no evidence of the cotter pins having been added to the castle nuts after the 
link inspection/reinstallation.
Check Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/01/2004
Flight Time:
14000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 150 hours (Total, this make and model), 13500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
