The pilot increased the throttle in order to taxi over snow that had accumulated on the apron 
and taxiway adjacent to his hangar.  As the airplane accelerated, he retarded the throttle lever, 
but the engine did not respond.  He subsequently applied full right rudder pedal and right 
brake, but the airplane continued to slide on the snow.  The airplane impacted a line of trees on 
the opposite side of the taxiway.  The pilot inspected the airplane following the accident and 
reported a "binding" of the throttle.  The airplane was inspected by an FAA inspector, who 
found that the throttle was stiff, but could be actuated throughout its full range.
The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during taxi.  A factor was the snow-
covered taxiway.
On January 1, 2005, about 1400 eastern standard time, a Beech G35, N333EG, was 
substantially damaged during a collision with trees while taxiing for takeoff at Falmouth 
Airpark (5B6), Falmouth, Massachusetts.  The certificated private pilot and passenger were not 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The personal 
flight, destined for Plymouth Municipal Airport (PYM), Plymouth, Massachusetts, was 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The pilot was interviewed via telephone and submitted a written statement.  He stated that he 
performed a preflight inspection of the airplane, then started the engine while parked on the 
apron adjacent to his hangar.
The pilot increased the throttle in order to start the airplane moving over snow that had 
accumulated on the apron and taxiway.  He then reduced the throttle after the airplane began 
accelerating; however, the engine continued to run at a higher rpm.  The pilot tried again to 
reduce the throttle, to no avail.  The airplane continued to accelerate at a "higher than normal" 
rate across the taxiway.
The pilot then applied full right rudder pedal and right brake, but the airplane did not respond, 
and continued to slide on the snow.  The airplane impacted a line of trees, on the opposite side 
of the taxiway, head-on.  
Additionally, the pilot reported that after the accident he and a friend inspected the throttle 
and carburetor.  He reported hearing a "snapping sound" and felt a "binding" of the throttle 
cable.
The pilot's hanger was located in a residential area of the Falmouth Airpark.  Access to the 
runway was provided via a 50-foot wide grass taxiway that ran perpendicular to the apron 
immediately in front of the pilot's hangar.  Examination of pictures taken by the pilot on the 
day of the accident revealed that the taxiway and the grass portion of the apron in front of the 
hanger, was covered with patches of snow.
The airplane was a 1956 Beech G35, and had accumulated 3,430 total flight hours at the time of 
the accident.  The airplane's most recent annual inspection was performed on June 1, 2004, 
and the airplane had accumulated 64 flight hours since that date.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single engine land, and a third 
class medical certificate.  At the time of the accident he reported 796 hours of total flight 
experience, and 47 hours of flight experience in make and model.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane on January 10, 
2005.  The inspector found that the throttle was stiff, but he could only duplicate the snapping 
sound heard by the pilot once, and noted a very slight vibration within the throttle.  The 
inspector also found that the throttle moved completely from the idle to the full power position 
with no obstruction or hindrance.
