Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Madras, OR
Accident Number:
WPR11LA068B
Date & Time:
12/01/2010, 1130 PST 
Registration:
N1699Z
Aircraft:
CESSNA 185A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Midair collision
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The propeller of a Taylorcraft airplane and the empennage of a Cessna airplane came in contact 
with each other while both aircraft were on final approach to the same runway. The pilot of the 
Cessna had completed a landing and performed a standard entry (left) onto the downwind leg 
of the traffic pattern. The pilot of the Taylorcraft was returning from a local area training flight 
and entered the downwind leg of the traffic pattern from a standard mid-field 45-degree entry. 
The Cessna pilot was announcing his position on the common traffic advisory frequency during 
each segment of the pattern; however, the pilot of the Taylorcraft could not hear the 
transmissions since his airplane was not equipped with a radio. Just prior to impact, the pilot 
of the Taylorcraft observed the empennage of the Cessna underneath the left wing of his 
airplane. The pilot of the Cessna never observed the Taylorcraft, but heard a loud bang come 
from the aft end of his airplane at impact. Both pilots were able to land their airplanes without 
further incident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of both pilots to see and avoid the other airplane while in the traffic pattern to land, 
which resulted in a midair collision. 
Findings
Personnel issues
Monitoring other aircraft - Pilot (Cause)
Monitoring other aircraft - Pilot of other aircraft (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR11LA068B
Factual Information
On December 1, 2010, about 1130 Pacific standard time, the propeller of a Taylorcraft BC-65, 
N23619, and the aft portion of the empennage of a Cessna 185A, N1699Z, came in contact with 
each other while both aircraft were on a visual flight rules (VFR) final approach to runway 16 at 
Madras Municipal Airport, Madras, Oregon. The certified flight instructor (CFI) and his 
student in the Taylorcraft, which was not radio equipped, were not injured, but the airplane, 
which was owned and operated by Berg Air, sustained substantial damage to the forward part 
of its fuselage. The commercial pilot and his passenger in the Cessna were also uninjured, but 
the Cessna, which was owned and operated by the passenger, sustained substantial damage to 
its empennage and aft fuselage. The occupants of the Taylorcraft were on a 14 Code of Federal 
Regulation Part 91 local instructional flight, and the occupants of the Cessna were on a 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations personal pleasure flight. The pilot of the Cessna was on his second 
circuit of the VFR pattern to runway 16. The occupants of the Taylorcraft were on their first 
circuit of the VFR pattern to runway 16, after returning from a training flight in the local area 
and entering the pattern via a standard 45 degree entry to the downwind. Neither aircraft was 
on a flight plan.
According to the flight instructor in the Taylorcraft, who was flying the airplane at the time of 
the accident, neither occupant had seen the Cessna until the empennage of the Cessna 
suddenly appeared underneath and very close to the left wing of his airplane while he was on 
short final. He said that at the precise moment that he noticed the Cessna, it seemed to slow, 
and as it did, its nose lowered and its tail pitched up. The CFI therefore immediately tried to 
bank to the right to avoid contact, but the propeller of the Taylorcraft came in contact with the 
Cessna before he could gain separation. After impacting the Cessna, the Taylorcraft's propeller 
stopped turning, and therefore the CFI made a power-off landing in the extended 1,800-foot 
paved stop-way of the old military runway. 
According to the pilot of the Cessna, who had announced his position on the common traffic 
advisory frequency (CTAF) on each segment of the traffic pattern, neither he nor his passenger 
ever saw the Taylorcraft, but while on short final he heard a loud bang come from the aft end of 
the airplane. Immediately after he heard the bang, the airplane pitched down and rolled to the 
right, but the pilot was able to regain control and continue flying straight ahead. Because he 
was unaware that the airplane had come in contact with another airplane, and because he 
thought the airplane had either impacted a large bird or experienced some sort of mechanical 
failure, he elected to climb straight ahead and land at the airplane's home airport, which was 
about 10 minutes away. It was not until after landing at the airplane's home airport and 
inspecting the airplane that the pilot of the Cessna realized there had been a mid-air collision.
Both pilots had flown standard VFR left hand patterns for runway 16. The pilot of the Cessna 
entered the downwind from the crosswind after completing his first touch-and-go landing. The 
pilot of the Taylorcraft entered the downwind near mid-field from a 45 degree entry leg. The 
pilot of the Cessna was making position/intention radio calls at each segment of the pattern. 
The Taylorcraft was not radio-equipped, nor was it required to be. Therefore the pilot of the 
Taylorcraft was unable to announce his position/intentions, nor was he able to hear the 
transitions of the pilot of the Cessna. Neither occupant of either airplane noticed that there was 
another airplane in the VFR pattern at the same time as they were.
At the time of the accident, there were broken clouds about 6,500 feet above ground level 
Page 3 of 5WPR11LA068B
(AGL), and a visibility of more than 10 miles.
Neither pilot reported any pre-impact anomalies or malfunctions associated with his airplane.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Midair collision (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/19/2010
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/12/2010
Flight Time:
5112 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4 hours (Total, this make and model), 2120 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 187 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 70 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N1699Z
Model/Series:
185A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1850499
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2428 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-470 SERIES
Registered Owner:
WEEMS JOHN SCOTT
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
WEEMS JOHN SCOTT
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5WPR11LA068B
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 6500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
170°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Madras, OR (S33)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Madras, OR (S33)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1225 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Madras Municipal Airport (S33)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
2428 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
16
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5079 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
44.670278, -121.155000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Orrin K Anderson
Adopted Date:
04/12/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Penny Ratliff; Portland FSDO; Hillsboro, OR
Publish Date:
04/12/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77917
Page 5 of 5WPR11LA068B
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
