This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Galena, AK
Accident Number: ANC14LA034
Date & Time: 06/01/2014, 1315 AKD
Registration: N2631R
Aircraft: CESSNA 182K
Injuries: 2 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On June 1, 2014, about 1315 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Cessna 182K airplane, 
N2631R, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing, following a loss of all engine 
power, about 26 miles southwest of Galena, Alaska. The airplane was owned by Iksgiza Air 
Service, LLC., Fairbanks, Alaska, and operated by the Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed 
Council, Fairbanks, as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country flight under the provisions of 
Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred. Of the four persons aboard, the pilot and 
one passenger sustained minor injuries, and two passengers were not injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed. The flight had originally 
departed Fairbanks, and made stops in Anvik and Kaltag, Alaska. The accident flight departed 
from the Kaltag Airport about 1300, and was en route to the Galena Airport. 
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC) on June 2, the pilot noted that the purpose of the flight was to 
transport three employees of the Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council to Fairbanks so 
they could attend a training class. He said that after departing from Fairbanks, he flew to Anvik 
and picked up one passenger, and then he flew to Kaltag and subsequently picked up two 
additional passengers, then he departed for Galena. He said that the flight between Fairbanks, 
Anvik, and Kaltag were uneventful. The pilot noted that he planned to purchase fuel at Galena, 
before continuing on to Fairbanks. 
As the flight approached the Galena Airport, and while flying level at 1,500 feet msl, the pilot 
said that the engine began to run rough and lose power, which was immediately followed by a 
loss of all engine power. The pilot said he was unable to restart the engine, and he selected a 
marshy area next to a small lake as a forced landing area. During the forced landing, the 
airplane's wheels contacted an area of soft, tundra-covered terrain, and the airplane nosed 
over, sustaining damage to the fuselage and wings. The airplane came to rest inverted, and 
partially submerged in lake water. 
The airplane was equipped with a Continental Motors O-470 series engine, and an NTSB 
postaccident inspection is pending following wreckage recovery. 
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
The closest official weather observation station is located at the Galena Airport. At 1258, an 
Aviation Routine Weather Report (METAR) was reporting, in part: Wind, 240 degrees (true) at 
9 knots; visibility, 10 statute miles; clouds and sky condition, 2,400 overcast; temperature, 45 
degrees F; dew point, 38 degrees F; altimeter, 30.12 inHg.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: CESSNA
Registration: N2631R
Model/Series: 182K
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: Yukon River Inter-Tribal
Watershed Council
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: GAL, 153 ft msl
Observation Time: 1258 AKD
Distance from Accident Site: 25 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 7°C / 3°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 9 knots / , 240°
Lowest Ceiling: Overcast / 2400 ft agl
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.12 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Kaltag, AK (KAL)
Destination: Galena, AK
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Minor
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: 1 Minor, 2 None
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 2 Minor, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude: 64.000000, 157.000000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Clinton O Johnson
Additional Participating Persons: Chris Farnell; Federal Aviation Administration; Fairbanks, AK
