National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KNOX, IN
Accident Number: CHI00LA068
Date & Time: 02/03/2000, 1405 EST
Registration: N1489L
Aircraft: Beech A23
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The accident airplane impacted a snowbank during a landing at Starke County Airport.
The pilots were uninjured.
The instructor stated that the airplane taxied through slushy snow and departed Porter County Municipal Airport {VPZ}.
He said the student performed two go arounds.
On the third attempt, the aircraft settled onto the runway the aircraft and pulled to the right.
The instructor took the controls and added full power.
The instructor said that the 'right tire went into snow bank along side of runway and pulled aircraft off of runway, skidding side ways and collapsing nose wheel.
After departing aircraft I checked runway and found a single skid tiremark on runway, about 20 feet long.
My assumption is that the slush during taxi at VPZ froze the tire up and caused us to be pulled off runway on landing at Stark County Airport.'
The student stated, 'Upon my flare I drifted slightly right of center line and sat the plane down.
It immediately pulled to the right.'
The airplane was moved prior to an on-scene examination.
The examination did not reveal any anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the instructor pilot not performing remedial action on the student's right drift during the flare.
Factors were the student not maintaining directional control, the student not maintaining proper centerline alignment, and the snowbank.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 2.
(F) PROPER ALIGNMENT - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 3.
(C) REMEDIAL ACTION - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOWBANK Factual Information On February 3, 2000, at 1405 eastern standard time, a Beech A23, N1489L, sustained substantial damage on impact with a snowbank during a landing on runway 36 (4,400 feet X 75 feet, dry/asphalt) at Starke County Airport, near Knox, Indiana (OXI).
The flight was being conducted as a 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight, in visual meteorological conditions, with a student pilot and certified flight instructor on board.
The pilots sustained no injuries.
The flight originated from Porter County Municipal Airport, Valparaiso, Indiana (VPZ) at 1220 central standard time and was landing at OXI at the time of the accident.
The instructor stated, "While taxing to active runway we went through slushy snow area not cleared by airport personnel.
We departed VPZ [and] stayed in pattern and performed a go- around on 27.
Departed VPZ for OXI to perform x wind landings so that student could solo at VPZ.
Student performed two go-around and on third attempt had every thing lined up for a good landing.
As the aircraft settled onto the runway the aircraft pulled to the right.
I grabbed controls, added full power.
Right tire went into snow bank along side of runway and pulled aircraft off of runway, skidding side ways and collapsing nose wheel.
After departing aircraft I checked runway and found a single skid tiremark on runway, about 20 feet long.
My assumption is that the slush during taxi at VPZ froze the tire up and caused us to be pulled off runway on landing at Stark County Airport."
The student stated, "Upon my flare I drifted slightly right of center line and sat the plane down.
It immediately pulled to the right."
The airplane was moved prior to a Federal Aviation Administration examination.
The examination did not reveal any anomalies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Instrument Airplane Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 12 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3438 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO346 Registered Owner: CHARLES A.
WHITE ET AL Rated Power: 165 hp Operator: CHARLES A.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
