National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: SANTA BARBARA, CA
Accident Number: LAX00LA084
Date & Time: 02/01/2000, 1609 PST
Registration: N32258
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-180
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The flight instructor stated that they were planning to practice touch-and go landings.
The student pilot had already performed one touch-and-go, which the flight instructor described as 'normal.'
According to the flight instructor, during the accident sequence, the airplane had already touched down when it suddenly veered off to the left side of the runway.
He said he took control of the airplane, but before he could regain directional control, it struck a series of three taxiway signs, resulting in substantial damage to the left wing and collapsing the left landing gear.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The dual student's loss of directional control and the flight instructor's inadequate supervision of the flight.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 2.
(C) SUPERVISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
OBJECT - AIRPORT SIGN/MARKER Factual Information On February 1, 2000, at 1609 hours Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-28-180, N32258, veered off the runway during landing at Santa Barbara, California, airport and subsequently struck three sets of taxiway signs.
The airplane, operated by Spitfire Aviation of Santa Barbara, sustained substantial damage.
The flight instructor and student pilot were not injured.
The instructional flight was operating under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.
The local area flight had departed from Santa Barbara at 1545.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and no flight plan was filed.
The flight instructor stated that they were planning on practicing touch-and go landings.
The student pilot had already performed one touch-and-go, which the flight instructor described as "normal."
According to the flight instructor, during the accident sequence, the airplane had already touched down when it suddenly veered off to the left side of the runway.
He said he took control of the airplane, but before he could regain directional control, it struck a series of three taxiway signs, causing substantial damage to the left wing and collapsing the left landing gear.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 38, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
