National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BOSTON, MA
Accident Number: NYC00LA097
Date & Time: 02/03/2000, 0800 EST
Registration: N397US
Aircraft: Boeing 737-300
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 59 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis While in cruise flight, the airplane encountered turbulence, and the flight attendants returned to their seats.
The turbulence continued, and a cart began to break free.
A flight attendant attempted to push the cart with her foot, and suffered a fracture.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: In flight encounter with turbulence.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) WEATHER CONDITION - TURBULENCE Factual Information On February 3, 2000, about 0800 Eastern Standard Time, a Boeing 737-300, N397US, encountered turbulence after departure from General Edward Lawrence Logan International Airport, Boston, Massachusetts.
There was no damage to the airplane, which was owned and operated by US Airways as flight 6509.
There were no injuries to 4 crewmembers and 55 passengers, while 1 crewmember was seriously injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight destined for Ronald Regan Washington National Airport, Washington, DC.
An instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the air carrier flight conducted under 14 CFR part 121.
The manager of Flight Safety at US Airways stated: "The flight was dispatched with MEL No.
22-3, yaw damper inop.
After level off and during initial passenger service the flight began to encounter turbulence that became progressively worse.
The flight attendant returned the serving cart to its stowage bin and then strapped into her jumpseat.
During the continued turbulence the cart began to break free.
On instinct the flight attendant put up her foot to hold the cart; however, it pushed her foot backwards.
At first, the flight attendant assumed her foot was just bruised and would get better on its own, it did not.
She visited her own doctor who diagnosed that she had fractured the 5th metatarsal base of her left foot."
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 47, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
