National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: FARMINGTON, NM
Accident Number: DEN00LA047
Date & Time: 02/03/2000, 0745 MST
Registration: N8240U
Aircraft: Beech A36
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis To prepare the student pilot for his first solo flight, the flight instructor retarded the throttle on downwind to simulate a power failure.
The instructor said the student flared the airplane high over the runway and added power to adjust the sink rate and banked left 'to return to the centerline.'
The airplane landed hard on the left main gear and bounced.
The flight instructor took control, aborted the landing, went around and landed uneventfully.
Postaccident inspection revealed wingtip, aileron, and rear spar damage.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's excessive remedial action (banking to realign the airplane with the runway).
Factors were the student pilot flaring the airplane prematurely and failing to maintain directional control, and the flight instructor's inadequate supervision of the student.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) FLARE - PREMATURE - DUAL STUDENT 2.
(F) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 3.
(C) REMEDIAL ACTION - EXCESSIVE - DUAL STUDENT 4.
There were no injuries to the commercial certificated flight instructor and student pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the instructional flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated at Farmington at 0730.
To prepare the student pilot for his first solo flight, the flight instructor retarded the throttle on downwind to simulate a power failure.
The instructor said the student flared the airplane high over the runway and added power to adjust the sink rate and banked left "to return to the centerline."
The airplane landed hard on the left main gear and bounced.
The flight instructor took control, aborted the landing, went around and landed uneventfully.
Postaccident inspection revealed wingtip, aileron, and rear spar damage.
: 3650 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 22 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 11632 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-550-B Registered Owner: SAN JUAN PILOT TRAINING, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
