The twin-engine airplane lost power in both engines while  approaching the uncontrolled 
airport for landing and landed short of the runway in an unprepared field.  The airplane was 
equipped with four fuel tanks; left main and left auxiliary tanks and right main and right 
auxiliary tanks. Two fuel quantity gauges indicated fuel quantity in either the main tanks or the 
auxiliary tanks based upon the position selected on a separate switch on the pilot's sub-panel.   
Approaching the airport the pilot completed the pre-landing checklist and confirmed the fuel 
selectors were on the main tanks.  He had not changed the fuel selector valve handle positions 
since before takeoff, 45 minutes earlier, and believed he had been feeding fuel from the main 
tanks the entire flight.  He turned on the fuel boost pumps to the "low" position and confirmed 
the fuel quantity gauge select switch was also set to indicate fuel quantity in the main tanks.  As 
the airplane entered the landing pattern on crosswind leg, 1/2 to 1 mile from the departure end 
of the runway, the left engine began to "surge."  The fuel gauges read 1/3 tank and the pilot, 
believing fuel supply was not the problem, elected to feather the left propeller and secure the 
left engine.  Continuing the approach, the pilot extended the downwind leg and turned onto 
base leg about 1.5 miles from the landing runway threshold.  As the airplane was turning onto 
final approach he lowered the landing gear and, as the gear was extending, the right engine 
began to surge.  He then believed he did have a fuel starvation problem and attempted to 
unfeather and restart the left engine.  The airplane was settling rapidly and he realized he 
wouldn't be able to reach the runway or restart the engines.  He located a clearing beyond some 
houses and landed the airplane there.  The person who recovered the wreckage reported 
draining 23 gallons of fuel from each main tank , 1/2-gallon from the left auxiliary tank and 1 
cup of fuel from the right auxiliary tank.  The fuel selector valve handles were in the main tank 
position and the fuel quantity gauge selector switch was in the main tank position.  It is 
possible on this model airplane to select the fuel quantity gauges to indicate fuel quantity in the 
main tanks while the engines are, in fact, receiving fuel from the auxiliary tanks.  Both engines 
were subsequently installed on a test stand and operated satisfactorily.  No mechanical defects 
were noted on the airframe or engines.
The pilot's inadvertent missetting of the fuel selector position on the auxiliary fuel tanks 
(versus the main tanks) resulting in fuel starvation of the engines.
On February 3, 2002, at 0953 Pacific standard time, a Beech 95-B55, N9DD, landed off-airport 
at Joshua Tree, California, while on final approach to Hi Desert Airport.  The private pilot and 
one passenger were not injured.  The aircraft was substantially damaged.  The personal flight 
was operated by the owner under 14 CFR Part 91, and departed Santa Monica, California, at 
0850.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  
The owner of the Joshua Tree Airport told the Safety Board investigator he heard the airplane 
approaching and lose power on one engine while on downwind leg, and the second engine 
while on final approach.  He then heard the airplane crash, called 911 on the telephone, and 
then went to the accident site.  He said that the entire airplane, including both wings, was 
heavily damaged.  He removed the two fuel caps on the right wing and observed no fuel in the 
tanks.  He removed the fuel tank cap on the left, main tank (marked "37 gallons"), and found 
the tank nearly full of a clear blue fluid that looked and smelled like avgas.  The left auxiliary 
tank appeared to be empty.  In the cockpit, both fuel selectors were pointed toward their 
respective main tank.
The pilot told the Safety Board investigator that he had about 600 hours experience in the 
airplane, and he knew that the fuel gauges were functional and accurate because he had, on 
occasion, used fuel down to a low amount before switching tanks.  Since the completion of the 
recent annual Inspection, the plane had flown a trip of about 4 hours duration from Santa 
Monica to Monterey and back, as well as a short 10-minute maintenance flight with his 
mechanic.  The airplane had four fuel tanks, a left and right main tank and a left and right 
auxiliary tank, totaling 136 gallons of usable fuel.  A typical fuel flow is 36 gallons per hour 
(total).  The airplane was last fueled ("topped-off") prior to departing Monterey.  The return 
trip from Monterey was about 1.5-hour duration and included use of the auxiliary fuel.  On the 
accident flight, from Santa Monica to Joshua Tree, he said the fuel selectors remained on the 
main tanks the entire flight, which took about 45 minutes.
The pilot said that on downwind leg for landing on runway 24, he had throttled back the 
engines to 18 inches of manifold pressure.  The left engine started "surging," it did not quit 
entirely, and there wasn't much yaw associated with the surging due to the low manifold 
pressure setting.  He glanced at the fuel quantity gauges and saw they were between 1/4 and 
1/2.  He concluded the problem was not fuel, as that agreed with his assessment of fuel 
remaining.  Because he was close to the airport, and only 1,000 feet agl, he chose to shutdown 
and feather the left engine and turned the left fuel selector "off."  He increased right engine 
manifold pressure to 20 inches, which held the plane's altitude with little yaw.  He made a wide 
base leg for the airport and lowered the landing gear as the airplane was turning final.  Within 
10 seconds of lowering the landing gear, the right engine lost power.  He attempted at that time 
to restart the left engine by turning the left fuel selector back to the main tank, pushing left 
propeller and throttle controls full forward, turning the boost pump on, and engaging the 
engine starter.  The attempt was unsuccessful, and rather than continuing to analyze the fuel 
system, he elected to "fly the airplane."  As he rolled the wings level on final approach, the right 
engine seemed to regain power but the airplane was slow and at low altitude (he estimated 500 
feet agl), and he elected to make an off-airport landing.  
The airplane was examined by the Safety Board investigator at the facilities of Air Transport in 
Phoenix, Arizona, on February 25 and 26, 2002.
The left engine was installed on a test stand and run.  The intake manifold balance tube 
exhibited crushing and was punctured at two locations that were sealed with duct tape.  The oil 
sump exhibited a dent and small puncture in the right, rear corner, accompanied by oil seepage 
that was not repaired.  Oil dripped from the puncture at the rate of about 1 drop each 10 
seconds.  The oil dipstick showed there were 8 quarts of oil remaining in the engine and none 
was added for the engine run.  The right rear intake manifold elbow was crushed and the 
corresponding part from the right-hand engine was removed and installed for the engine run.  
All four engine mounts were broken in the "I" section and were replaced with serviceable 
mounts.  The two exhaust pipes were cut off approximately 12 inches from the discharge end in 
order to enable the engine to be installed on the test stand and clear the mounting rails of the 
stand.  The aircraft's propeller was removed from the engine and a borrowed, 2-blade propeller 
was installed for the test run.  The engine started after about 15 seconds of cranking and 
priming.  The engine ran smoothly and was operated from idle to approximately 2000 rpm.
The right engine was installed on the same test stand and run with the same results.  The four 
broken engine mounts were replaced, the right-rear intake manifold elbow was reinstalled, the 
exhaust pipe ends were cut to fit the test stand, and the same propeller was installed prior to 
running the engine.   
The airplane was equipped with 3-blade propellers.  The left propeller, when viewed from the 
front, exhibited a smooth, uniform, aft bending of about 45 degrees over the outer half span of 
two of the blades.  The outer half span of these two blades exhibited a pattern of scratch marks 
on the front side of the blade extending diagonally across them.  The third blade was bent 
smoothly aft about 10 degrees over its entire span and exhibited a shiny, polished appearance 
to the leading edge near the tip.  The three blades appeared to be in the normal flight 
(unfeathered) position, and the hub mechanism was tight when the blades were twisted by 
hand.
All three blades of the right propeller exhibited abrasion, chordwise scratches and were rolled 
and twisted aft, outboard of the midspan.  One blade was rolled up about 180 degrees, another 
about 150 degrees, and the third about 90 degrees.  There was a modest amount of torsional 
twisting.  The three blades appeared to be in the normal flight (unfeathered) position, and the 
hub mechanism was tight when the blades were twisted by hand.
The airplane was equipped with four fuel tanks; a left and right main tank of 37-gallon (usable) 
capacity and, outboard of the main tank in each wing, an auxiliary tank of 31 gallons (usable) 
capacity.  Two fuel gauges on the instrument panel display fuel quantity in either the two main 
tanks or the two auxiliary tanks, depending upon the position of a selector switch located on 
the lower left sub-panel, which is selected by the pilot.  Two fuel selectors are located on a floor 
console of the cockpit, in front of and between the front seats. The pilot can select to feed fuel 
to each engine from its respective main or auxiliary tank or to crossfeed fuel to either engine 
from the opposite main tank.  The Raytheon Aircraft Company party representative confirmed 
that it is possible, on this model airplane, to select fuel to supply the engines from one set of 
tanks (main or auxiliary) while the fuel quantity gauges indicate quantity in the other set of 
tanks.
Examination of the wings revealed no visual punctures or breaches in the fuel cells and there 
were no visible external fuel stains.  The fuel system vents were open when blown through and 
the main sump fuel screens were clear.  In the cockpit the fuel selectors were in the main tank 
position for each engine and the fuel quantity selector switch was in the main tank position.  
The fuel boost pump switches were in the "low" position.
The operator of the retrieval company that picked up the aircraft reported no evidence of fuel 
leakage at the site.  He reported draining 23 gallons of fuel from each main tank; however, the 
left auxiliary tank contained 1/2 gallon of fuel and the right auxiliary tank contained about 1/2 
cup of fuel.  The Raytheon Aircraft Company party representative said the differing quantities 
reportedly observed by the airport operator earlier were likely due to the airplane resting in an 
unlevel attitude.
