According to witnesses, the powered glider was observed making a low pass down runway 36 of 
a private, sod agricultural airstrip. The aircraft next entered a left downwind leg for an 
approach and landing to the runway. While on final approach, the powered glider's 
undercarriage collided with static wires strung between two power transmission line towers, 
and the aircraft impacted the ground. The aircraft was destroyed and the pilot suffered fatal 
injuries. It is likely that the pilot was under continuing treatment for his bipolar disorder and 
sleep disorder at the time of his accident and may have been on two different antidepressants. 
Mirtazapine is substantially sedating, and interferes with certain skilled performance tasks. In 
addition, mirtazapine and fluoxetine may interact to cause severe restlessness, confusion, 
incoordination, abdominal pain, and other symptoms.
The pilot's failure to maintain obstacle clearance, resulting in the in-flight collision with a static 
wire and an uncontrolled descent and collision with the ground.  A factor in the accident was 
the pilot's impairment resulting from the use of unapproved medication.
On February 1, 2002, about 1630 central standard time, an experimental Harleman Titan 
Tornado II, motor glider, registered to a private individual, operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 
personal flight, collided with a static line strung between the tops of power line support towers 
and crashed during an approach to a private airstrip near Molino, Florida. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The aircraft received 
substantial damage and the private-rated glider pilot sustained fatal injuries. The aircraft 
departed Coastal Airport, Pensacola, Florida, about 30 minutes before the accident.
According to a brother of the pilot, an eyewitness stated that he observed the aircraft over fly 
the north-south oriented agricultural airstrip and make a left course reversal to enter a 
downwind leg and approach for a landing in a northerly direction. At about 700 feet south of 
the runway's southern threshold, the aircraft's fixed landing gear collided with one of two side 
by side static wires strung between the tops of two power transmission line towers, and the 
aircraft impacted the ground. The towers support east-west running power transmission lines 
that are easily seen and avoided, however, the static wires run above the power lines and are 
thinner in cross section.
According to an FAA inspector, two additional eyewitnesses stated that the aircraft actually 
made two approaches to the airstrip. The first approach and landing was uneventful. It was the 
second approach that resulted in the wire collision and plunge to the ground. According to the 
FAA aircraft registry report, N170V is classified as a fixed wing, single engine, amateur-built, 
experimental motor glider. According to the FAA airman's registry report, the pilot possessed a 
private-pilot certificate for gliders, and no medical certificate. According to Federal Air 
Regulation, 61.23, (b), "A person is not required to hold a medical certificate when exercising 
the privileges of a pilot certificate with a glider category rating."  The pilot's first and only 
Application for Airman Medical Certificate and Student Pilot Certificate, completed on March 
8, 1998, noted a history of bipolar disorder treated with Depakote (valproate) and insomnia 
treated with Ambien (zolpidem). The pilot was denied a medical certificate. The FAA instructs 
aviation medical examiners (AMEs) that the use of "mood ameliorating" medications is 
considered disqualifying.
According to the manufacturing manager for Titan Aircraft kits, the Tornado II can be built for 
use in numerous categories; (1) as a single place ultralight, (2) a 2-place ultralight trainer, (3) a 
standard experimental single or dual place light aircraft, or, (4) using the larger 26 foot higher 
aspect ratio wing, as a motor glider. Factory personnel had knowledge of the accident of 
N140V, and confirmed that factory records revealed the aircraft was built as a motor glider.
The Special Airworthiness Certificate issued to the builder/pilot classifies the aircraft model as 
a "Titan Tornado II  MG." It could be assumed the "MG" meant motor-glider, however, 
according to FAA Order 8130.2D, under the heading, "Listing of Manned Free Balloon or 
Glider on Special Airworthiness Certificates Issued for Experimental Purposes", the proper 
denotation on the  experimental airworthiness certificate, FAA Form 8130-7, should be as 
follows: "MANNED FREE BALLOON" or "GLIDER" will be placed in parentheses following 
"experimental" in the Category/Designation block. This procedure ensures the appropriate 
application of 14 CFR Part 61, Certification: Pilots, Flight Instructors, and Ground Instructors, 
concerning the medical requirements for the operation of such aircraft. Such an identification 
was not appended to the Form 8130-7 for the accident aircraft. A copy of the applicable parts of 
FAR Part 21.191, as well as the Special Airworthiness Certificate for the accident aircraft are 
attachments to this report.
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. William R. Bell, Associate Medical 
Examiner, District I, Florida, on February 2, 2002. The cause of death was attributed to 
multiple blunt force trauma sustained in an airplane accident. A toxicological examination was 
negative for ethanol in the blood. Tests were positive for fluoxetine and mirtazapine in the 
blood. The brand name for fluoxetine is Prozac and the brand name for mirtazapine is 
Remeron. Both of these prescription-only medications are used to treat mental depression. The 
wife of the pilot stated that the pilot used the Remeron for insomnia, and the Prozac for 
depression. The following warnings for the medications are stated, " Fluoxetine may cause 
drowsiness, restrict the ability to think clearly, and cause poor muscle control." For the 
compound, mirtazapine, the following warning is noted, "Mirtazapine may cause drowsiness or 
trouble in thinking. Dizziness, light-headedness, or fainting may occur". Material extracted 
from the pilot's medical records, as well as records of telephone conversations with the pilot's 
wife are attachments to this report.
