The flight departed and proceeded uneventfully to the La Belle Municipal Airport where an 
uneventful landing was performed.  The flight departed to return to the initial departure 
airport and during cruise flight, the certified flight instructor (CFI) noted a discrepancy with 
one of the fuel gauges.  He landed uneventfully at a nearby airport, and with the engine 
running, the CFI checked for fuel leaks and checked both fuel tanks; no leakage was noted and 
both tanks were found to contain a sufficient quantity of fuel.  The CFI elected to depart to the 
return to the original departure airport and approximately 15 minutes into the flight, oil spots 
were noted on the windshield.  The CFI reported the engine lost power shortly after seeing the 
oil spots.  The CFI maneuvered the airplane for a landing in a field maintaining 85 miles-per-
hour (mph), and during the landing roll with the flaps retracted, the airplane collided with a 
berm and became airborne.  The airplane then contacted another berm becoming airborne 
again for a short distance.  The airplane then impacted the ground and came to rest upright.  
The CFI exited the airplane and obtained assistance for the student who remained in the 
airplane.  Examination of the fuel system, fuel vent system, air induction system, exhaust 
system, and engine assembly revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.  The 
crankshaft fracture was noted to be from overstress.  On engine testing of the ignition system 
components revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.  Bench testing of fuel 
injection system components and both magnetos revealed no evidence of preimpact failure, a 
discrepancy was noted with the condensers of both magnetos.  Bench testing of the fuel 
selector valve and flexible fuel lines revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.  
Testing of fuel from the facility that fueled the airplane revealed no discrepancies that would 
cause a loss of engine power.  No determination was made as to the reason for the reported loss 
of engine power.  Review of the "Flight Manual" for the airplane revealed that for forced 
landings on unprepared surfaces, full flaps should be used if possible with a 75 mph glide.
The reported loss of engine power due to undetermined reasons.  Contributing factors in the 
accident were an improper flap setting, excessive landing speed, and terrain consisting of 
berms.
On February 1, 2002, about 1324 eastern standard time, a Cessna R172E, N7878N, registered 
to the U.S. Air Force, operated by Patrick Air Force Base Aero Club, experienced collapse of the 
nose landing gear while landing in a field near River Ranch, Florida.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 instructional 
flight.  The airplane was substantially damaged and the certified flight instructor (CFI) and 
student pilot were seriously injured.  The flight originated about 1107, from Patrick Air Force 
Base (Patrick AFB), Florida.
The CFI stated that he and his student departed from Patrick AFB and proceeded to the La 
Belle Municipal Airport where an uneventful landing was performed; he and the student took a 
break while at the airport.  The flight departed from La Belle for Patrick AFB, and while en 
route, he noticed a discrepancy with the left fuel gauge.  The flight proceeded to the Sebring 
airport where an uneventful landing was performed.  While the engine remained running, the 
CFI exited the airplane and visually checked for fuel leaks and quantity of fuel in both tanks; no 
leaks were noted and approximately 18 gallons of fuel were noted in each tank.  The CFI elected 
to depart to return to Patrick AFB, and approximately 15 minutes into the flight, the student 
asked him whether there was oil on the windshield.  The CFI replied it was and checked the 
engine instruments; the oil pressure was in the "green" arc.  The CFI further reported that at 
that time the engine surged, and he took control of the airplane from the student and contacted 
Patrick AFB air traffic control tower (Patrick AFB ATCT).  He confirmed the ignition switch 
and fuel selector were on both, the mixture was full rich, the fuel pump was on low, and applied 
full throttle.  The engine "power" increased momentarily then decreased to idle rpm.  The flight 
continued and he maneuvered the airplane for an open field maintaining 85 miles-per-hour.  
After touchdown in the field during the landing roll, he noticed a rise in terrain and applied aft 
elevator control input.  The airplane contacted the rising terrain, became airborne, and 
impacted the ground with the nose landing gear which sheared off.  After the airplane came to 
rest he exited it and attempted to get the student out but was unable.  Unable to establish two 
way radio communications to summon help, he activated the emergency locator transmitter 
and walked to a road where he stopped a passing motorist who in turn called 911.
The student pilot stated that while proceeding direct to Patrick AFB, during straight and level 
flight "spots" appeared on the windshield.  The CFI initially thought the spots were bird 
droppings but both concluded it was oil.  Shortly after observing the spots on the windshield, 
the engine lost "rpm" and the CFI took the controls of the airplane.  He believed the propeller 
stopped rotating before the CFI landed the airplane in a field that looked "...fairly smooth."  He 
further reported he, "... did not see any fence or ditch until just before we crossed the ditch 
during rollout."  The CFI left to get help while he remained in the airplane for 2-3 hours before 
being evacuated via helicopter.
According to a transcription of communications with Patrick AFB ATCT, two-way 
communications were established with that facility and at 1321:29, an occupant advised, "we 
are 30 miles out with an engine failure."  The controller acknowledged the transmission and 
asked the position of the airplane.  An occupant responded, "we are 30 about 30 miles south of 
melbourne", followed immediately with, "we are losing our engine power and altitude."  The 
controller responded by first advising the flightcrew to contact Daytona Approach, which was 
acknowledged, but the controller then advised the flightcrew to contact Miami.  The last 
transmission from the controller was not acknowledged by the flight crew.
The accident site was examined by the FAA inspector-in-charge (FAA IIC), along with 
representatives of the United States Air Force, and Patrick AFB Aero Club.  A representative of 
Cessna Aircraft Company examined the site after the airplane was recovered.  According to the 
FAA IIC, after touchdown in the field, the airplane rolled approximately 400 feet where it 
collided with a berm.  The airplane became airborne traveling approximately 65 feet where it 
impacted another berm causing the nose landing gear to separate.  The airplane became 
airborne again traveling 5 feet where it impacted the ground nose first creating a 6-inch deep 
trench.  The airplane came to rest in an upright position with the empennage elevated 
approximately 108 feet from the point of contact with the first berm; the airplane was 
recovered for further examination.
Examination of the airplane and engine following recovery was performed by the parties to the 
investigation with FAA oversight.  The left and right fuel tanks were found to contain 
approximately 8 gallons and 9 gallons of 100 low lead fuel, respectively.  The fuel reservoir 
tank was found to be empty; a fractured fuel line was noted between the reservoir tank and the 
fuel strainer.  The gascolator was found to be full of fuel, no water was present.  No 
obstructions of the fuel vent system, air induction system, or exhaust system were noted.  With 
the exception of the fractured fuel line between the reservoir tank and fuel strainer, fuel system 
continuity was confirmed.  The auxiliary fuel pump operationally checked good.  The fuel 
selector was found in the detent of the both position.  A light coating of oil was noted on the 
fuselage belly skins.  Examination of the engine revealed the propeller appeared initially to be 
attached to the engine but separated when the FAA IIC attempted to verify if the propeller was 
secured.  The crankshaft was fractured aft of the propeller mounting flange, continuity was 
established from the fracture surface to the accessory section.  Camshaft, and valve train 
continuity was confirmed by rotation of an adapter installed at the vacuum pump pad location, 
suction and compression were noted in all cylinders with rotation of the adapter.  No 
discrepancies were noted with the magnetos, ignition harness, or ignition switch when tested.  
A total of 8 quarts of oil were drained from the engine; the oil was clean and gold in color (oil 
capacity is 10 quarts).  The crankshaft, manifold valve, fuel injector nozzles and lines, 
mechanical fuel pump, both magnetos, throttle and metering unit, fuel selector valve, and 
flexible fuel lines were retained for further examination.
Metallurgical examination of the fractured crankshaft was performed by the NTSB Materials 
Laboratory, located in Washington, DC.  The results of the examination indicate the fracture 
surface exhibited evidence of overstress separation; no fatigue was noted.
Examination and bench testing of the mechanical fuel pump, manifold valve, throttle and 
metering unit, and fuel injector nozzles and lines was performed with NTSB oversight.  Bench 
testing of the mechanical fuel pump revealed leakage from the damaged mixture shaft.  The 
discharge pressure was higher than specified at 600 and 2,200 rpm.  The discharge pressure in 
terms of pounds-per-hour (pph) was less than specified when tested twice at different fuel flow 
rates at 2,200 rpm.  Bench testing of the manifold valve with the fuel injector nozzles and lines 
revealed the unit flowed greater than specified when tested at 50 and 100 pph, respectively.  
The metering unit which was received partially disassembled was reassembled for bench 
testing which revealed the unit flowed greater than specified at all test points.  The NTSB 
investigator who witnessed the tests reported the metering unit could be adjusted to flow 
within limits.
Examination and bench testing of the magnetos was also performed with NTSB oversight.  
Bench testing revealed both magnetos produced spark at all terminals when operated from 150 
to 4,701 magneto rpm.  The internal timing of both magnetos was satisfactory and the contact 
gap of both magnetos were within limits.  The contact surfaces of the left magneto were noted 
to have slight pitting; no pitting was noted on the contact surfaces of the right magneto.  The 
left and right condenser checked .29 and .3 microfarads respectively, specification is .35 + or - 
10 percent.
Testing of the fuel selector valve and flexible fuel lines was performed at Cessna Aircraft 
Company with FAA oversight.  Flow testing of the flexible fuel lines from the accident airplane 
was performed in both directions and was compared with flow testing results of similar new 
lines.  Flow testing of the accident fuel selector valve was performed and was compared with 
the flow test results of a new fuel selector valve.  No appreciable difference was noted when 
flow testing the accident lines and fuel selector valve when compared with new lines and valve.  
Sediment was noted to flow from the accident flexible hose from the fuel pump to metering 
unit during bench testing.  Disassembly of the accident fuel selector valve revealed the cam 
measured within .002 inch when compared with a new cam.  A gasket was missing between the 
main body of the valve and the valve cover; red-orange colored sealant was observed on the 
faying surfaces of the main body and valve cover.
Review of the airframe maintenance records revealed the airplane was inspected last on 
January 26, 2002, in accordance with a 100-hour inspection.  The same entry indicates a new 
o-ring was installed in the fuel selector valve.  The airplane had accumulated approximately 6 
hours since the inspection at the time of the accident.  Review of the provided "Archived Closed 
Write-ups Report" sheets that begin with an entry dated March 10, 2001, through June 23, 
2001, revealed no recorded engine related discrepancies.  Review of the "Deferred and Closed 
Write-ups Report" sheets that begin with an entry dated June 26, 2001, through January 29, 
2002, revealed 2 entries related to engine discrepancies.  The first entry dated July 7, 2001, 
indicates discrepancies related to both magnetos; the corrective action was retiming of the 
magnetos to factory specifications.  The second entry dated September 5, 2001 indicates a rpm 
drop of 350 when checking the left magneto; the corrective action was, "8 Sep, [magneto] 
check ok."
Testing of a sample of fuel taken from the facility that fueled the airplane was performed by the 
United States Air Force.  The results of the analysis revealed no evidence of cross 
contamination; 43 parts per million weight (ppmw) of water were detected in the submitted 
sample.  According to the president of a fuels laboratory, the finding of 43 ppmw is not 
significant.
Review of the airplane's "Flight Handbook" revealed no reference to emergency procedures to 
follow in preparation for a forced landing.  The handbook does have a maximum glide distance 
chart.  Review of the "Flight Manual" for the United States AIr Force (USAF) series T-41C/D 
airplane revealed that for forced landings on unprepared surfaces, "...if possible, use full flaps 
and a 75 mph glide.  Land on the main gear, holding the nosewheel off the ground as long as 
possible."  A note indicates that full flap glides are very steep and require an aggressive flare 
just before touchdown in order to prevent landing on the nose landing gear first.
The airplane minus initial retained components was released to William C. Donnell, Manager, 
Patrick AFB Aero Club, on February 20, 2002.  The initial retained components were also 
released to William C. Donnell, on April 6, 2002.  Additional retained components consisting 
of the fuel selector valve and flexible fuel lines were released to Donald Opel, Chief Pilot, 
Patrick AFB Aero Club, on January 3, 2003.
