The pilot attempted to takeoff on a slush covered runway, lost directional control of the 
airplane, and aborted the takeoff.  During the aborted takeoff, the airplane rolled down an 
embankment onto rough and uneven terrain.
The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for takeoff.  Factors associated with the accident are a 
slush covered runway, and rough/uneven terrain.
On February 1, 2002, about 1356 Alaska standard time, a wheel-equipped Britten-Norman 
BN2A-26 airplane, N27MR, sustained substantial damage during an aborted takeoff at the 
Ouzinkie Airport, Ouzinkie, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules 
(VFR) on demand charter flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred. The 
airplane was operated by Island Air of Kodiak, Alaska. The airline transport certificated pilot 
and the two passengers were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident.  The flight originated at the Ouzinkie Airport, and was bound for Kodiak.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on February 1, the director of operations for the operator reported 
that during the attempted takeoff, the right landing gear became mired in slush, and the 
airplane was pulled to the right side of the runway.  The pilot reduced engine power to abort 
the takeoff.  The airplane exited the runway to the right.  The airplane went down an 
embankment and encountered rough and uneven terrain. The pilot and passengers exited the 
airplane without incident. The director of operations said the nose gear did not collapse, but 
was bent rearward. 
During a telephone conversation with the IIC on February 2, the director of operations 
reported that the bulkhead to which the nose landing gear is attached was damaged and would 
have to be replaced. No other portions of the airplane were damaged. He said there were no 
known mechanical problems with the airplane prior to the accident.
