The pilot reported that the engines had full power before rotation, and that the takeoff roll was 
normal until rotation.  Right after the aircraft lifted off, the left wing dropped and he felt a 
swerve to the left, and the aircraft's nose pitched up.  The pilot pushed on the control yoke and 
attempted to counteract the roll motion with opposite aileron.  The aircraft continued to the 
left and collided with trees approximately 1,250 feet from the departure end of the runway and 
about 100 yards east of the runway edge.  Post accident inspection of the flight controls found 
control continuity from all flight control surfaces to the cockpit controls.  The left engine was 
inspected and partially torn down.  During the engine inspection, there was no evidence found 
to indicate a mechanical failure or malfunction.
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during takeoff.  Trees were a factor.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 2, 2002, approximately 1033 Pacific standard time, an Aero Commander 520 
airplane, N520SE, registered to and being flown by a private pilot, was substantially damaged 
during a collision with trees adjacent to runway 16 at Pierce County Airport-Thun Field, 
Puyallup, Washington.  The pilot received minor injuries, and the pilot-rated passenger 
sustained a serious injury.  Visual meteorological conditions, with winds from 120 degrees true 
at 6 knots, were reported at McChord Air Force Base, Tacoma, Washington, at 0955, and no 
flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 local flight.
During a telephone interview with the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), the pilot reported 
that he had full power before rotation, and that the takeoff roll was normal until rotation.  The 
pilot reported that right after rotation, the aircraft's left wing dropped and he felt a swerve to 
the left, and the aircraft's nose pitched up.  The pilot stated that he reacted by pushing on the 
control yoke and attempting to counteract the motion with opposite aileron.  He stated that he 
then saw he was not going to make it above the trees, so he tried to hit the trees as flat as 
possible, "like a belly flop."  The pilot stated that he did not change the power setting on the 
engines, that he did not have time to feather either engine, and that he did not have a chance to 
look at the engine instruments during the accident sequence, since he was concentrating on 
flying the airplane.  The pilot reported that he set the takeoff trim before takeoff to 15 degrees, 
and that he took off with 1/4 flaps.  The pilot also reported that the aircraft had 140 gallons of 
fuel aboard at takeoff (he stated that full fuel is 150 gallons, with 145 gallons usable.)
The passenger reported in a telephone interview with the NTSB IIC that the flight proceeded 
normally through the engine run up before takeoff.  He stated that just prior to rotation, he 
looked at the engine tachometers and that they were matched (NOTE:  the aircraft is equipped 
with a dual-needle engine tachometer, with two needles on a concentric axis that indicate on a 
single dial face.)  The passenger stated that rotation was normal, but that the aircraft then 
swerved hard to the left during the initial climb (within 1 second of the main wheels leaving the 
ground.)  The passenger stated that the aircraft stayed nose-high during the turn.  The 
passenger reported that he did not notice any change in engine pitch until the aircraft started 
hitting the trees, and that it got quiet about that time.  The passenger stated he did not know 
whether or not the left engine was running when the aircraft started the left turn, but that he 
was certain the right engine was running at high power until impact (or just before impact.)  
The passenger stated that he did not notice any other abnormal indications (such as loud 
noises, flashes, or bangs) preceding the abrupt left turn after rotation.  The passenger reported 
that he stayed off the flight controls during the entire event, and did not know what control 
inputs the pilot made in response to the situation.
A witness standing about mid-field and watching the aircraft takeoff, reported that after 
takeoff, the left wing dipped, and the aircraft began to yaw to the left.  The nose pitched up and 
engine power seemed to reduce.  The aircraft "fell into woods" traveling about 90 degrees to 
runway heading.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
At the time of the accident the pilot held a private pilot certificate for single and multi-engine 
land aircraft.  The pilot also held certificates for Flight Engineer in turbojet powered aircraft 
and airframe and powerplant.  The pilot reported a total flight time of 5,000 hours in all 
aircraft with 2,500 hours as pilot-in-command.  Approximately 1,500 hours were in multi-
engine aircraft with 110 hours of pilot-in-command time in the accident aircraft.
The pilot held a Class II medical certificate dated August 27, 1992, with a limitation to wear 
corrective lenses.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident aircraft, an Aero Commander 520, serial number 520-25, was manufactured in 
1952.  Two Lycoming GO-435-C2B engines were installed on the aircraft at the time.  A review 
of maintenance records indicated that the last annual inspection/100 hours inspection was 
accomplished on September 29, 2001, at a total airframe time of 3,476.9 hours.  
The left engine, serial number L-2200-11-BA, indicated a total time since overhaul of 264.3 
hours.  The right engine, serial number L-2830-11A, indicated a total time since overhaul of 
1,121.9 hours.
Approximately 3 hours had been accumulated on the aircraft since the last inspection. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The nearest weather reporting facility to the accident site was McChord Air Force Base, 
Tacoma, Washington, located eight miles southwest of the accident site, reported the weather 
at 0955 as a broken ceiling at 5,000 feet.  Visibility was seven miles.  The altimeter was 30.16" 
Hg.  The winds were from 120 degrees at six knots.  Temperature was three degree Celsius.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The accident site was located in the trees about 1,250 feet south of the north end of runway 16, 
a 3,650-by-60 foot runway, and about 100 yards east of the runway edge.  A generally easterly 
path of broken trees was noted toward the crash site, and the aircraft had come to rest upright 
on a generally easterly heading.  Both propellers were at low pitch and both exhibited some 
degree of tip curl, with the right propeller exhibiting somewhat more severe blade damage than 
the left propeller.  The aircraft's gear and flaps appeared to be extended.  
The wreckage was removed from the trees and taken to the ramp area at the airport for further 
examination.  Both wings remained attached to the wing roots.  Both engines remained 
attached to the wings and encased in their respective nacelles.  Both propeller assemblies 
remained attached to their respective crankshafts.  Extensive leading edge impact damage was 
noted to both wings.  The empennage/aft fuselage was twisted to the right.  The vertical 
stabilizer remained attached.  The rudder remained attached at the hinges.  The horizontal 
stabilizers remained attached.  The elevators remained attached at their respective hinges.  
During the airframe examination, flight control continuity was established from all flight 
control surfaces to the cockpit controls.  
The left engine was examined and partially torn down.  During the examination, the crankshaft 
rotated easily.  Gear and valve train continuity was established.  Compression was developed in 
all cylinders.  Both magnetos produced a spark from all towers.  The airframe low-point drains 
and pressure carburetor inlet screens were clean and free of contaminants.  Fuel was found at 
the inlet to the fuel pump and at the inlet to the pressure carburetor.  Fuel was removed from 
various points along the fuel system and was found clean and clear.  All spark plugs were 
removed and most of the electrodes were found to be dark grayish, or covered with slight dark 
soot.
The three blades of the left side propeller displayed slight tip curls with minimal leading edge 
damage.   One blade contacted the side of the fuselage during the accident sequence. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The Bendix PS-5BD pressure carburetor, serial number 855493,  was removed from the left 
engine for bench testing and inspection.  On May 29, 2002, the unit was taken to Precision 
Airmotive, Everett, Washington.  Initial inspection of the unit determined that it was flowable 
on the test bench.  The unit was installed on the bench and during the test it was noted that the 
unit flowed slightly lean of specifications at low power test points, and within specification at 
the mid and high power test points to include the full power test point.
The left engine fuel pump was removed for inspection and bench flow testing.  On June 4, 
2002, the unit was installed on a bench test at Galvin Flying Service, Seattle, Washington.  At 5 
PSI, the pressure relief valve was tested and found to cut off at approximately 12 PSI 
(specification is 13.1 PSI minimum at 2,500 rpm/175 gph).  The check was reaccomplished in 
accordance with Pesco Service Instructions.  During this check at 2,500 rpm and 15 PSI, fuel 
flow was 208 gph.  The test specification is 212 gph minimum.  The test operator reported that 
the bench was slightly low on fluid and some air cavitation of the fluid was evident.   The pump 
was in specification for the 1,500 rpm test with 116 gph minimum.  After a second flow test, the 
pressure relief valve was readjusted to as-found setting of 12 PSI and the test was concluded.
ADDITIONAL DATA/INFORMATION
The wreckage to include the Bendix pressure carburetor were released to the owner on October 
10, 2002.
