Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Hastings, NY
Accident Number:
IAD05LA071
Date & Time:
06/02/2005, 1930 EDT 
Registration:
N2122
Aircraft:
Piper E2
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot/mechanic/owner explained that he had purchased the airplane 1 month prior to the 
accident and had been flying it for 8 days since its reassembly.  The airplane had accrued about 
6 hours of flight time during that span, and was flown for about one hour earlier on the day of 
the accident, with no deficiencies noted.  The pilot started the engine and performed a ground 
run to bring the engine up to normal operating temperature.  The takeoff and initial climb at 
maximum power proceeded without incident.  When the airplane reached about 150 feet above 
ground level, the pilot adjusted the throttle for climb power, and the engine "completely cut 
off."  The airplane collided with trees and terrain during the subsequent forced landing.  
Following the accident, the engine ran on the airframe without interruption.  Examination of 
the fuel system revealed that the 90-degree fitting installed between the fuel tank and the fuel 
selector was completely occluded with rust, sediment, and debris.  Examination of the fuel tank 
revealed it was comprised of two compartments, separated by a baffle.  The area forward of the 
baffle contained a large quantity of "sludge," rust, and debris.  According to the pilot/owner, he 
examined the interior of the fuel tank with a bore scope prior to purchase, but he did not 
examine the tank forward of the baffle.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Fuel starvation due to a blocked fuel line, which resulted in a loss of engine power.
Page 2 of 6IAD05LA071
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE FITTING - BLOCKED(TOTAL)
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
Findings
3. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6IAD05LA071
Factual Information
On June 2, 2005, at 1930 eastern daylight time, a 1934 Piper E2, N2122, was substantially 
damaged during a collision with trees following a forced landing after takeoff near, Hastings, 
New York.  The certificated private pilot/mechanic/owner was not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local personal flight that originated at the 
pilot/owner's private airstrip, at 1928.  No flight plan was filed for the flight conducted under 
14 CFR Part 91.
In a telephone interview, the pilot explained that he had purchased the airplane 1 month prior 
to the accident.  The airplane was partially disassembled for transport after its purchase, and 
had been flying for 8 days since its reassembly.  The airplane had accrued about 6 hours of 
flight time during that time span.
Earlier on the day of the accident, the pilot flew the airplane for about 1 hour with no 
deficiencies noted.  Later that evening, he decided to fly the airplane for 10 to 15 minutes 
before securing it for the evening.
The pilot started the engine and performed a ground run to bring the engine up to normal 
operating temperature.  He then taxied for departure from the north/south strip.  The takeoff 
and initial climb at maximum power proceeded without incident.  When the airplane reached 
about 150 feet above ground level, the pilot adjusted the throttle for climb power, and the 
engine "completely cut off."  He said there was no sputter or decrease in power before the 
complete power loss. 
The pilot maneuvered the airplane back toward the airport for a landing on the east/west 
runway.  During the turn, he determined that the trees in his path could not be cleared, and he 
leveled the wings prior to striking the trees.  The airplane remained suspended in the trees for 
a few moments, and then settled to the ground.
The airplane was examined at the scene by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) aviation 
safety inspectors on the day of the accident, and on June 6, 2005.
Examination of the airplane revealed that all major components were accounted for at the 
scene.  Control continuity was established from the cockpit to all flight control surfaces.  The 
airplane was then moved from the site to the owner's hangar.
The engine was started, and it ran on the airframe.  The engine was stopped, and the fuel 
system was examined.  The carburetor was intact, and the gascolator contained fuel.  A fuel 
sample from the gascolator contained small amounts of sediment.  The fuel line from the fuel 
selector to the gascolator was absent of debris.
A 90-degree fitting was installed between the fuel tank and the fuel selector.  The fitting was 
removed, and examination revealed that the fitting was completely occluded with rust, 
sediment, and debris.
The fuel tank was removed, and the top was cut open to examine the contents.  Examination of 
the tank revealed it was comprised of two compartments, separated by a baffle.  The area 
forward of the baffle contained a large quantity of "sludge," rust, and debris.
According to the pilot owner, he examined the interior of the fuel tank with a bore scope prior 
to purchase, but he did not examine the tank forward of the baffle.
Page 4 of 6IAD05LA071
The airplane had accrued about 1,380 total hours of flight time.  The airplane was rebuilt in 
1989, and had accrued 84 total hours since then.  It's most recent annual inspection was 
completed in March 2005, just prior to the owner's purchase.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single engine land.  His most 
recent FAA third class medical certificate was issued in May 2002.  The pilot reported 700 total 
hours of flight experience.  He flew 25 hours in the 90 days prior to the accident, 6 hours of 
which were in the accident airplane.
At 1954, the weather reported at Syracuse International Airport (SYR), Syracuse, New York, 
about 20 miles north, included a broken ceiling at 8,500 feet with wind from 300 degrees at 5 
knots.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/01/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/01/2004
Flight Time:
680 hours (Total, all aircraft), 6 hours (Total, this make and model), 25 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft), 14 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N2122
Model/Series:
E2 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
84
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
932 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
6 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1397 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
A-40-4
Registered Owner:
Scott Revoir
Rated Power:
40 hp
Operator:
Scott Revoir
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6IAD05LA071
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SYR, 421 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1954 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 8500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.07 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hastings, NY (NONE)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (NONE)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1928 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Hastings (NONE)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
375 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
1700 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
43.366667, -76.235556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Brian C Rayner
Adopted Date:
04/25/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Tom Williams; FAA/FSDO; Rochester, NY
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6IAD05LA071
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
