Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Calexico, CA
Accident Number:
WPR15LA096
Date & Time:
02/01/2015, 0030 PST 
Registration:
N510KJ
Aircraft:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER COMPANY 
R44 II
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The commercial pilot was conducting an agricultural application flight. He reported that, after 
reaching a field and during the first turn, the engine experienced a partial loss of engine power. 
During the subsequent attempt to land, the pilot turned the helicopter to avoid power lines. 
The helicopter subsequently landed hard and rolled onto its right side. 
A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical 
malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. The engine was test run 
with no anomalies noted. The reason for the partial loss of engine power could not be 
determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation. 
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR15LA096
Factual Information
On February 1, 2015, about 0030 Pacific standard time, a Robinson R44 II, N510KJ, force 
landed following a partial loss of engine power approximately 5 miles east of Calexico, 
California. The commercial pilot was not injured, and the helicopter was substantially 
damaged. The helicopter was registered and operated by John Reed Aviation as a 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight. Night, visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The local flight originated at Calexico International 
Airport, Calexico, California, about 0025.
The pilot reported in a written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), that the pilot who flew the helicopter on the previous flight stated 
to him prior to the accident flight that there was a "feeling and increasing vibration on the 
pedals." A subsequent examination of the helicopter revealed no anomalies. He further stated, 
"I started it [the accident helicopter], and did a hover control check to make sure everything 
was working properly, after that I took off to do the high recon of the field. There were power 
lines to the north, after the recon I set up for my first practice pass (south to north) wind was 
out of the west so the turns where going to be to the west." After reaching the field and during 
the first turn, the engine experienced a partial loss of power. He further stated "I started my 
pull, to perform a 'P' turn [A turning maneuver where at the conclusion of the spray pass, the 
helicopter pulls up, initially turns to the right, and then makes a left turn until it is lined up for 
the next pass], with the same inputs on the controls as I've done plenty of times in the past, and 
as the aircraft started to gain altitude and lose airspeed, the RPMs went down, it felt like the 
governor was not able to keep them on the green, I lowered collective and rolled throttle on, 
also I turned to the west to avoid the power lines, I flared as I got close to the ground–" The 
helicopter landed hard and rolled onto its right side, resulting in substantial damage to the 
forward fuselage and tailboom.
The pilot reported to the NTSB that he accumulated a total time of 583 hours in rotorcraft, and 
40 hours in the last 90 days. He also accumulated a total night flying experience of 85 hours.
The United States Naval Observatory data indicated that the sunset and end of civil twilight at 
the accident site were at 1714 and 1740, respectively. The moon was in a waxing gibbous phase, 
with 96% of the moon's visible disk illuminated.
Examination of the helicopter was performed by the NTSB and a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector. The agricultural sprayer assembly was removed from the 
fuselage prior to the examination of the wreckage. The main rotor blades, tail boom sections, 
drive shaft, tail rotor assembly and four transmission drive belts were removed from the 
helicopter prior to the examination and found with the main wreckage. The four transmission 
drive belts were cut to facilitate their removal and revealed normal wear. A section of the tail 
rotor pitch control rod, about 3 feet in length, separated from the aft control rod end, and was 
not found during the examination. Examination of the fuselage revealed that the windshield 
separated from both left and right sides and was buckled in several locations. The main rotor 
blades remained intact and were buckled in several locations. The tail rotor assembly was 
intact and the stinger separated near the aft attachment. The tail rotor blade pitch movement 
Page 3 of 5WPR15LA096
moved freely by hand. The engine cowling and fan shroud was undamaged. The instrument 
panel was undamaged. Control continuity was established from the cabin controls to the 
swashplate and damaged tail rotor control rod. Examination of the Lycoming IO-520-AE1AA 
engine revealed no anomalies. The helicopter was setup for a test run and the engine started 
with little hesitation. The engine ran smoothly for several minutes and a magneto check was 
performed. Several throttle bursts were applied and the engine was shut down normally.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Autorotation
Off-field or emergency landing
Hard landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
29, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Unknown
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/01/2014
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/24/2013
Flight Time:
583 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5WPR15LA096
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER 
COMPANY
Registration:
N510KJ
Model/Series:
R44 II 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
2004
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted; Normal
Serial Number:
10338
Landing Gear Type: 
Ski; Skid;
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/15/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
13 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1686.6 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540 SER
Registered Owner:
CORNERSTONE INVESTMENTS 
LLC
Rated Power:
0 hp
Operator:
John Reed Aviation
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Agricultural Aircraft (137)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KIPL, -56 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
11 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0853 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
319°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.96 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Calexico, CA (CXL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Calexico, CA (CXL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0025 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Airport Information
Airport:
CALEXICO INTL (CXL)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
5 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 5 of 5WPR15LA096
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
32.676389, -115.418611 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew L Swick
Adopted Date:
09/06/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Tom Marques; FAA-FSDO; San Diego, CA
Publish Date:
09/06/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90678
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
