Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bon Aqua, TN
Accident Number:
ERA15FA336
Date & Time:
09/02/2015, 1545 CDT 
Registration:
N216LA
Aircraft:
HENDERSON W A/JOHNSON W L RV 
6A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During the cruise portion of a cross-country flight, about 20 minutes after takeoff, the 
commercial pilot stopped responding to air traffic controllers as the airplane reversed course. 
It then climbed from 6,500 ft to 9,000 ft mean sea level and completed two left circuits before 
descending rapidly into the ground. Examination of the wreckage did not reveal any preimpact 
mechanical malfunctions. The pilot's autopsy revealed that he had severe coronary artery 
disease, scarring from previous heart attacks, and evidence of ongoing or recent damage to two 
new areas of heart muscle, indicating recent heart attacks. All of these conditions put him at 
risk of experiencing acute heart failure or a disturbance of heart rhythm (arrhythmia). Both 
acute heart failure and arrhythmia can rapidly lead to decreased consciousness due to low 
blood pressure. It is likely that acute symptoms from complications of the pilot's ongoing heart 
attacks resulted in impairment /incapacitation of the pilot and led to his loss of airplane 
control.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's incapacitation from complications of a recent heart attack, which resulted in a loss 
of control during cruise flight.
Page 2 of 7ERA15FA336
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Cardiovascular - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 7ERA15FA336
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
On September 2, 2015, about 1545 central daylight time, an experimental amateur-built RV-
6A, N216LA, was substantially damaged when it impacted wooded terrain near Bon Aqua, 
Tennessee. The commercial pilot was fatally injured. The airplane was registered to Chelsea 
Aviation Enterprises LLC and operated by the commercial pilot as a personal flight conducted 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the planned flight to Shelby County Airport 
(EET), Alabaster, Alabama. The flight originated from Bomar Field (SYI), Shelbyville, 
Tennessee, about 1400.
The airplane was fueled with 12 gallons of 100 low-lead aviation gasoline prior to departing 
from SYI. According to information from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the pilot 
was receiving flight following services from air traffic control (ATC). About 20 minutes after 
departure, while the flight was in radio and radar contact with Huntsville Approach, the pilot 
stopped responding to ATC as the airplane reversed course, from south to north. The airplane 
continued north, climbed from 6,500 feet to 9,000 feet mean sea level and completed two left 
circuits, before descending rapidly into terrain.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
66, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Glider
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/10/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/24/2015
Flight Time:
1682 hours (Total, all aircraft), 100 hours (Total, this make and model), 7 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 7ERA15FA336
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate, with ratings for airplane single-engine land, 
airplane multiengine land, instrument airplane and glider. He also held a flight instructor 
certificate with a rating for glider. His most recent FAA second-class medical certificate was 
issued on June 10, 2015. At that time, the pilot did not report any cardiac issues and according 
to his wife, the pilot was not aware of any issues. He reported a total flight experience of 1,672 
hours at that time. Review of the pilot's logbook revealed that he had accumulated about 1,682 
total flight hours at the time of the accident; of which, 7 hours and 3 hours were flown during 
the 90-day and 30-day periods preceding the accident, respectively.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
HENDERSON W A/JOHNSON 
W L
Registration:
N216LA
Model/Series:
RV 6A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2005
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
60527
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/12/2015, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
14 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
147 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Aero Sport Power Ltd
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A2A
Registered Owner:
CHELSEA AVIATION 
ENTERPRISES LLC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
The two-seat, low-wing, fixed tricycle-gear airplane, was assembled from a kit and issued an 
experimental airworthiness certificate in 2005. It was powered by an Aero Sport Power O-360-
A2A, 180-horsepower, experimental engine, equipped with a Sensenich two-blade, fixed-pitch 
propeller. Review of maintenance records revealed that the airplane's most recent condition 
inspection was completed on April 12, 2015. At that time, the airplane and engine had 
accumulated about 147 hours since new. The airplane flew approximately 14 hours from the 
time of the most recent inspection, until the accident.
Page 5 of 7ERA15FA336
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MRC, 681 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1555 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
170째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
190째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.03 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
32째C / 21째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Shelbyville, TN (SYI)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Alabaster, AL (EET)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
1400 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Maury County Airport (MRC), Columbia, Tennessee, was located about 20 miles south of the 
accident site. The recorded weather at MRC, at 1555, included wind from 190 degrees at 3 
knots, clear sky, and visibility 10 miles.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
35.935000, -87.252500
A debris path was observed, beginning with several freshly cut tree branches, extending on a 
magnetic course about 260 degrees for 110 feet to the main wreckage. Sections of the outboard 
right wing were located along the beginning of the debris path. The right flap and right aileron 
separated from the right wing, but the left flap and left aileron remained partially attached to 
the left wing. The left flap was extended beyond its full travel-point and the left aileron was 
hanging from one hinge. The empennage remained intact and exhibited less damage. Control 
continuity was confirmed from the elevator and rudder to the pilot's control stick and rudder 
pedals in the cockpit. Continuity was also confirmed from the pilot's control stick to the point 
of aileron separation on both wings. Additionally, the elevator trim cable remained attached 
from the elevator trim tab to the cockpit.
Page 6 of 7ERA15FA336
The cockpit was crushed, but the pilot's seat and four-point harness remained intact. The 
magneto switch remained in the both position and the fuel selector was positioned to the right 
main fuel tank. The throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control levers were in the full 
forward position. The engine remained partially attached the fuselage. The two-blade propeller 
separated from the hub. Both propeller blades exhibited chordwise scratching. One blade was 
s-bent while the other was bent aft.
The engine was separated from the airframe for examination. The top spark plugs were 
removed; the electrodes were intact and light gray in color, except for the No. 3 top spark plug 
that was impact damaged. The valve covers were removed and oil was noted throughout the 
engine. The crankshaft was rotated via an accessory gear drive. Camshaft, crankshaft, and valve 
train continuity were confirmed and thumb compression was attained on all cylinders. The oil 
screen and oil filter was absent of contamination. The carburetor had separated from the 
engine during impact. Its floats and needle were intact and the valve was mid-range. Some fuel 
was recovered from the engine-driven fuel pump, consistent with 100 low-lead aviation 
gasoline. Both magnetos produced spark at all leads when rotated by hand.
Medical And Pathological Information
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on September 3, 2015, by the Hickman County Medical 
Examiner, Nashville, TN. The cause of death was multiple blunt force injuries and the manner 
of death was accident. Contributing to the death were hypertensive and atherosclerotic heart 
disease.
The autopsy also revealed that there was up to 90 percent stenosis in the right and left anterior 
descending coronary arteries with thrombi past the area of stenosis in both. The remainder of 
the coronary arteries were diffusely 40 percent stenosed. In addition, there were multiple 
white, fibrous plaques within the myocardium of the left ventricle and the interventricular 
septum indicating scarring from previous heart attacks. Finally, there were two areas of 
erythema and wall softening: on the medial-most aspect of the interventricular septum and on 
the inner aspect of the posterior aspect of the left ventricle. On the microscopic evaluation, 
there were dense areas of fibrosis and collagen deposition; hemorrhage into myocardium; wavy 
myocytes with enlarged, pyknotic nuclei; edema; and inflammatory infiltrates into the 
myocardium. These indicate previous scarring and recent damage from heart attacks.
Toxicological testing was performed on the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical Science Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The results were negative for carbon monoxide, 
alcohol, and drugs.
Page 7 of 7
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert J Gretz
Adopted Date:
01/18/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Rocky Davidson; FAA/FSDO; Nashville, TN
James M Childers; Lycoming Engines; Williamsport, PA
Publish Date:
01/18/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91910
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
