Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Hillsboro, OH
Accident Number:
CEN10FA181
Date & Time:
04/01/2010, 2337 EDT 
Registration:
N2190Y
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172D
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
A witness located about 1/2 mile southeast of the accident site heard the sound of an airplane 
engine increasing in power followed by a crash. He estimated that this occurred within a few 
seconds and heard no sounds after the crash. The airplane wreckage was located the following 
morning at the departure airport, where the airplane had impacted the runway pavement 
about 100 feet from the threshold. A depression (crater) in the runway pavement was present 
at the impact point, and the pavement exhibited other impressions consistent with impact from 
the wings, propeller, and nose landing gear. The airplane was fragmented and the wings and 
empennage had separated from the fuselage. The main wreckage was located within 20 feet of 
the point of impact. The entire debris field was within approximately 75 feet of the impact 
point. Examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies consistent with a 
preimpact failure or malfunction. The impressions in the runway pavement, the distribution of 
the wreckage, and the extensive damage to the airplane were consistent with a high-power, 
high-angle impact with the runway pavement.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Impact with the runway pavement for unknown reasons.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 6CEN10FA181
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2010, about 2337 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172D Skyhawk, N2190Y, piloted 
by a private pilot, was destroyed during an in-flight collision with terrain at the Highland 
County Airport (HOC), Hillsboro, Ohio.  The personal flight was being conducted under 14 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 without a flight plan.  Night visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed.  The pilot sustained fatal injuries.  The exact time of departure could not 
be determined.
About 2230, a witness located about 3 miles east of HOC reported observing the lights from 
two airplanes.  One appeared to be about 3/4 mile north-northeast of her location.  Its lights 
were on, and as she watched, it turned toward the west in the direction of HOC.  She estimated 
the airplane™s altitude at 500 feet above ground level (agl).  She noted that nothing appeared 
unusual with the exception of its altitude, which seemed a little low to her.  The second 
airplane was 5 or 10 miles north of her location and appeared to be headed in the direction of 
Wilmington or Dayton.
About 2337, a second witness located at the Rocky Fork State Park with his family, about 1/2 
mile southeast of HOC, heard the sound of an airplane ﬁthrottle upﬂ followed by a crash.  He 
estimated that this occurred within a few seconds; ﬁvery quick.ﬂ  He heard no sounds after the 
crash.  He and his wife got into their car to search the area including the airport, but did not 
see or hear anything.  They eventually returned to their campsite.
At 0100, the accident pilot™s brother contacted local authorities.  He informed them that the 
pilot had not come home from work and that he had located the pilot™s truck in the airport 
parking lot.  A search of the fixed base operator™s facilities revealed that the accident airplane 
was not in the hangar.  In addition, the hangar door was open and the lights were on.
The airplane wreckage was located about 0718 the following morning near the Runway 23 
threshold at HOC.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a single-engine land airplane rating.  He was 
issued a third-class airman medical certificate on October 7, 2008, with a restriction for 
corrective lenses.
The pilot™s flight time logbook was not available to the NTSB.  On his most recent application 
for a medical certificate, the pilot reported a total flight time of 600 hours, with 50 hours flown 
within the preceding 6 months.
Records indicated that the pilot owned a 1965 Champion 7GCAA Citabria, N9594S.  He 
purchased that airplane in October 2006.  A log kept with that airplane suggested that it had 
been flown 1.6 hours since January 1, 2010, with the most recent log entry dated February 14, 
2010.
A flight instructor based at HOC reported that the accident pilot had successfully passed a 
flight review with him on November 23, 2008, in the pilot™s Citabria.  He began providing flight 
training to the accident pilot in 2003, and the pilot subsequently earned his private pilot 
certificate in 2004.  Federal Aviation Administration records indicate that the accident pilot 
Page 3 of 6CEN10FA181
was issued a private pilot certificate on April 26, 2004.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was a 1963 Cessna 172D, N2190Y, serial number 17249690.  It was a 4-
place, single-engine airplane, configured with a tricycle landing gear configuration.  It was 
powered by a 145-horsepower Continental O-300D reciprocating engine, serial number 27358-
D-2-D, and a 2-bladed, fixed pitch McCauley 1C172 propeller.
Maintenance records indicated that the most recent annual inspection was completed on 
October 12, 2009, at a total airframe time of 5,475.6 hours.  There were no entries in the 
maintenance logs subsequent to the annual inspection.
The flight instructor based at HOC stated that he had flown the accident airplane earlier that 
day with a different pilot and there were no issues with the aircraft.
The current owner purchased the accident airplane in April 2004.  The accident pilot 
reportedly rented the airplane from the current owner for flight training and personal flying.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The Airborne Airpark (ILN) Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS), located 19 miles 
north-northwest of HOC, recorded conditions at 0054:  Clear skies, wind from 200 degrees at 
6 knots, 10 miles visibility, temperature 16 degrees Celsius, dew point 7 degrees Celsius, 
altimeter 29.94 inches of mercury.
Conditions recorded by the ILN ASOS between 2254 on April 1st and 0254 on April 2nd 
consisted of clear skies and southerly winds at 7 knots or less.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
The non-towered airport was served by a single runway.  Runway 5-23 was 3,520 feet long by 
75 feet wide, and composed of asphalt.   Medium intensity runway lights and a two-light 
precision approach path indicator (PAPI) were installed for Runway 23.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted the Runway 23 pavement about 100 feet from the threshold.  The 
impact point was located right of the runway centerline, near the transition to the paved run-
up/back taxi turn out area, northwest of the threshold.  A depression (crater) in the runway 
pavement was present at the impact point.  In addition, the pavement exhibited impressions 
consistent with being formed by impact from the wings, propeller, and nose landing gear 
adjacent to the depression.  The pavement impressions were oriented on an approximate 
bearing of 264 degrees.  A fan-shaped debris field, extending to about 75 feet from the initial 
impact, was also oriented on an approximate 264-degree bearing.
The main wreckage, which included the propeller, engine, instrument panel, cockpit/cabin 
seats, and fuselage structure, came to rest within approximately 20 feet of the impact point.  
The propeller has separated from the engine, and the engine had separated from the airframe.  
The aft fuselage/empennage section had separated from the remainder of the fuselage.   It 
came to rest inverted about 20 feet from the impact point.  The wing assembly and center 
section of the cockpit/cabin roof had separated from the fuselage.  The assembly came to rest 
about 60 feet from the initial impact point.
The fuselage was fragmented.  The wings were crushed aft and fragmented.  The horizontal and 
Page 4 of 6CEN10FA181
vertical stabilizers were deformed, but otherwise appeared intact.  The flight controls remained 
attached to the airframe.  Control continuity was established from the control surfaces to the 
wing root and aft fuselage separation point, as applicable.  
The engine crankcase was fractured consistent with impact forces.  The forward-left (#6) 
cylinder was separated from the engine.  The remaining cylinders were deformed, but 
remained attached to the engine.  The propeller, with the propeller flange attached, had 
separated from the crankshaft.  The blades exhibited bending, twisting, and deformation, with 
leading edge gouges and chordwise scratches.
The postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any anomalies 
consistent with a preimpact failure or malfunction.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy of the pilot was performed at the Montgomery County Coroner™s Office in Dayton, 
Ohio, on April 3, 2010.  The autopsy report noted the cause of death as ﬁmultiple blunt force 
injuries.ﬂ
The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute forensic toxicology report was positive for ethanol 
in liver, lung, kidney, and muscle tissues.  Blood, urine and vitreous fluid was not available for 
testing.  The report indicated that the samples were received on May 13, 2010; 10 days after the 
autopsy.  The report also noted ﬁPutrefaction:  Yesﬂ regarding the condition of the samples.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)  (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/07/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
350 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6CEN10FA181
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N2190Y
Model/Series:
172D 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
17249690
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/12/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5476 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-300 SER
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
145 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ILN
Distance from Accident Site:
19 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0054 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
327°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
200°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.94 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
16°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hillsboro, OH (HOC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Hillsboro, OH (HOC)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Highland County Airport (HOC)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
977 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
23
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3520 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Page 6 of 6CEN10FA181
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.188889, -83.538889
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy Sorensen
Adopted Date:
04/12/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Norman L Johnson; FAA-Cincinnati FSDO; Cincinnati, OH
Steve Miller; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
Sara Irwin; Teledyne Continental Motors, Inc.; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
04/12/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75625
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
