Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Firebaugh, CA
Accident Number:
WPR17LA071
Date & Time:
03/01/2017, 1030 PST 
Registration:
N211CS
Aircraft:
BELL 206B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The commercial pilot of the helicopter reported that, while conducting an aerial application 
flight, he heard a loud bang followed by a total loss of engine power. The pilot initiated an 
autorotation to a plowed field; however, during the landing sequence, the main rotor blades 
struck the tailboom. 
Postaccident examination revealed that, when power was applied, the fuel quantity gauge 
indicated about 15 gallons of fuel when the actual amount present was about 6.5 gallons. This 
erroneous fuel level indication led the pilot to believe that more fuel was available than was 
actually in the fuel tanks. The helicopter flight manual indicated that, due to possible fuel 
sloshing in unusual attitudes or out-of-trim conditions, and one or both fuel pumps 
inoperative, the unusable fuel is 10 gallons.
The engine was subsequently installed on a test stand and several test runs revealed no 
anomalies. Further testing revealed that the aft fuel boost pump was inoperative. The thermal 
fuse was found open, consistent with overheating due to the lack of fuel being transferred 
through the pump. It is likely that, during the flight, the attitude of the helicopter was slightly 
nose-down. This allowed the fuel to transfer to the forward portion of the tank, which resulted 
in a lack of fuel flow through the aft fuel pump; the subsequent overheating triggered the 
thermal fuse, which caused the aft fuel pump to become inoperative. 
It is likely that the total loss of engine power was the result of fuel exhaustion.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Page 2 of 6WPR17LA071
A total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion. Contributing to the accident was the 
improper calibration of the fuel quantity gauge, which led the pilot to believe that there was 
adequate fuel onboard.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Fuel - Fluid level (Cause)
Fuel quantity indicator - Malfunction (Factor)
Fuel indication system - Malfunction (Factor)
Page 3 of 6WPR17LA071
Factual Information
On March 1, 2017, about 1030 Pacific standard time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N211CS, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power near 
Firebaugh, California. The commercial pilot was not injured. The helicopter was registered to 
and operated by West Valley Aviation Inc., under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal 
Regulations
 Part 137. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed 
for the local aerial application flight, which originated from a nearby staging area about 1 
minute prior to the accident. 
The pilot reported that during an agricultural aerial application flight, he was flying about 5 ft 
over the crop at an airspeed of 70 mph, when he heard a loud bang followed by a loss of engine 
power. The helicopter shook violently as he rolled down the throttle twist-grip to the detent 
stop. As he reached over with his right hand to press the throttle detent switch, he 
inadvertently rolled on the throttle slightly and heard the engine begin to spool up in RPM, at 
which time he was able to reach the throttle detent switch to close the throttle. An autorotation 
was executed and upon touchdown in a freshly plowed soft field, the main rotor blade struck 
the tailboom and the helicopter came to rest upright. 
The pilot stated that he had refueled the helicopter about 20 minutes prior to the accident with 
20 to 25 gallons of fuel. He estimated that at the time of the accident, he had about 10 gallons 
of fuel on board.
Postaccident examination of the helicopter by the pilot revealed that the tailboom was 
separated forward of the tail rotor gearbox. The helicopter was recovered to a secure location 
for further examination.
Examination of the helicopter by representatives of Bell Helicopter and Rolls Royce under the 
supervision of a Federal Aviation Administration inspector revealed that when power was 
applied to the helicopter, the fuel quantity gauge indicated about 15 gallons of fuel. The fuel 
tank was drained and contained about 6.5 gallons of fuel. When the fuel was poured into the 
fuel tank, the fuel quantity gauge displayed about 6 gallons. The forward boost pump was 
found operational; however, the aft boost pump was inoperative. No preimpact anomalies were 
observed with the main rotor assembly, main rotor drive system, or flight controls. 
The engine was removed and subsequently sent to Keystone Aviation for further examination. 
The engine was installed on a test stand and subsequently run. Throughout 6 test runs, the 
engine appeared to run normally with the exception of various chip detector lights throughout 
about 33 minutes of total run time. The engine was disassembled to gain access to the gearbox. 
Damage was noted to the forward face of the separator on the #3 bearing, which could have 
been sustained during replacement of the double lip seal with a single lip seal to accommodate 
the engine test run. No additional anomalies were noted with the engine. 
Examination of the fuel pump revealed that the thermal fuse was open consistent with over-
heating. Representatives from Parker Hannifin stated that the fuel pump thermal fuse is 
Page 4 of 6WPR17LA071
designed to shut power off to the fuel pump when the fuel pump casing builds excess heat due 
to being run without fluid (fuel).
The Bell Helicopter Flight Manual, section 3, page 3-8, states "Due to possible fuel sloshing in 
unusual attitudes or out of trim conditions, and one or both fuel pumps inoperative, the 
unusable fuel is ten gallons. 
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Enroute-cruise
Off-field or emergency landing
Autorotation
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/19/2016
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
4599 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4200 hours (Total, this make and model), 4559 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 160 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 100 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3.7 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6WPR17LA071
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELL
Registration:
N211CS
Model/Series:
206B B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
1979
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted; Normal
Serial Number:
2775
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid;
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/22/2017, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3201 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
20 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
ROLLS-ROYCE
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
250-C20B
Registered Owner:
WEST VALLEY AVIATION INC
Rated Power:
420 hp
Operator:
WEST VALLEY AVIATION INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Agricultural Aircraft (137)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KMAE, 253 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
18 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1853 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
69°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.42 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Firebaugh, CA 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Firebaugh, CA 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1029 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
36.881389, -120.466389 (est)
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Joshua Cawthra
Adopted Date:
11/06/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Mike Coreberly; Federal Aviation Administration; Fresno, CA
Gary Howe; Bell; Euless, TX
Jon Michael; Rolls Royce; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
11/06/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94799
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
