National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HOMESTEAD, FL
Accident Number: MIA00LA063
Date & Time: 01/01/2000, 1300 EST
Registration: N752CC
Aircraft: Cessna 550
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The pilot-in-command (PIC) stated he was in cruise flight at 1,000 feet, 200 knots, 5 miles from the destination airport when the airplane experienced an in-flight collision with a bird on the leading edge of the right wing.
The PIC notified the control tower and landed without further incident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: An inadvertent in-flight collision with a bird in cruise flight resulting in substantial damage to the airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane sustained substantial damage.
The airline transport-rated pilot-in-command (PIC), copilot, and sensor operator reported no injuries.
The flight originated from Miami, Florida, about 5 minutes before the accident.
The accident was reported to the NTSB on January 5, 2000.
The PIC stated they were in cruise flight at 1,000 feet, 200 knots, and about 5 miles north of Homestead Air Force Base when they experienced an in-flight collision with a big bird.
The bird hit the leading edge of the right wing.
He notified tower and landed without further incident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 41, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane; Helicopter Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
