National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MORRISTOWN, AZ
Accident Number: LAX97LA116
Date & Time: 03/02/1997, 1750 MST
Registration: N39W
Aircraft: Beech J35
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While in cruise flight the pilot felt a slight vibration and immediately made a power change without affect.
After reducing the engine rpm from 2300 to 2100, the airplane vibrated hard for a split second and then smoothed out.
At that point, the propeller had separated from the engine with part of the crankshaft.
Metallurgical examination of the crankshaft revealed that the fatigue failure occurred inside the crankshaft bore 1.7 inches forward of the crankshaft oil seal.
The point of origin was at two corrosion pits.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the crankshaft due to improper inspection/overhaul procedures.
The pilot received minor injuries and the passenger received serious injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal cross-country flight and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that while in cruise flight he felt a vibration and immediately made a power change without affect.
He further reduced the engine rpm from 2,300 to 2,100, the airplane vibrated hard for a split second and then smoothed out.
At that point, the propeller separated from the engine with part of the crankshaft.
The failure occurred over remote desert terrain and the propeller was not recovered.
ENGINE INFORMATION According to the engine logbook, the engine had been overhauled on April 11, 1989, at 1,819 total hours.
At the time of the accident, the engine had accumulated about 937 hours since the overhaul.
Postaccident metallurgical examination of the crankshaft revealed that it had failed approximately 1.7 inches forward of the crankshaft oil seal.
From this fatigue cracking origin, it propagated at a 45-degree angle to the axis of the crankshaft forward and aft.
The origin was located inside the crankshaft bore at two corrosion pits.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
