National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PUEBLO, CO
Accident Number: FTW97LA111
Date & Time: 03/01/1997, 1155 MST
Registration: N2396S
Aircraft: Cessna TR182
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis On the first flight following maintenance to the nose landing gear because of a ground incident, the nose gear failed to extend.
The pilot elected to raise all the landing gear and land gear up.
Inspection following the accident revealed the nose landing gear doors to be improperly adjusted preventing the nose landing gear from extending.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Improper repair to the nose landing gear assembly.
A factor was binding of the nose gear extension assembly due to the improper repair.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) LANDING GEAR,NOSE GEAR ASSEMBLY - BINDING(MECHANICAL) 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,MAJOR REPAIR - IMPROPER - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL Factual Information On March 1, 1997, at 1155 mountain standard time, a Cessna TR182, N2396S, sustained substantial damage when the nose gear failed to extend for landing at Pueblo Municipal Airport, Pueblo, Colorado.
The private pilot and passenger were not injured on this personal flight operating under 14 CFR Part 91.
No flight plan was filed and visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The flight departed Alamosa, Colorado, at 1115.
This was the first flight after repairing the nose landing gear following a ground incident which occurred on February 21, 1997.
The flight departed Alamosa with the pilot occupying the left seat and his 2 year old daughter in a car seat strapped in the right seat.
On arrival in Pueblo, the nose gear failed to extend.
After attempts to lower the gear failed, the pilot elected to raise the landing gear and landed with all the landing gear in the up position.
Examination of the aircraft by a certified repair station following the accident revealed the nose gear doors were not properly adjusted when maintenance was performed on the landing gear following the previous incident.
The lack of proper adjustment prevented the nose landing gear from extending.
Aircraft damage was to the left wing and underside of the fuselage in the area of the nose landing gear assembly.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 41, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
