National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: WEST CHICAGO, IL
Accident Number: CHI97LA076
Date & Time: 03/02/1997, 1400 CST
Registration: N9420W
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-235
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During climbout after a touch-and-go, the airplane sustained a total loss of engine power.
The airplane was landed in the grass on the airport property.
No engine discrepancies were found during examination of the engine.
The right main fuel tank was selected and contained approximately five quarts of fuel.
The aircraft's owners manual listed the unusable fuel for all our fuel tanks on the airplane, at one pint each.
The right main fuel tank gauge functioned normally following the accident, and no leaks were found in the right main fuel tank.
The carburetor's fuel bowl was not compromised in the accident, and was nearly empty.
The one fluid ounce of fluid removed from the carburetor fuel bowl, was one third water and two thirds gasoline.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: fuel starvation due to the pilot's improper fuel tank selection.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM - STARVATION 2.
The pilot was executing touch and go landings when he reported a loss of engine power shortly after taking off from runway 28, at the Dupage Airport, West Chicago, Illinois.
After the pilot reported the loss of power, the control tower cleared the airplane to land on any available runway.
The airplane landed on the airport property, south of the departure end of runway 28, in the grass.
Both pilots on board the airplane sustained minor injuries in the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was not operating on a flight plan, and VFR conditions existed at the time of the accident.
An interview of the pilot was conducted by the investigator in charge (IIC) on the morning of March 3, 1997.
The pilot reported that shortly after takeoff, at approximately 200 feet above the ground, the aircraft engine started to lose power, followed immediately by a total loss of engine power.
The pilot reported that the electric boost pump was on, and that he was too busy flying the airplane to attempt to switch fuel tanks.
When asked which fuel tank the fuel selector was on at the time of the accident, the pilot reported that he remembered it being selected to the right main fuel tank.
The pilot reported that on the day of the accident, the airplane had been flown to Rockford, Illinois, then to Janesville, Wisconsin, then back to the Dupage Airport.
The airplane was using automobile gasoline, and the pilot reported that he used gas cans to fuel the airplane himself.
The pilot reported on the day of the accident that he had drained some water out of the airplane's fuel tanks.
The airplane was inspected by the investigator in charge during the afternoon of March 3, 1997.
The drain plug for the carburetor was removed, and approximately one fluid ounce of fluid was removed from the carburetor.
The fluid appeared to be one third water, and two thirds automobile gas.
The carburetor's fuel bowl capacity is greater than one fluid ounce.
The carburetor's fuel bowl was not compromised in the accident.
The finger strainer was removed, and found to be clean with no significant debris noted.
The carburetor contained a metal float.
The carburetor was found broken loose from the engine with all fuel lines still attached.
Mud was found inside the accelerator pump of the carburetor.
When the fuel line which runs from the firewall fitting to the input side of the fuel pump was removed, only a trace of fuel was present.
The gascalator on the bottom of the fuselage was drained, and no water contamination in the fuel was noted.
The right main fuel tank was drained, and contained slightly less than 5 quarts of fluid, which appeared to be automobile gasoline.
Both wing tip tanks contained some fuel, the left tip tank was leaking fuel while the IIC was working on the airplane.
The left main tank gauge showed approximately eight gallons of remaining fuel.
Each of the four fuel tanks on the airplane was capable of supplying fuel to the engine area, when tested following the accident.
The IIC reviewed the Aircraft Owners Manual for the accident aircraft.
The unusable fuel in the owners manual was listed at one pint for each fuel tank.
After the right main tank was checked for remaining fluids, it was filled with water to check for leaks.
No leaks were found in the right main fuel tank when the water was allowed to remain in it for forty minutes.
After testing the right main tank for leaks the electric boost pump was used to drain the right main fuel tank, along with the tank's fuel drain.
During the draining of the water the right main tank's fuel gauge was checked for accuracy.
The fuel gauge registered full, when the tank was full of water.
The gauge was slightly below the empty mark, when the water in the fuel tank stopped flowing during draining.
The spark plugs were removed from the engine, and inspected.
All spark plugs were moderately sooted.
The magneto with the impulse coupling was checked, and would create spark on all six spark plugs.
Fuel was poured into the fuel line which was attached to the input side of the fuel pump.
When the propeller was rotated by hand the mechanical fuel pump pumped gasoline.
The air filter was opened and inspected.
A large amount of mud was present in the air filter area.
Compression was found on all of the engine's cylinders, when tested.
The airplane's left wing was crushed, the left main landing gear wheel was separated.
The nose gear had collapsed.
The propeller, engine mount, and firewall were all bent.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
