National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: PITTSTOWN, NJ
Accident Number: NYC97LA059
Date & Time: 03/02/1997, 1600 EST
Registration: N88AA
Aircraft: Beech J35
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The pilot reported that while preparing the airplane for landing, he placed the fuel selector to the auxiliary position.
During climb-out following an aborted landing, the engine lost power as the landing gear retracted.
The airplane landed back on the runway and came to rest 50 feet from the departure end.
The pilot stated, 'The Bonanza Manual states not to use auxiliaries for take-off as there is a possibility they could unport.'
According to the limitations section of the Beechcraft Pilot's Operating Handbook for the J35 Bonanza, 'Use auxiliary fuel in level flight only and do not use for take off or landing.'
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's placing the fuel selector in the improper position causing fuel starvation and a loss of engine power.
The loss of engine power resulted in a forced landing on the runway during an aborted landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 1.
FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION 2.
(C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - RUNWAY Factual Information On March 2, 1997, at 1600 eastern standard time, a Beech J-35 Bonanza, N88AA, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following an aborted landing at the Sky Manor Airport (N40) near Pittstown, New Jersey.
The certificated private pilot and commercial pilot rated flight instructor were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed.
The local flight originated at Morristown, New Jersey at approximately 1430, and was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
He stated, "The pilot has to move his (left) leg and bend over to look at it."
The pilot reported, "There was no indication of turbulence during the approach but when over the numbers the plane dropped and bounced.
I was uncomfortable with the situation and called for a go-around."
The pilot reported that during the initial climb of the aborted landing, the engine lost power as the gear retracted.
He stated that the airplane landed back on the runway and came to rest 50 feet from the departure end.
The pilot reported that when he went back in the airplane to turn the fuel selector off, he "..was amazed..." he found the fuel selector in the auxiliary position.
The pilot stated, "The Bonanza Manual states not to use auxiliaries for take-off as there is a possibility they could unport."
The pilot did not report any mechanical deficiencies and an inspection of the airplane by Federal Aviation Administration Safety Inspectors revealed no pre-impact anomalies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 55, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
