Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Carson City, NV
Accident Number:
WPR17LA072
Date & Time:
03/01/2017, 1250 PST 
Registration:
N39894
Aircraft:
BELLANCA 17-30A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel related
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airline transport pilot was conducting the airplane's first flight after about 1 1/2 years of 
inactivity and the completion of an annual inspection. A witness reported that the airplane 
took off normally, but the retractable landing gear remained extended. As the airplane neared 
the end of the runway, about 300 ft above ground level, the engine sounded as though it 
"decreased to idle." The airplane entered a right, 180o turn and descended rapidly before 
impacting the ground.
During a postaccident test run, the engine operated normally at both idle and full power 
settings and during abrupt changes between idle and full power. However, it operated 
inconsistently at 2,100 rpm for about 30 seconds before stabilizing at that power setting. 
During this time, the fuel pump pressure fluctuated. Following the test run, the fuel manifold 
valve was disassembled, revealing rust on the screen, lower housing, and plunger, consistent 
with exposure to water. The diaphragm was removed and a small amount of fuel was found on 
the "dry" side of the valve; the vent extending from this section was examined and clear of 
debris. Examination of the airframe and engine maintenance logs revealed that the airplane 
flew a total of 73 hours and underwent 3 annual inspections in the previous 8 years. It is likely 
that water accumulated in the fuel system sometime during the airplane's prolonged periods of 
disuse, resulting in corrosion of the fuel manifold valve's internal components. Because the 
corrosion was internal, it would not have been detected without disassembly of the fuel 
manifold, which is not part of the annual inspection procedure. It is likely that this corrosion 
caused the manifold valve plunger to temporarily stick, which restricted fuel flow to the engine 
and resulted in the anomalous operation during the postaccident test run as well as the loss of 
power on the accident flight. Following the loss of engine power, the pilot initiated a turn back 
to the runway, during which the airplane exceeded its critical angle of attack and experienced 
an aerodynamic stall. 
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 6WPR17LA072
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power due to internal corrosion of the fuel manifold valve. Also causal 
was the pilot's decision to return to the runway following the loss of engine power shortly after 
takeoff, and his exceedance of the airplane's critical angle of attack during the turn, which 
resulted in an aerodynamic stall.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel distribution - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Fuel distribution - Malfunction (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 6WPR17LA072
Factual Information
On March 1, 2017, about 1250 Pacific standard time, a Bellanca 17-30A, N39894, experienced a 
loss of engine power shortly after takeoff from the Carson Airport (CXP), Carson City, Nevada. 
The pilot, sole occupant, was seriously injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage 
to both wings. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot as a 14 
Code of Federal 
Regulations
 Part 91 personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of 
the accident no flight plan was filed for the local flight. 
At the time of this report, the pilot was unable to provide a statement or complete the NTSB 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report Form 6120.1. 
A witness reported that he observed the airplane takeoff normally, with the exception that the 
landing gear remained in the down position. At the end of the runway, when the airplane was 
no higher than 300 feet, it sounded as if the engine decreased to idle. The airplane made a right 
180
o
 turn and descended rapidly before impacting the ground. 
Postaccident examination of the airframe revealed continuous control continuity throughout 
the airframe. In addition, control continuity was established from the cabin to the throttle, 
mixture, and propeller controls. The fuel lines were intact from the engine to the firewall, and 
from the wing tanks to the fuselage; the remaining lines were inaccessible due to airframe 
damage. Air was blown from the engine driven fuel pump inlet line aft through the fuel selector 
and air/fuel exited the left wing fuel tank outlet line. With no obvious anomalies with the 
airframe or engine, the engine was shipped to Continental Motors to be run in a test cell.
The engine was installed into a test cell. It started normally and ran for a while at 1,200 RPM 
with no anomalies noted. The power was increased to 2,100 rpm and the engine operated 
inconsistently; the fuel pump pressure was fluctuating, and after about 30 seconds the engine 
stabilized. After stabilization, a magneto check was completed and no abnormalities were 
noted. The engine power was increased to 2,400 RPM momentarily before full power was 
applied; the engine continued to operate normally. The engine power was abruptly changed 
between idle and full power several times with no anomalies noted. Unable to recreate the 
inconsistent running engine, it was shut down normally and removed from the test cell. 
The fuel components were removed from the engine. The fuel manifold valve was disassembled 
and rust indicative of corrosion was present on the screen and lower housing of the unit. The 
plunger was removed and it also exhibited rust. The diaphragm was removed and a small 
amount of fuel was found on the "dry" side of the valve; the vent extending from this section 
was examined and clear of debris.
The most recent entries from the airplane's airframe and engine maintenance logbooks were 
three annual inspections that occurred over a span of about 8 years. The tach time difference 
between these inspections was a total of 73 hours, for an average of 9 hours a year. The wife of 
the pilot reported that they purchased the airplane in 2002, and it has been parked in a hangar 
for a majority of their ownership. About 1.5 years leading up to the accident, the airplane had 
been undergoing an annual inspection and new paint, which was completed on February 24, 
Page 4 of 6WPR17LA072
2017. When the maintenance was completed, the pilot ran the airplane's engine on the ground 
for about 45 minutes with no anomalies noted; the accident flight was the first flight post 
maintenance. 
According to a Continental Motors representative the fuel manifold valve is generally not 
disassembled by a mechanic in the field, and there are rarely issues with this engine 
component. If fuel issues are suspected, the troubleshooting section of the Continental Motors 
Standard Practices Manual (M-0) directs the mechanic to an isolated fix. If the problem is 
isolated to the fuel manifold, it is to be removed and either sent to an appropriate overhaul 
facility, or replaced by a new or rebuild from Continental Motors. 
History of Flight
Initial climb
Fuel related (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Engineer
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine 
Sea; Single-engine Land; Single-
engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/28/2016
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
22000 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6WPR17LA072
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BELLANCA
Registration:
N39894
Model/Series:
17-30A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1973
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
73-30544
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/24/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3394 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
IO 520 SERIES
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CXP, 4705 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1255 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
100°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.41 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / -9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Carson City, NV (CXP)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Carson City, NV (CXP)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1250 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Carson Airport (CXP)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4705 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
9
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6100 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 6 of 6WPR17LA072
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
39.192222, -119.732778 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Samantha A Link
Adopted Date:
01/25/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Aaron Southerland; Federal Aviation Administration; Reno, NV
Kurt Gibson; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
01/25/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94804
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
