Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Naples, FL
Accident Number:
MIA01LA054
Date & Time:
01/02/2001, 1400 EST 
Registration:
N45CF
Aircraft:
Beech 200
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
7 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane was parked by an unknown person from Naples Airport Authority after landing 
several days earlier and according to personnel from the Naples Airport Authority, remained in 
the same position that it had been parked from then to the arrival of the pilot to depart on the 
accident date.  The pilot stated that personnel from Naples Airport Authority were busy and 
unable to take several passengers to the airplane from the fixed base operator (FBO).  During 
the preflight, he noted the light pole was just behind the outboard side of the right wing.  He 
obtained his IFR clearance and was cleared to taxi.  He began to taxi without a marshaller and 
with a row of airplanes ahead of his location, he initiated an immediate left turn to maintain 
right wingtip clearance with parked airplanes.  During the turn, the right horizontal stabilizer 
contacted the light pole.  Individuals nearby who witnessed the collision ran near the airplane 
and got the pilots attention who then secured the airplane.  According to a Federal Aviation 
Administration airworthiness inspector who examined the airplane, the leading edge of the 
right horizontal stabilizer and the forward and aft spars of the vertical stabilizer were damaged.  
Examination of the area where the airplane had been parked revealed double concentric circles 
pole painted on the ramp centered on the light pole; the outer circle had a radius of 
approximately 32 feet.  Radial lines were painted on the ramp from the base of the light pole to 
the inner circle line.  A north/south oriented taxiway line west of where the airplane had been 
parked was blacked out; no leadout line was noted from the spot where the airplane had been 
parked forward to the blacked out taxiway line.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the pilot to obtain assistance from the FBO in the form of a marshaller and 
failure of the pilot to maintain clearance resulting in the on-ground collision with the light 
pole.
Page 2 of 5MIA01LA054
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: TAXI - TO TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) PROPER ASSISTANCE - NOT OBTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 5MIA01LA054
Factual Information
On January 02, 2001, about 1400 eastern standard time, a Beech 200, N45CF, 
registered to Gray Aircraft Accessories, Inc., collided with a light pole while taxiing on the ramp 
to takeoff at the Naples Municipal Airport, Naples, Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR 
Part 91 personal flight.  The airplane was substantially damaged and the private-rated pilot and 
six passengers were not injured.  The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The airplane was parked by an unknown person from Naples Airport Authority after 
landing several days earlier and according to personnel from the Naples Airport Authority, 
remained in the same position that it had been parked from then to the arrival of the pilot to 
depart on the accident date.  The pilot stated that personnel from Naples Airport Authority 
were busy and unable to take several passengers to the airplane from the fixed-base operator 
(FBO).  During the preflight, he noted the light pole was just behind the outboard side of the 
right wing.  He obtained his IFR clearance and was cleared to taxi.  He began to taxi without a 
marshaller and with a row of airplanes ahead of his location, he initiated an immediate left 
turn to maintain right wing tip clearance with parked airplanes.  During the turn, the right 
horizontal stabilizer contacted the light pole.  Individuals nearby who witnessed the collision 
ran near the airplane and got the pilots attention who then secured the airplane.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector who examined 
the airplane, the leading edge of the right horizontal stabilizer and the forward and aft spars of 
the vertical stabilizer were damaged.
Examination of the area where the airplane had been parked revealed double concentric 
circles pole painted on the ramp centered on the light pole; the outer circle had a radius of 
approximately 32 feet.  Radial lines were painted on the ramp from the base of the light pole to 
the inner circle line.  A north-south oriented taxiway line west of where the airplane had been 
parked was blacked out; no lead out line was noted from the spot where the airplane had been 
parked forward to the blacked out taxiway line.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
60, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/14/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/29/2000
Flight Time:
3168 hours (Total, all aircraft), 895 hours (Total, this make and model), 23 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5MIA01LA054
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N45CF
Model/Series:
200 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
BB-736
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/25/2000, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
12500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
180 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
6035 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A
Registered Owner:
Gray Aircraft Accessories, 
Inc.
Rated Power:
850 hp
Operator:
Laman A. Gray
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KAPF, 9 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1346 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 15000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 25000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.34 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Naples, FL (KAPF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Louisville, KY (KLOU)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1400 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Naples Municipal (APF)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
9 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
Unknown
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Page 5 of 5MIA01LA054
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
6 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
7 None
Latitude, Longitude:
26.152500, -81.775556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
07/30/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert D Hardwick; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Miami, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
