National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Hudson, CO
Accident Number: DEN06LA055
Date & Time: 04/01/2006, 1625 MST
Registration: N924LB
Aircraft: McLaughlin Rans S-7
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot there was no intention to land.
He stated that he had no recollection after turning final, but did recall "radical maneuvering to avoid hitting" the tank.
According to the statement submitted by the pilot-rated passenger, the airplane touched down and the pilot "had trouble with directional control."
The passenger stated that the pilot added power, became airborne, and struck the tank, resulting in substantial damage.
An examination of the airplane's systems revealed no anomalies.
The routine aviation weather report reported, wind 340 degrees at 21 knots, gusting to 27 knots; with peak wind recorded at 29 minutes past the hour at 230 degrees at 29 knots.
According to the FAA, the pilot did not hold a tailwheel endorsement.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during an attempted landing.
Contributing factors include the pilot's improper in-flight planning and decision making, the pilot's lack of experience in tailwheel airplanes, the pilot's lack of a tailwheel endorsement, and the gusty winds.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) LACK OF FAMILIARITY WITH AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(F) LACK OF CERTIFICATION - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 6.
OBJECT - OTHER Factual Information On April 1, 2006, at 1625 mountain standard time, a McLaughlin Rans S-7, N924LB, piloted by an airline transport pilot, was substantially damaged when it impacted an oil tank while landing at Platte Valley Airpark (18V), Hudson, Colorado.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 without a flight plan.
The pilot sustained minor injuries and the pilot-rated passenger sustained serious injuries.
The local flight departed approximately 1600.
According to the emergency response personnel, the pilot stated they were attempting to land on runway 33 (4,100 feet x 40 feet, asphalt) when the airplane impacted the oil tank on the left side of the runway.
Both the pilot and private pilot-rated passenger submitted a Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report Form (NTSB Form 6120.1/2).
According to the pilot's statement, the purpose of the flight was to introduce the pilot to the make and model of the airplane.
There was no intention to land.
He stated that he had no recollection after turning final for runway 33, but did recall "radical maneuvering to avoid hitting" the tank.
According to the statement submitted by the pilot-rated passenger, the airplane touched down and the pilot "had trouble with directional control."
The passenger stated that the pilot added power, became airborne, and struck the tank.
The right wing separated from the airplane, and the right horizontal stabilizer was bent up and wrinkled.
An examination of the airplane's systems, conducted by an Airworthiness Inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), revealed no anomalies.
The closest official weather observation station was Denver International Airport (DEN), Denver, Colorado, located 14 nautical miles south of the accident site.
According to the FAA, the pilot did not hold a tailwheel endorsement.
According to CFR Part 61.31(h) 2 (i) "Additional training required for operating tailwheel airplanes.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
