The airplane was substantially damaged during a forced landing on a road.  The pilot reported 
that while in level flight the engine "blew up."  He executed a forced landing on a road and 
elected to delay lowering of the landing gear until the airplane had cleared a car that was 
traveling in the opposite direction.  Once clear of the car, the pilot lowered the landing gear, 
but it did not fully extend due to the low altitude.  Examination of the engine revealed a hole in 
the crankcase adjacent to the number 6 connecting rod journal.  Additionally, the number 6 
connecting rod and piston were found fractured.  No determination could be made regarding 
the failure of the connecting rod.
The failure of the connecting rod which resulted in the loss of engine power during cruise flight 
and subsequent forced landing.  A contributing factor was the delayed lowering of the landing 
gear in order to clear the other vehicle encountered during the forced landing.
On July 2, 2004, about 1715 central daylight time, a Beech model A36, N3248T, piloted by a 
commercial pilot, was substantially damaged as a result of a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power and subsequent in-flight fire.  The 14 CFR Part 91 business flight was operating 
in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  No injuries were reported.  The flight 
originated from the Mason City Municipal Airport, Mason City, Iowa, at 1630, and was bound 
for the Joe Foss Field Airport, Sioux Falls, South Dakota.
The pilot reported that about 15 minutes into the flight, while level at 4,500 feet mean sea level, 
the airplane engine "blew up."  The pilot stated that he executed a forced landing on a road.  He 
stated that he kept the landing gear retracted to insure that he could clear a car that was 
traveling in the opposite direction.  The pilot stated that once clear of the car he lowered the 
landing gear, but due to the low altitude, the landing gear did not fully extend before contact 
with the road occurred.
Examination of the engine revealed a hole in the top of the crankcase near the number 5 and 6 
cylinders.  The hole in the crankcase was aligned with the number 6 connecting rod journal.  
All of the engine accessories remained intact and attached to the engine. 
Fractured pieces of the number 6 connecting rod, piston and piston pin were found within the 
crankcase.  The fractured piston exhibited signatures consistent with overload failure.  The 
fracture surfaces of the connecting rod were smeared and no determination could be made 
concerning the fracture surfaces.
The number 5 piston was lodged within its cylinder.  The connecting rod remained attached to 
the piston.  The connecting rod cap was separated from the connecting rod.  The fracture 
surfaces were smeared and no determination could be made concerning the fracture surfaces.
Examination of the main bearings and the connecting rod bearings of the undamaged 
connecting rods revealed no evidence of oil starvation.
