The 1,765-hour instrument rated private pilot was executing the ILS RWY 5 instrument 
approach when he over flew the airport, then made a left turn and collided with mountainous 
terrain approximately five miles northeast of the airport.  A witness was in her home when she 
heard the sound of an airplane "flying really low." She said the engine sounded normal, and 
then the sound of the engine stopped very "abruptly."  The pilot was vectored by air traffic 
control (ATC) to intercept the localizer course for the ILS RWY 5 approach.  A review of ATC 
communications and radar data revealed at 1035:53, when the airplane was approximately 5.5 
miles southwest of HOSSY intersection, an approach controller instructed the pilot to, "fly 
heading 020 degrees intercept the localizer and maintain 3,000 feet until established."  The 
pilot acknowledged, and began a right turn towards the airport.  Over the next two minutes, the 
airplane tracked a 020 degree heading but remained south of the final approach course.  At 
1038:10, the airplane was just southeast of HOSSY at an altitude of 3,000 feet msl.  At this 
point, the airplane was 700 feet above the published approach altitude, which was 2,300 feet 
msl, and the pilot had not reported established on the final approach course.  At 1039:25, the 
approach controller conducted a position relief briefing and discussed the airplane's approach 
with the relief controller.  The controller stated to the relief controller, "he's probably going to 
miss...I turned him on too late probably gonna miss yeah he's too high he's missed it now."  At 
1039:25, the pilot reported established on the final approach course.  The airplane was 2.5 
miles past HOSSY and three miles from the runway at an altitude of 3,000 feet msl.  The relief 
controller responded, "roger change to advisory approved report your arrival time this 
frequency."  The pilot acknowledged.  The relief controller then replied, "well just make sure 
you got this approach you are cleared for the i l s runway five approach and change to advisory 
approved report your arrival time this frequency."  The pilot responded, "two three romeo 
cleared for the i l s runway five I'll report to you when I am down."  No further transmissions 
were received from the pilot. Both controllers acknowledged the pilot's abnormal approach and 
failed to provide known information that may have assisted the pilot in determining whether to 
continue with the approach or take alternate action as required per FAA Order 7110.65, "Air 
Traffic Control" paragraph 5-9-2, Final Approach Course Interception. Examination of the 
airplane and engine revealed no mechanical deficiencies. 
Page 2 of 10FTW04FA172
The pilot's failure to fly a stabilized, published instrument approach procedure, which resulted 
in a collision with mountainous terrain.  Factors were the clouds and the air traffic controllers' 
failure to provide known information that may have assisted the pilot in determining whether 
to continue with the approach or take alternate action.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 2, 2004, at 1043 central daylight time, a Piper PA-32-300 single-engine airplane, 
N4123R, was substantially damaged after colliding with mountainous terrain while 
maneuvering near Indian Mountain, Hot Springs, Arkansas.  The instrument rated private 
pilot/owner, the sole occupant of the airplane, was fatally injured.  An instrument flight rules 
(IFR) flight plan was filed for the cross-country flight that originated at Lebanon-Springfield 
Airport (6I2), near Springfield, Kentucky, about 0700, destined for Hot Springs/Memorial 
Airport (HOT), near Hot Springs, Arkansas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
personal flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
A witness was in her home located on Indian Mountain.  She was talking on the telephone, 
when she heard the sound of an airplane "flying really low" near her home.  The witness said 
the engine sounded normal and "it wasn't sputtering or anything like that...then the sound of 
the engine stopped very abruptly."  
A review of air traffic control communications revealed that the pilot received radar vectors to 
intercept the localizer course for the ILS RWY 5 approach.   
At 1007:39, the pilot contacted the Memphis Air Route Traffic Control Center and advised he 
was at an altitude of 5,000 feet mean sea level (msl).  An approach controller acknowledged the 
transmission and instructed the pilot to fly a heading of 200 degrees.  The pilot responded, 
"heading two zero zero."  
At 1017:29, the controller instructed the pilot to fly a heading of 230 degrees, and the pilot 
acknowledged.  
At 1020:37, the controller asked the pilot, "and four one two three romeo can you reduce your 
speed about fifteen knots or so", which the pilot responded, "roger."
At 1024:05,  the controller requested the pilot's indicated airspeed, which the pilot advised, 
"three romeo is indicating a hundred and twenty five knots."  The controller stated, "roger."  
At 1032:18, the controller instructed the pilot to fly a heading of 290 degrees, and the pilot 
acknowledged.  
At 1034:50, the controller instructed the pilot to descend and maintain 4,000 feet msl, and the 
pilot acknowledged.
At 1035:22, the controller stated, "four one two three romeo fly heading zero one zero and 
intercept the localizer."  The pilot acknowledged by stating, "zero one zero intercept the 
localizer two three romeo." The controller responded, "and two three romeo, I'm gonna bring 
you in just a bit high if that's okay."  The pilot responded, "two three romeo okay." 
At 1035:53, the controller stated, "november four one two three romeo your position is eight 
miles southeast of Hossy, fly heading zero two zero, intercept the localizer, maintain three 
thousand till established."   The pilot acknowledged the instructions and stated, "two three 
romeo, maintain three thousand, intercept the local, I'll let you know when I'm established."
At 1038:49, the controller handling the airplane was relieved by another controller.  The 
controller conducted a position relief briefing with the relief controller and had a short 
discussion regarding the airplane's approach. The controller said to the relief controller, "he's 
probably gonna miss", which the relief controller responded by saying, " turn him on too early 
late."  The controller replied, "I turned him on too late, probably gonna miss, yeah he's too 
high, he's missed it now he missed it he's too high."   
At 1039:25, the pilot stated, "memphis center two three romeo is established."  The relief 
controller instructed the pilot to, "change to advisory approved report your arrival time this 
frequency."  The pilot acknowledged, and stated, "three romeo switching to advisory."  The 
relief controller stated, "ah well just make sure you got this ah approach you are cleared for the 
ILS runway five approach and change to advisory approved report your arrival time this 
frequency."  The pilot responded by saying, "two three romeo cleared for the ILS runway five 
I'll report to you when I am down."  No further transmissions were received from the pilot.     
Data downloaded from a hand-held global positioning system (GPS) found at the crash site 
revealed that the airplane departed Springfield about 0700 and proceeded westbound toward 
Hot Springs.  A review of the last eight minutes of recorded data revealed the airplane 
approached Hot Springs Airport from the southwest, and was abeam HOSSY, the final 
approach fix, at 1038:08 at an altitude of 3,055 feet mean sea level (msl), and a groundspeed of 
127 knots.  The airplane made a series of left and right turns as it proceeded along the localizer 
course toward the airport.
Two minutes and 36 seconds later, the airplane was abeam the missed approach point at an 
altitude of 2,536 feet msl, and a ground speed of 114 knots.  For the next two minutes and 30 
seconds, the airplane continued to descend as it proceeded on a northeasterly heading away 
from the airport.  A review of the last 11 seconds of recorded data revealed that the airplane 
began a left turn to the north before the data ended at 1043:30 at an altitude of 970 feet, and a 
ground speed of 111 knots.  The last GPS coordinate was recorded at 34 degrees, 31 minutes 
north latitude, and 93 degrees, 01 minutes west longitude, approximately five miles northeast 
of the airport.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land and instrument 
airplane.  His most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class medical was 
issued on August 27, 2002.  A review of the pilot's logbooks revealed he had accumulated a 
total of approximately 1,765 flight hours, of which 115 hours were in simulated instrument 
conditions and 58 hours were in actual instrument conditions.  The pilot was current for 
instrument flight conditions and had completed a biennial flight review on October 18, 2002.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
Hot Springs Airport was equipped with an automated surface observation system (ASOS). 
At 1035, the weather was reported as wind from 220 degrees at 8 knots, visibility 8 statute 
miles, overcast clouds at 7,000 feet agl, broken clouds at 4,200 feet agl, and scattered clouds at 
1,200 feet agl.  The temperature was 79 degrees Fahrenheit and the dewpoint was 72 degrees 
Fahrenheit.
At 1053, the wind was from 220 degrees at 4 knots, visibility 7 statute miles, overcast clouds at 
2,100 feet agl, broken clouds at 1,300 feet agl, and scattered clouds at 800 feet agl.  The 
temperature was 76 degrees Fahrenheit, and the dewpoint 73 degrees Fahrenheit.  The 
barometric pressure setting was 30.03 inches Mercury, with remarks of lightning northeast of 
the airport, and that rain began at 1016 and ended at 1020.
A review of weather radar information indicated a line of rain showers northwest of the airport 
along with scattered areas of precipitation around the area of the Hot Springs Airport at the 
time of the accident.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Hot Springs/Memorial Airport was a non-towered airport with an elevation of 540 feet msl.  
Runway 5 is a 6,595-foot-long and 150-foot-wide asphalt runway, with no displaced threshold.  
The runway is equipped with high intensity runway edge lights, and a 1,400-foot medium 
intensity approach lighting system, with runway alignment indicator lights.  The pilot also had 
the capability of turning on the runway lights via the push-to-talk mechanism on the airplane's 
radio.  The airport elevation is 540 feet msl.
A review of the published approach procedure revealed the inbound course for the ILS RWY 5 
approach was 050 degrees magnetic, and the missed approach point was 715 feet msl.  The 
crossing altitude at HOSSY, the final approach fix, was 2,300 feet msl.  The distance between 
HOSSY and the missed approach point, which was located a half nautical mile from the end of 
the runway, was 5.1 nautical miles.  The published missed approach procedures were to climb 
to 1,100 feet msl, then make a climbing right hand turn to 3,000 feet msl via the Hot Springs 
VOR 123 degree radial to SOCKS intersection and hold.
The FAA performed a flight inspection of the final segment and missed approach procedure for 
the ILS RWY 5 instrument approach, and found the equipment operation was satisfactory.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was examined at the accident site on July 3, 2004.  All major 
components of the airplane were accounted for at the scene.  The airplane impacted heavily 
wooded terrain, on an upslope of approximately 60 degrees, and came to rest at an elevation of 
approximately 950 feet msl.  The wreckage came to rest on the south side of Indian Mountain, 
located inside Hot Springs National Park.  The top of the summit was approximately 1,000 feet 
msl.  The wreckage path was oriented on a magnetic heading of 357 degrees, and was 
approximately 50-feet long.
The point of initial impact appeared to be along a line of several trees, that ran perpendicular 
to the wreckage path.  The trunks of the trees were severed at different heights consistent with 
the airplane being in a left bank at the time of impact.  Impact marks on trees and branches 
became progressively lower and narrower along the wreckage path.
The main wreckage, which consisted of the engine, fuselage, right wing, and tail control 
surfaces, came to rest on its left side.  The left wing had separated and was found lodged in a 
tree near the initial impact point.  Examination of the wing revealed a large circular-shaped 
impact mark near the fuel tank, and the wing spar was bent approximately 60 degrees.  The 
main fuel tank was breached, and the tip tank was separated from the wing and found adjacent 
to the fuselage with the fuel cap secure.  The flap and aileron remained attached to the wing 
and exhibited impact damage.  The right wing remained partially attached to the fuselage, and 
a large circular-shaped impact mark was noted near the wing root.  The fuel cap was secure.  
The flap and aileron remained attached to the wing and exhibited impact damage.  The tail 
control surfaces also exhibited impact damage.
Control cable continuity was established for all flight control surfaces to the cockpit except for 
the left wing aileron cables, which were found separated at the wing root and exhibited "broom 
straw" fractures.  The flap handle was found in the second notch or 25 degree extended 
position.
The face of the altimeter was separated from its housing, and the setting in the Kollsman 
window was 30.04 inches of Mercury.
Examination of the engine revealed impact damage to the #2 cylinder.  The engine was rotated 
and valve train continuity and compression were established for each cylinder, except the #2 
cylinder.  The magnetos were removed and rotated via a pneumatic drill.  Spark was produced 
on all towers.  The top and bottom spark plugs were removed and appeared to be oil soaked.
The two-bladed constant-speed propeller remained attached to the engine and sustained 
impact damage.  One blade was bent aft about 45 degrees, near mid-span.  It also exhibited 
some S-bending and heavy chordwise scratching.  The other blade was loose in the hub and 
was bent forward about 65 degrees.  The blade exhibited S-bending, leading edge nicks and 
gouges.
The fuel servo was found intact and disassembled.  The screen was absent of debris and a small 
amount of fuel was noted in the chamber.
The vacuum pump was removed and disassembled.  The coupling was intact and the pump 
rotated freely by hand.  The rotor and vanes were also intact.
Examination of the pitot-static system revealed the pitot tube and plumbing connections were 
secure.  The pitot line was broken in several locations, but the line from the pitot tube and the 
instrument panel was absent of any blockages.  In addition, the pitot and static connections 
between the airspeed, altimeter, and vertical speed indicator were found secured with no 
apparent pre-existing anomalies.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on July 6, 2004, by the Arkansas State Crime 
Laboratory, Little Rock, Arkansas.  
Toxicological testing was conducted by the FAA's Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Air traffic control services were provided to the pilot by the Memphis Air Route Traffic Control 
Center Fayetteville Low Radar controller positions.  Two controllers handled the airplane's 
approach into Hot Springs Airport.   A review of FAA  air traffic control procedures revealed 
that FAA Order 7110.65, "Air Traffic Control" paragraph 5-9-2, Final Approach Course 
Interception stated:
a.  Assign headings that will permit final approach course interception on a track that 
does not exceed the interception angles specified in Table 5-9-1.  Approach Course Interception 
Angle is the distance from interception point to approach gate.  Maximum interception angle 
Less than 2 miles or Triple Simultaneous ILS/MLS Approaches in use, 20 degrees; 2 miles or 
more 30 degrees (45 degrees for helicopters)
b.  If deviations from the final approach course are observed after initial course 
interception, apply the following:
1. Outside the approach gate: Apply procedures in accordance with subparagraph a, if 
necessary, vector the aircraft for another approach.
2. Inside the approach gate: Inform the pilot of the aircraft's position and ask intentions...The 
intent is to provide for a track course intercept angle judged by the controller to be no greater 
than specified by this procedure.
c. EN ROUTE. When using a radarscope range above 125 NM, the controller shall solicit and 
receive a pilot report that the aircraft is established on the final approach course. If the pilot 
has not reported established by the final approach gate, inform the pilot of his/her observed 
position and ask intentions."
Review of air traffic communications and radar data (not GPS data) revealed at 1035:53, when 
the airplane was approximately 5.5 miles southwest of HOSSY intersection an approach 
controller instructed the pilot to, "fly heading 020 degrees intercept the localizer and maintain 
3,000 feet until established."  The pilot acknowledged the transmission and the airplane began 
a right turn towards the airport.  Over the next two minutes, the airplane tracked a 020-degree 
heading but remained south of the final approach course.  At 1038:10, the airplane was just 
southeast of HOSSY at an altitude of 3,000 feet msl.  At this point, the airplane was 700 feet 
above the published approach altitude, which was 2,300 feet msl, and the pilot had not 
reported established on the final approach course.  This would be considered an abnormal 
approach by air traffic control and the approach controller did not advise the pilot of his 
position or inquire about his intentions.  
At 1038:49, the approach controller conducted a position relief briefing and discussed the 
airplane's approach with the relief controller.  The controller stated to the relief controller, 
"he's probably gonna miss", and the relief controller responded by saying, "turn him on too 
early late."  The controller replied, "I turned him on too late, probably gonna miss, yeah he's 
too high, he's missed it now."  
At 1039:25, the pilot reported established on the final approach course.  The airplane was 2.5 
miles past HOSSY and three miles from the runway at an altitude of 3,000 feet msl.  The relief 
controller responded, "roger change to advisory approved report your arrival time this 
frequency."  The pilot replied, "three romeo switching to advisory."  The controller then 
replied, "well just make sure you got this approach you are cleared for the i l s runway five 
approach and change to advisory approved report your arrival time this frequency."  The pilot 
responded and said, "two three romeo cleared for the i l s runway five I'll report to you when I 
am down."  This would be considered an abnormal approach by air traffic control and the 
approach controller did not advise the pilot of his position or inquire about his intentions.  
Both approach controllers were aware of the airplane's abnormal approach and did not provide 
known information that may have assisted the pilot in determining whether to continue with 
the approach or take alternate action.  
