While performing a maintenance check flight, the collective down lock engaged, which resulted 
in an uncontrolled descent and collision with terrain. The pilot and a mechanic were to fly a 
maintenance flight check of the engine and perform a rotor track and balance. He entered a 
descent at approximately 1,200 feet above ground level (agl) and prepared to level off at 
approximately 700 feet agl. When he tried to pull up on the collective, the collective would not 
move and was observed latched by the collective down lock. He and the mechanic tried to 
unlatch the collective from the down lock, but they did not have enough time before he had to 
flare the helicopter for landing. With the collective stuck in flat pitch, they landed hard and 
with forward speed. The flight crew evacuated the helicopter once it had come to rest. An 
ensuing post accident fire destroyed the helicopter. A new after market avionics control panel 
had been installed and the collective down lock, which is secured to the panel, was adjusted 
prior to the flight. The down lock attaches to the lower section of avionics panel. When the 
collective is lowered to the lower pitch stop the clearance between the collective and the down 
lock is about 0.16 inches. The down lock is a flexible plate that is free to vibrate with the 
helicopter's normal rhythms. In the original factory installation, the clearance between the 
down lock and the collective is 0.3 inches. This is the second known accident where the 
collective lock has inadvertently engaged in flight with this particular after market avionics 
panel installed. The manufacturer of the aftermarket avionics panel provided installation 
information indicating that maintenance personnel must bend the collective locking plate such 
that the locking plate will spring away from the collective lock button. Examination of the 
accident aircraft™s locking plate indicated that the locking plate bend was likely reversed, 
allowing the locking plate to spring toward the lock button.
Inadvertent in-flight engagement of the collective down lock, which resulted in an uncontrolled 
descent and ground impact. The collective down lock engagement was caused by the improper 
installation and/or adjustment of the collective locking system, which reduced the clearance 
between the locking plate and the collective control. A factor was the pilot™s decision to embark 
on a maintenance test flight after encountering difficulty disengaging the collective lock release 
during previous hover tests.
On July 1, 2004, at 1500 mountain standard time, a Eurocopter AS-350-B2, N513TS, collided 
with terrain 8 miles northwest of Scottsdale Airport, Arizona, while performing a maintenance 
check flight.  Westcor Aviation, Inc., was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 
CFR Part 91.  The commercial pilot and a mechanic crewman received minor injuries, and the 
helicopter was destroyed.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had not 
been filed.  The maintenance test flight originated at Scottsdale Airport.
The pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Accident Report that they were performing a 
maintenance flight to check the engine and performing a rotor track and balance.  He entered a 
descent at 2,700 feet mean sea level (msl) (approximately 1200 feet above ground level (agl)), 
and prepared to level off at 2,200 feet msl (approximately 700 feet agl).  When he tried to pull 
up on the collective, the collective would not move.  It was observed by the mechanic-crewman 
that the collective lock had engaged.  He and the crewman tried to unlatch the collective from 
the down lock, but they did not have enough time before he had to flare the helicopter for 
landing.  With the collective stuck in flat pitch, they landed hard and with forward speed.  The 
flight crew evacuated the helicopter once it had come to rest.  An ensuing post accident fire 
destroyed the helicopter.
Examination of the helicopter maintenance logbook revealed that the helicopter's factory 
avionics console was replaced with a Geneva P132 avionics console on June 7, 2004.  On July 1, 
2004, the Eurocopter 12-year major inspection was entered as complied with.  One of the items 
entered in the logbook for the major inspection was a check of the collective lock, and the 
installation of a new collective lock button.  The collective lock consists of an aluminum metal 
button that protrudes from the end of the collective grip and an 8-inch (approximately) sprung 
steel strap or flexible lock plate is attached to the either the cockpit deck or the avionics console 
depending on how the helicopter is equipped.  The flexible lock plate is aligned in parallel with 
the vertical travel of the collective end.  The flexible plate has a circular hole in the upper end 
that fits over the protruding collective lock button.  The pilot locks the collective down by 
pushing it slightly past the lower pitch stop and pulling the flexible plate over the collective 
lock button.  The collective is held in place by its natural upward force towards the lower pitch 
stop position and a groove in the collective button that the flexible lock plate engages.  The 
pilot disengages the lock by pushing down on the collective slightly and the flexible plate 
springs itself forward away from the collective lock button.  When the flexible lock plate is not 
engaged (i.e., normal flight conditions) it is free to vibrate about its base attachment point with 
the rhythms of the helicopter.  A rubber plug placed in the middle of the flexible plate is meant 
to dampen out vibrations when in contact with the avionics panel.
Section 3.3, adjustment of the "LOW PITCH" lock plate, in the Eurocopter Maintenance 
Manual, the collective lock is to be adjusted such that when the collective is at the lower pitch 
stop, with no further downward force on the collective by the pilot, the collective lock button is 
set 1 mm short of being aligned to engage the flexible lock plate.  On the Geneva avionics panel, 
two setscrews in the base of the plate adjust the flexible lock plate vertically for alignment.
The clearance between the collective and the flexible plate when the collective is at the lower 
pitch stop was measured in an exemplar helicopter with a factory avionics panel installed.  The 
measurement was approximately 0.3 inches between the end of the collective lock button and 
the flexible lock strap.  Geneva provided documents that depicted the clearance between the 
collective lock button and the flexible lock plate with a Geneva avionics panel installed as 0.16 
inches.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
National Transporation Safety Board investigators have identified a second occurrence of an 
AS350 with the Geneva avionics panel installation where the collective lock engaged in flight, 
which resulted in an accident.  Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin SW-05-20 was 
issued on December 2, 2004, recommending inspection of the collective lock rigging.
