Shortly after takeoff, and about 100 feet above the ground, the airplane's engine began to lose 
power.  The pilot began to dump the load of fertilizer the airplane was carrying and then 
performed a forced landing into a cranberry bog.  After touchdown, the airplane nosed over.  
An inspection of the engine revealed that the impeller shaft of the blower section of the engine 
was bent, and its surface was discolored from heat and exhibited signs of rotational scoring.  A 
1/16-inch oil passage that lubricated the impeller shaft bearings was found blocked.
A blocked internal oil passage, which resulted in inadequate lubrication of the blower impeller 
shaft, and the subsequent partial loss of engine power.
On July 2, 2004, at 1330 eastern daylight time, a Grumman G-164A, N915X, operated by 
Downstown Airport, Inc. was substantially damaged during a forced landing, shortly after 
taking off from a gravel airstrip in Chatsworth, New Jersey.  The certificated commercial pilot 
was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed 
for the local aerial application flight, conducted under 14 CFR Part 137.
According to a written statement submitted by the pilot, the departure to the south was normal 
until about 100 feet, when the engine began to lose power.  The pilot made a "slight" right turn 
to align the airplane with the wind and a cranberry bog.  The pilot also began dumping the 
800-pound load of fertilizer that was onboard the airplane.  After touchdown, the airplane 
nosed over in the bog.
The engine was disassembled and examined under the supervision of a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector at a maintenance and repair facility.  The oil pump was 
removed and appeared to be normal, and the oil screen appeared to be clean. 
The blower (supercharger) section of the engine was also examined.  Several impeller blades 
were damaged or missing, and the remaining portions of the impeller exhibited signs of 
melting and breakage.  The impeller shaft was bent, and its surface was discolored from heat 
and exhibited signs of rotational scoring.  The impeller shaft bushings were worn and 
"oversize", and the blower shaft attach nut also exhibited heat discoloration.  
Further examination of the engine revealed metal contamination in the engine cylinders.
According to the chief inspector at the facility where the engine was disassembled, the impeller 
shaft was supported by two bronze bushings that were lubricated by engine oil via a 1/8-inch 
hole in both of the bushings, and a 1/16-inch hole in one of the bushings.  The 1/16-inch hole 
was found blocked.  The inspector additionally stated that failure of the bronze bushing would 
cause the impeller shaft to "wobble," and permit contact between the blower and the rear case, 
which would then result in excessive damage to the impeller, impeller shaft, blower, and rear 
case. 
