National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Goshen, IN
Accident Number: CEN17LA048
Date & Time: 12/03/2016, 0851 EST
Registration: N218D
Aircraft: ARION AIRCRAFT LLC LIGHTNING
LS-1
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The sport pilot reported that, before departing on a cross-country flight, he contacted the flight service station for a weather briefing for his flight route.
He then conducted a preflight inspection of the airplane, started it to allow it to warm up, and ran the carburetor heat before departing.
The climb to cruise at 2,000 ft was normal.
The pilot reported that, about 10 miles from the departure airport, the engine started to run "rough" and that he applied carburetor heat.
When this did not have any effect on engine performance, he decided to return to the departure airport.
He added that, during the return, the engine "power was very poor" and that the airplane was losing altitude rapidly.
The pilot spotted a clear field nearby and performed a soft-field landing approach.
Upon landing, the gear dug into the soft plowed field.
The airplane continued forward on its belly, which resulted in substantial damage.
The weather conditions were conducive to the accumulation of serious icing at any power setting.
Although the pilot reported that he used carburetor heat, it is likely that the ice had already accumulated to the degree that the carburetor heat was insufficient to melt the ice and restore full engine power.
An examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any preimpact anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A partial loss of engine power due to carburetor icing and the subsequent forced landing on a rough/soft field.
The pilot and his passenger were uninjured.
The airplane sustained substantial fuselage damage.
The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight.
Day visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which did not operate on a flight plan.
The flight originated from the Goshen Municipal Airport (GSH), near Goshen, Indiana, about 0840 and was destined for the Ankeny Regional Airport (IKV), near Ankeny, Iowa.
According to the pilot, he contacted the flight service station for a weather briefing along his route of flight to IKV.
He conducted a preflight inspection of the airplane.
About 0825, the pilot loaded the airplane and started it to allow it to warm up.
About 0830, the airplane was taxied to runway 27.
The pilot performed flight checks that allowed the operating temperatures to continue to warm and he "ran the carburetor heat again just prior to departing."
About 0835, he departed from the runway on a 270 heading.
The climb to cruise at 2,000 feet was normal and he subsequently transitioned to cruise.
About 9 to 10 nautical miles from GSH the engine started to run "rough" and the pilot applied carburetor heat.
This did not improve engine performance, so he decided to return to GSH where he started to line up for a downwind for runway 27.
The engine continued to sputter with carburetor heat applied.
Engine "power was very poor" and the airplane was losing altitude rapidly.
The pilot then thought that the airplane may be able to make runway 9.
He subsequently realized the airplane was too low for that approach and with little power, the airplane would not be able to make the field where it would end up in the trees or fence short of runway 9.
The pilot spotted a clear field that he could turn into and have an up wind landing.
He called common traffic advisory frequency at GSH about 0852 and announce a mayday call that indicated where the airplane was landing.
The pilot performed a soft field landing approach and slowed as much as possible heading back on 270 heading.
He knew that the fields were recently tilled and would be very soft and muddy due to recent rains.
The pilot attempted to fly just above the surface as long as possible and keeping the nose up.
On landing the gear dug into the very soft plowed field and the airplane continued forward on its belly.
The pilot indicated that it was a very short amount of time from when he "called in and actually landed the plane."
At 0853, the recorded weather at GSH was: Wind 260 degrees at 5 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky condition overcast clouds at 2,800 feet; temperature 1 degree C; dew point -3 degrees C; altimeter 30.33 inches of mercury.
The temperature and dew point spread were plotted on a carburetor icing probability chart.
Their intersection was within the serious icing at any power setting envelope.
A Federal Aviation Administration Inspector conducted an on-scene investigation of the accident airplane.
He established flight control continuity existed.
He observed that the fuel filters, one for each tank, were mounted in the aircraft cabin under the seats.
The filters appeared clean and contained a liquid consistent with 100 low lead aviation gasoline.
Some engine components sustained impact damage and the engine could not be test run.
However, no preimpact anomalies were detected.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94464
