The commercial pilot of the helicopter reported that, after he released the external load of trees 
in the loading zone and about 50 ft above ground level, it seemed like the engine experienced a 
partial loss of power. The pilot stated that he heard an abnormal noise as the helicopter began 
to spin to the right, and the low rotor rpm warning light illuminated. The pilot jettisoned the 
external load line and rolled the throttle toward a closed position in order to counteract the 
yawing motion, with no response noted. The pilot then initiated an autorotation; during the 
landing sequence, the helicopter impacted a tree and came to rest upright in a nose-high 
position. The pilot further stated that, after the helicopter came to rest, he noted that the 
engine was at a "very slow idle" and he had to shut down the engine. Postaccident examination 
of the helicopter revealed no evidence of any preexisting mechanical anomalies that would 
have precluded normal operation. The engine was removed and installed in an engine test cell 
and ran throughout various power settings. 
The airframe fuel filter was removed. The filter element was almost black. The fuel removed 
was dark, and debris was observed within the fuel filter bowl. The fuel sample from the filter 
housing was tested and found to be within Jet A specifications. The debris noted within the 
sample contained various metals, the source of which could not be determined. Given that fuel 
was found throughout the fuel system, it is unlikely that the debris in the filter resulted in a 
blockage and restriction of fuel flow; however, the reason for the partial loss of engine power 
could not be determined. 
A loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined based on the available 
information.
On November 2, 2015, about 1424 Pacific standard time, a Bell 206B, N22743, was 
substantially damaged during an autorotation landing following a partial loss of engine power 
near Dallas, Oregon. The helicopter was registered to and operated by Applebee Aviation under 
the provisions of 
14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 133. The commercial pilot, sole occupant 
of the helicopter, sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed for the external load flight. The local flight originated from a staging area 
about 15 minutes prior to the accident.
The pilot reported that prior to the accident flight; the helicopter was refueled with 30 gallons 
of Jet-A fuel. The pilot departed from a staging area and began lifting Christmas trees from a 
field to a nearby loading zone. The pilot stated that after about 5 or 10 loads, he released a load 
of trees in the loading zone and shortly after, it seemed like the engine went to a reduced power 
setting at an altitude of about 50 feet above ground level. He further stated that he heard an 
abnormal noise originate from the helicopter as the helicopter began to spin to the right along 
with an illumination of a low rotor RPM light. The pilot jettisoned the external load line and 
rolled the throttle towards a closed position in order to counteract the yawing motion, with no 
response noted. The pilot initiated an autorotation and during the landing sequence, the 
helicopter impacted a tree. Subsequently, the helicopter came to rest upright in a nose high 
position. The pilot further stated that after the helicopter came to rest, he noted that the engine 
was at a "very slow idle" and he had to shut off the engine.
Postaccident examination of the helicopter by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector 
revealed that the tailboom forward of the tailrotor gearbox was twisted about 90
o
. The 
helicopter was recovered to a secure location for further examination. 
On December 2, 2015, the recovered helicopter was examined at the facilities of AvTech Inc., 
Auburn, Washington, by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge and representatives from Rolls Royce and Bell Helicopters. The examination revealed 
that the skids were removed to facilitate wreckage transport. Flight control continuity was 
established throughout the airframe to the main rotor head and aft to the tailrotor. An area of 
impact damage was observed just forward of the tailrotor gearbox. Continuity of the engine 
controls was established from the cockpit controls to the engine. The airframe fuel filter was 
removed. The filter element was dark, almost black in color. The fuel removed was dark in 
color (charcoal looking). Debris was observed within the fuel filter bowl. Samples of the debris 
and fuel were retained. Power was applied to the helicopter, and the fuel boost pumps were 
turned on. Fuel expelled out of the engine supply fuel lines. A sample was taken, and the fuel 
appeared to be fairly clear in color with no debris noted. Visual inspection of the fuel tanks 
revealed that about 10 to 20 gallons of fuel was present.
The engine was visually intact and all fuel and air lines appeared to be secure. N1 and N2 
rotated freely and continuity was established throughout the engine to the gearbox. The engine 
fuel filter was removed from its housing, and a fuel sample was collected. The fuel was dark in 
color and contained an unknown sediment inside. The filter was dark in color. The fuel from 
the fuel nozzle supply line was captured and was found clear in color. 
The engine was removed and subsequently shipped to Rolls Royce for further inspection. Fuel 
samples were retained and sent for subsequent testing.
On April 6, 2016, the engine was further examined at the facilities of Rolls Royce, Indianapolis, 
Indiana. The engine was placed on an engine stand, and visually examined. Compressed air 
was applied to the port where the PC Line connects to the compressor scroll. Air was found 
leaking from the PC line that connects to the fuel control unit. The engine was subsequently 
installed in an engine test cell and run for about 90 minutes throughout various power settings. 
During a governor droop test, when the load was removed from the engine to test the 
governor's ability to maintain RPM, N2 RPM increased to the limit for the test cell. Throughout 
the engine run, the engine produced rated power at cruise flight and takeoff power settings. 
The power turbine governor and fuel control unit were removed and subsequently examined at 
the facilities of Honeywell, Inc., South Bend, Indiana, under the supervision of an NTSB 
investigator. The investigator reported that the bench tests of the power turbine governor 
revealed the unit was "sluggish" however, would not result in a loss of engine power. The fuel 
control unit was placed on a test bench and functioned normally.
The fuel sample from the fuel filter housing from the accident helicopter was submitted to a 
third-party laboratory for analysis. There was a small amount of unknown debris visible in the 
sample. Three tests, including Freezing Point; Flashpoint and Distillation were performed on 
the fuel sample. All tests were found to be within specification for Jet A fuel. The debris was 
retained and sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for further examination. The testing 
results for the debris found higher elemental levels of calcium (Ca), copper (Cu), iron (Fe), 
magnesium (Mg), nickel (Ni), potassium (K), silver (Ag) and zinc (Zn). The source of the debris 
could not be determined.
