After landing in night visual meteorological conditions, the commuter flight proceeded to taxi 
to the ramp. Upon coming to a service road perpendicular to the taxiway, a vehicle moved 
directly across the airplane's taxi path. The flight crew immediately applied brakes to stop. 
While braking, the airplane's tail rocked aft and struck the ground. The flight crew contacted 
ground control to inform them about the vehicle incident and resumed taxi to the ramp, and 
the driver of the vehicle radioed the tower, informing them that he had cut off an aircraft. An 
inspection of the airplane by the operator revealed structural damage to the aft pressure 
bulkhead resulting from the tail strike.
The failure of the driver of the service vehicle to yield to the taxiing airplane, which resulted in 
a near-collision and tail strike. 
On November 2, 2015, about 1925 central standard time, a Cessna 208 Caravan, N732MD, 
registered to Multi-Aero Inc., of Sarasota, Florida, and doing business as Air Choice One of St. 
Louis, Missouri, was substantially damaged during taxi after braking to avoid a ground vehicle 
at the Chicago O'Hare International Airport (ORD). The pilot, co-pilot, and seven passengers 
were not injured. Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The flight was being 
operated as a commuter passenger flight under the provisions of 
Federal Code of Regulations 
Part 135
. The flight had originated from Ironwood, Michigan (IWD), and ORD was its final 
destination.
After landing on Runway 27 at ORD, the flight crew proceeded to taxi to the ramp via Taxiway 
R. Upon coming to a service road perpendicular to the taxiway, a vehicle moved directly across 
their taxi path. The flight crew immediately applied brakes to stop. While braking, the 
airplane's tail section stuck the ground before stabilizing back to a normal stance on the 
landing gear. The flight crew contacted ground control to inform them about the vehicle 
incident and resumed taxi to the ramp.
According to a report by the FAA inspector who responded to the accident scene, the driver of 
the service vehicle (OPS 11) had radioed the tower on frequency 120.75. The driver stated that 
he just cut off an aircraft on taxiway R. A few minutes later, the driver radioed on frequency 
129.9 and reported that he was sorry. Both the pilot-in-command, and the first officer reported 
that they were cut off by the service vehicle and stopped the aircraft immediately to avoid 
collision.
A special fight permit was issued by the FAA to ferry the aircraft
 
from ORD to the company 
repair facility in St. Louis, Missouri, to accomplish repairs. As reported on NTSB Form 6120, 
a
n inspection of the airplane by the operator revealed structural damage to the aft pressure 
bulkhead.
