National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Latangai Island, PO
Accident Number: WPR13LA137
Date & Time: 03/02/2013, 1320 UTC
Registration: N471M
Aircraft: HUGHES 369HS
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Inflight upset
Injuries: 1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Aerial Observation
 Analysis The pilot reported that, as he was flying toward a school of fish, he observed a nearby fishing vessel moving in the same general direction.
He flew over the vessel then continued toward a fish aggregating device (FAD), which is a floating object designed and strategically placed to attract fish; it was located about 0.7 mile away from the vessel.
As the pilot approached the FAD, he circled twice and then descended the helicopter into a low hover over the FAD.
The helicopter was positioned into the wind, and the vessel was approaching the helicopter from behind.
With the helicopter still in a low hover, the fish spotter reached out of the helicopter to attach a radio buoy to the FAD.
Shortly after, the helicopter was struck from behind by the vessel.
The helicopter subsequently plunged into the ocean.
The fish master, who was at the controls of the vessel, reported that he observed the helicopter circle twice before it appeared to fly out of the area.
He was slowing the vessel when it was about 500 meters (0.3 mile) from the FAD when he observed the helicopter in front of the vessel.
The captain of the vessel reported that he was on the vessel™s helicopter deck when he noticed the helicopter circle twice and then descend to a hover.
He stated that he was unsure what the helicopter was doing until he saw the fish spotter reach for the FAD.
At this time, he felt the fish master reverse the vessel; however, it still impacted the helicopter™s tail.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of both the pilot and the fish master of the vessel to adequately monitor their environment, which resulted in a collision.
The airline transport pilot sustained serious injuries, and the one fish spotter (passenger) sustained fatal injuries.
The helicopter's main rotor assembly and tail rotor assembly were substantially damaged.
The aircraft was registered to and operated by Jerry's Helicopter Service, Inc. under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Day, visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight and no flight plan had been filed.
The flight originated from the helicopter's designated vessel (MV FK 869) at approximately 1220 UTC.
The pilot reported that while flying the fish spotter found a fish formation.
The pilot was flying towards it when he observed a fishing vessel motoring nearby, and in the general direction of, where the fish were spotted.
The pilot circled over the vessel and identified it as the Pacific Ranger before it proceeded to circle over the fish formation.
When the fish spotter found the fish aggregating device (FAD), which are floating objects designed and strategically placed to attract fish, the pilot approached the FAD and hovered over it at a low altitude about 0.7 miles away from the Pacific Ranger.
During this time, the helicopter was positioned into the wind, with the Pacific Ranger approaching from behind.
The fish spotter reached out of the helicopter and attempted to attach a radio buoy to the FAD when the helicopter suddenly shook violently and plunged into the ocean, coming to rest upside down.
The fish master of the Pacific Ranger was at the controls at the time of the accident.
He reported that prior to seeing the helicopter he observed it on radar when it was about 20 miles away.
The helicopter approached the Pacific Ranger and circled around it twice.
The fish master reported that it appeared that they did not find the FAD and flew out of the area.
When the vessel was about 500 meters from the FAD he was slowing down the vessel when he observed the helicopter in front of them.
The captain of the Pacific Ranger reported that he was on the helicopter deck of the Pacific Ranger watching for tuna and FADs when he noticed the helicopter circle twice and descend to a hover about five ship lengths in front of, and facing away from, the Pacific Ranger.
He was unsure what the helicopter was doing until he observed the fish spotter climb onto the float of the helicopter and reach for the FAD.
At this time, he felt the fish master reverse the Pacific Ranger, however, they still impacted the tail of the helicopter.
A GPS, which contained waypoints the pilot created during the flight, was recovered from the helicopter and taken to the manufacturer for analysis.
The GPS data indicated that when the helicopter initially flew in front of the Pacific Ranger, the helicopter was about 1.7 nautical miles (nm) (about 2 miles) away from the FAD and the Pacific Ranger was about 1.9 nm (2.3 miles) away.
The helicopter continued toward the FAD and made one large circle, followed by a smaller circle, before descending to a low hover.
The GPS did not indicate time nor did it show the speed of the helicopter or Pacific Ranger.
According to The Federal Aviation Administration's Model Civil Aviation Regulations (MCARS), Version 2.7, Part 11 states under Fish Spotting Operating Rules, "Each operator shall conduct operations so as not to endanger persons or property on the surface nor aircraft in flight."
