National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Boulder, CO
Accident Number: CEN13LA525
Date & Time: 09/01/2013, 1100 MDT
Registration: N6460A
Aircraft: CESSNA 182
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Skydiving
 Analysis The pilot reported that he had flown a group of skydivers to altitude for an intentional parachute jump about 3 miles north of the airport and was returning for landing at the time of the accident.
The airplane was on final approach when the engine lost power.
The pilot's attempts to restore engine power were unsuccessful, and he ditched the airplane into a lake short of the runway.
The pilot reported using carburetor heat during the descent; however, the pilot did not periodically apply engine power (clear the engine) during the descent.
Power lever advancement should be performed periodically during descent to assure that power recovery can be achieved."
A postaccident engine examination did not reveal any anomalies consistent with a preimpact failure or malfunction.
Local weather conditions were conducive to the formation of carburetor icing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to adequately clear carburetor icing, resulting in a loss of engine power on final approach following a descent at idle power.
Findings Aircraft Personnel issues Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause) Environmental issues Conducive to carburetor icing - Effect on equipment (Cause) Factual Information **This report was modified on 1/30/2014.
Please see the public docket for this accident to view the original report.
** On September 1, 2013, about 1100 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 182 airplane, N6460A, was substantially damaged when the pilot ditched the airplane into a lake following a loss of engine power on approach to the Boulder Municipal Airport (BDU), Boulder, Colorado.
The pilot sustained minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to and operated by N6460A LLC under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which was not operated on a flight plan.
The local flight originated from BDU about 1035.
The pilot reported that he had flown a group of skydivers to altitude for an intentional parachute jump about 3 miles north of the airport and was returning for landing at the time of the accident.
The airplane was on final approach to runway 8 (4,100 feet by 75 feet, asphalt) when the engine lost power.
His attempts to restore engine power were unsuccessful and he subsequently ditched into Hayden Lake short of the runway.
He reported a clear sky with a light and variable wind.
A postaccident engine examination conducted by a National Transportation Safety Board investigator did not reveal any anomalies consistent with a preimpact failure or malfunction.
Approximately 11 gallons of fuel were recovered from the airplane after the accident.
The Pilot's Operating Handbook for the accident airplane noted that up to 5 gallons of fuel is unusable in all flight conditions, with 2 gallons of fuel being unusable in level flight.
Weather conditions recorded at the Rocky Mountain Metropolitan Airport (BJC), located about 9 miles southeast of BDU, at 1047, included an ambient temperature and dew point of 21 degrees Celsius and 11 degrees Celsius, respectively.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot had reported using carburetor heat during the descent after the skydivers left the airplane; however, the pilot did not periodically apply engine power (clear the engine) during the descent.
Information provided by the FAA regarding carburetor icing noted a possibility of serious icing at glide power under those conditions.
Power lever advancement should be performed periodically during descent to assure that power recovery can be achieved."
