The airplane landed on a snow covered runway and was unable to maneuver while taxiing. The 
pilot requested that a tug be dispatched to tow the airplane to the gate. After the tug was 
connected, the airplane and tug slid on the snow and the tug jackknifed and impacted the left 
side of the airplane causing substantial damage. The tug was subsequently re-connected and 
the airplane was towed to the gate.
The collision between the tug and the airplane during towing as a result of sliding on the snow 
covered runway.
On December 3, 2008, about 1315 central standard time, a McDonnell Douglas DC-9-50, 
N782NC, operated as Northwest Airlines (NWA) Flight 1742, and piloted by an airline 
transport pilot, sustained substantial damage when it was struck by a tug. The aircraft had just 
landed on runway 36 at the Dane County Regional Airport-Truax Field (MSN), Madison, 
Wisconsin, and the flight crew requested a tug to tow the airplane to the gate due to taxiway 
conditions. The Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121 flight was operated in instrument 
meteorological conditions and was on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan. No injuries 
were reported. The flight originated from the Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport 
(DTW), Detroit, Michigan, at 1117. MSN was the intended destination.
According to a report filed by the operator, the airplane landed on runway 36 at MSN about 
1236. The pilot was directed by air traffic control (ATC), to exit the runway at taxiway A1. The 
aircraft slowed to a safe taxi speed and attempted to exit at the taxiway, but missed the taxiway 
and stopped about 6 feet onto the runway overrun area. The pilot contacted ATC, and 
requested permission to execute a 180-degree turn on the overrun. During the turn, the 
airplane began sliding on the snow and the flight crew stopped the airplane about 90-degrees 
into the turn. The airplane was facing west and was still on the paved overrun area at this time. 
At this point, the pilot contacted ATC and requested a tug to pull the airplane to the gate.
A NWA tug was dispatched and an airport snow removal truck spread sand on the area 
between the nose of the airplane and its left wing. After the tug was attached to the airplane 
and had started to move, the airplane/tug jackknifed and slid on the snow covered runway. The 
tug impacted the left side of the airplane's fuselage causing a puncture to the skin and damage 
to internal structural members. The tug was subsequently re-connected and the airplane was 
towed to the gate where the passengers de-planed normally.
History of Flight
Taxi-from runway
Ground handling event (Defining event)
