National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Wichita Falls, TX
Accident Number: CEN10LA186
Date & Time: 04/01/2010, 1650 CDT
Registration: N3320U
Aircraft: CESSNA 182F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Fire/smoke (non-impact)
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis The pilot stated that he was taxiing to the runway when he smelled an electrical odor in the cockpit and then saw smoke coming from the instrument panel.
He stopped the airplane and shut it down.
As he exited the airplane, he saw black smoke and flames coming from the instrument panel.
The fire consumed most of the airplane fuselage aft of the engine firewall.
The origin of the fire could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A fire of undetermined origin.
Findings Aircraft Aircraft systems - Not specified Not determined Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause) Factual Information On April 1, 2010, about 1650 central standard time, a Cessna C-182F airplane, N3320U, was substantially damaged after catching fire during taxi for takeoff at Kickapoo Downtown Airport (CWC), Wichita Falls, Texas.
The commercial pilot was not injured.
The business flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated he was taxiing to the runway when he smelled an ﬁelectricalﬂ smell in the cockpit.
He then saw smoke coming from the instrument panel.
He stopped the airplane and shut it down.
As he exited the airplane he saw black smoke and flames coming from the instrument panel.
The fire consumed most of the airplane fuselage aft of the engine firewall.
The airplane maintenance records were in the airplane at the time of the accident and were consumed by the fire.
According to the mechanic who performed regular maintenance on the airplane, the last annual inspection had occurred in March of 2009, and a new engine, battery, and landing light had been installed about 18 flight hours prior to the accident.
A postaccident examination of the wreckage was conducted by NTSB investigators.
The origin of the fire could not be determined.
