National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Stony River, AK
Accident Number: ANC10TA028
Date & Time: 04/02/2010, 1600 AKD
Registration: N82732
Aircraft: PIPER PA-18-150
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control on ground
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Public Aircraft
 Analysis The private pilot was on a public use wildlife patrol in a ski-equipped airplane when the accident occurred.
The pilot reported that he landed on a frozen lake to make contact with the owner of a wilderness lodge, and that while taxiing from landing the airplane slid off the taxi area and into trees.
The pilot said that he attempted to determine wind conditions on the ground and elected to land upslope to the east.
He reported that his landing slide was longer than anticipated and he thought about going around.
Upon exiting the airplane he realized that he had landed downwind and that the wind appeared to be about 6 knots.
The pilot did not report any mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident.
The pilot noted substantial damage to both wings.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during taxi from landing, which resulted in the airplane sliding into trees.
The airplane was being operated by the State of Alaska, Department of Public Safety, as a visual flight rules (VFR)public use wildlife patrol under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The solo private pilot was not injured.
The flight departed McCarthy, Alaska, about 1100.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) on April 5, a representative of the State of Alaska, said the pilot reported that he had landed on a frozen lake to make contact with the owner of a wilderness lodge.
He said while taxiing from landing the airplane slid off the taxi area and into trees.
The pilot reported substantial damage to both wings.
In a written report dated April 6, the pilot wrote that after attempting to determine wind conditions on the ground he elected to land upslope to the east.
He reported that his landing slide was longer than anticipated and he thought about going around, but did not.
He continued that after almost coming to a stop he steered the airplane to the right edge of the landing area, and attempted to use power to blow the tail of the airplane around, and taxi to a safe area to park.
He said when he added power to blow the tail around and turn to the right, the skies failed to catch and the left wing struck a tree causing the airplane to pivot to the left and the right wing struck another tree.
The pilot said upon exiting the airplane he realized he had landed downwind, and the wind appeared to be about 6 knots from the west.
The pilot did not report any mechanical anomalies with the airplane prior to the accident.
