National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Ugashik, AK
Accident Number: ANC08LA047
Date & Time: 04/01/2008, 0900 AKD
Registration: N5840Z
Aircraft: PIPER PA-22
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control on ground
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was landing a tailwheel and tundra tire-equipped airplane on an ice-covered lake.
During the landing roll, the main landing gear tires encountered an area of water, which rapidly slowed the airplane, resulting in a loss of control and a nose over.
The airplane received structural damage to the wings, wing lift struts, and the vertical stabilizer.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's selection of unsuitable terrain for landing, which resulted in a nose over.
A factor contributing to the accident was water on the surface of the ice-covered lake.
The airplane was operated by the pilot as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.
The airline transport certificated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated at the Ugashik Airport, about 0830.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, Anchorage Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), Anchorage, Alaska, reported that he received a telephone call from the pilot.
The pilot told the inspector that during the landing roll on the lake, the main landing gear tires encountered an area of water, and the airplane nosed over.
The airplane received structural damage to the wings, wing lift struts, and the vertical stabilizer.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
