National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Koliganek, AK
Accident Number: ANC08LA046
Date & Time: 04/01/2008, 1540 AKD
Registration: N8327S
Aircraft: PIPER PA-32
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of visual reference
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was in cruise flight about 700 feet agl over near featureless snow- covered terrain when he encounter lowering ceilings.
He described the weather conditions as rapidly deteriorating.
He began a turn to reverse direction, and the airplane collided with terrain.
His destination, about 10 miles away, was reporting a visibility of 2 miles in mist, and a ceiling of 400 feet broken.
The ceiling was variable between 200 to 900 feet.
A low ceiling and snow-covered terrain likely produced flat lighting conditions, making visual reference to terrain, and determining height above the ground difficult.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's VFR flight into adverse weather conditions that resulted in a collision with snow- covered terrain during a turn to reverse direction.
Factors contributing to the accident were low ceilings, flat lighting conditions, and the snow-covered terrain.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) cross-country air taxi flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated as Flight 245, by Peninsula Airways Inc., Anchorage, Alaska.
The commercial certificated pilot, the sole occupant, received minor injuries.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed in the area of the accident.
VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated at the Dillingham Airport, Dillingham, Alaska, about 1510, and was en route to Koliganek, with cargo and mail.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC), on April 2, the director of operations for the operator reported that the pilot was on the first segment of his flight from Dillingham, then to Koliganek, then to New Stuyahok, Alaska, and return to Dillingham.
The pilot did not arrive in Koliganek, and an emergency locator transmitter (ELT) signal was received from the airplane.
The pilot was located by search and rescue personnel about 2040, and transported to Koliganek by snow machine.
In a written statement from the pilot on April 3, he reported that he was in cruise flight about 700 feet agl, and the visibility was good until about 20 miles from Koliganek.
The weather began to deteriorate rapidly, and the pilot decided to turn around.
The airplane then collided with terrain.
Personnel from the operator reported that when they arrived at the accident scene to begin recovery operations, they found that the airplane collided with almost featureless snow- covered terrain on a northwest heading.
They reported the right main landing gear separated first, followed by the left main gear, followed by an impact that separated the right wing.
At 1540, a special observation at Koliganek was reporting in part:  Wind, 130 degrees (true) at 15 knots; visibility, 2 statute miles in mist; clouds, 400 feet broken, 1,300 feet broken, 8,500 feet overcast; temperature, 34 degrees F; dew point, 32 degrees F; altimeter, 29.67 inHg.
Remarks; ceiling variable from 200 to 900 feet.
: 3600 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 84 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 15026 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, activated, aided in locating accident Engine Model/Series: IO-540K Registered Owner: Peninsula Airways Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
