Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Kalispell, MT
Accident Number:
SEA05LA189
Date & Time:
09/01/2005, 2030 MDT 
Registration:
N12QJ
Aircraft:
Ballhagen/Shyrock Q-2
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Just prior to the flight, the pilot, who was five hours into a ten hour experimental aircraft flight 
test regimen, readjusted the valve lash in the Subaru engine that powered the subject aircraft. 
At the beginning of the flight, he took off and climbed to about 1,000 feet above ground level 
(agl). After he rolled out on downwind, his ground crew contacted him on the aircraft radio to 
advise him that the aircraft's engine appeared to have been missing and running rough during 
the takeoff and initial climbout. About the time that the pilot received the radio transmission, 
the aircraft's engine quit producing power, and he decided to continue on around the pattern in 
order to execute a forced landing on the runway from which he had departed. As he turned 
from base to final, the pilot realized that he might not be able to stretch the glide to the end of 
the runway, but he elected to attempt to do so. When the aircraft descended to about 25 feet 
agl, its airspeed slowed to the point where it stall/mushed into the terrain about one-quarter of 
a mile off the end of the runway. In a post accident inspection, it was determined that the valve 
clearance in the engine had been set with a gap so small that when the internal engine 
temperature began to increase the exhaust valves in each cylinder did not completely close. 
Without the closure of the valves, sufficient compression was not created in the cylinders, and 
the engine stopped producing power.  
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot/owner's improper setting of the engine's valve clearance, leading to the failure of the 
exhaust valves to fully close and a total loss of power while on a VFR downwind, and the 
pilot/owner's failure to maintain sufficient airspeed as he tried to extend his power-off glide to 
the approach end of the runway.
Page 2 of 6SEA05LA189
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - DOWNWIND
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,VALVE,EXHAUST - OPEN
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,ADJUSTMENT - IMPROPER USE OF - OWNER/PILOT MECHANIC
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
3. STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) AIRSPEED(VREF) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6SEA05LA189
Factual Information
On September 1, 2005, approximately 2030 mountain daylight time, an experimental 
Ballhagen/Shyrock Q-2, N12QJ, impacted the terrain during a no-power forced landing off the 
end of the runway at Flathead Skyranch, which is located about five miles southwest of 
Kalispell, Montana. The private pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured, but the 
aircraft, which is owned and operated by the pilot, sustained substantial damage. The 14 CFR 
Part 91 personal pleasure flight, which originated at the same airport less than five minutes 
prior to the accident, was being operated in visual meteorological conditions. No flight plan 
had been filed. There was no report of an ELT activation.
According to the pilot, who was five hours into a ten hour experimental aircraft flight test 
regimen, just prior to this flight he had readjusted the valve lash in the Subaru engine that 
powered the subject aircraft. At the beginning of the flight, he took off on runway 16, and 
climbed to about 1,000 feet above ground level (agl). After he rolled out on downwind, his 
ground crew contacted him on the aircraft radio to advise him that the aircraft's engine 
appeared to have been missing and running rough during the takeoff and initial climbout. 
About the time that the pilot received the radio transmission, the aircraft's engine quit 
producing power, and he decided to continue on around the pattern in order to execute a 
forced landing on the runway from which he had departed. As he turned from base to final, the 
pilot realized that he might not be able to stretch the glide to the end of the runway, but he 
elected to attempt to do so. When the aircraft descended to about 25 feet agl, its airspeed 
slowed to the point where it stall/mushed into the terrain about one-quarter of a mile off the 
end of the runway. After impacting the terrain, the aircraft slid for about 75 feet before coming 
to a stop. During the impact with the ground, the front wing (canard) sustained substantial 
damage. 
In a post accident inspection, both the pilot/owner and an FAA Airworthiness Inspector who 
responded to the scene determined that the valve clearance in the engine had been set with a 
gap so small that when the internal engine temperature began to increase, the exhaust valves in 
each cylinder did not completely close. Without the closure of the valves, sufficient 
compression would not be created in the cylinders, and the engine would stop producing 
power.  
Page 4 of 6SEA05LA189
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
57, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/01/2005
Flight Time:
1056 hours (Total, all aircraft), 220 hours (Total, this make and model), 1010 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Ballhagen/Shyrock
Registration:
N12QJ
Model/Series:
Q-2 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
A2876
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/01/2005, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1200 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
5 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
300 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Subaru
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
EA81-1.8L
Registered Owner:
David G. Hudak
Rated Power:
110 hp
Operator:
David G. Hudak
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6SEA05LA189
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Kalispell, MT (MT95)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (MT95)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2025 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Flathead Sky Ranch (MT95)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
3000 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
48.128333, -114.348611
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Orrin K Anderson
Adopted Date:
02/28/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Rick Koffman; Helena FSDO
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA05LA189
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
