Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Leakey, TX
Accident Number:
FTW02LA136
Date & Time:
05/02/2002, 1430 CDT 
Registration:
N397QS
Aircraft:
Cessna 560
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
6 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Executive/Corporate
Analysis 
After a visual approach to the 3,975 foot long by 50-foot wide runway, the turbojet airplane 
touched down about 2,100 feet beyond the landing threshold, and overran the departure end of 
the runway.  The 5,600 hour pilot in command (PIC) reported that the approach speed and 
descent rate were "normal,"  and the aircraft was on short final over the trees at the "desired 
speed."  Once the trees were clear, the aircraft descended to the runway at idle power.  During 
the descent the PIC noticed a 16-knot increase in speed above reference.  The PIC elected to 
continue "because the aircraft was close to the runway" and the PIC thought he had "extra 
landing distance to work with beyond what was required."  The PIC reported that the aircraft 
"floated beyond the desired touchdown point," and "at this point [the pilots were] committed 
to stopping the aircraft."  Passing the last third of the runway, the aircraft turned to the right 
"without" input from the pilots, overran the departure end, and collided with trees.  Once the 
aircraft left the runway, the PIC stowed the thrust reversers and attempted to shut down the 
engines.  Due to the "violent ride," the PIC managed to shut down one engine.  A post-impact 
fire consumed the aircraft after the crew assisted to evacuate the occupants.  No mechanical or 
maintenance anomalies were discovered with the aircraft.  According to the flight manual, 
based on 29.74 inches HG, 1,808 PA, 30 degrees Celsius, zero wind, and an aircraft landing 
weight of 14, 500 lbs, the calculated total stopping distance (air and ground distance) at 
reference speed (Vref), was estimated at 2,955 feet.  According to the flight manual, the "total 
distance" is based on full flaps, speed brakes after touchdown, Vref at 50 feet over the runway 
threshold, idle thrust when crossing the threshold, and no thrust reverse.
   
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilots failure to land the aircraft at the proper touchdown point on the runway to allow 
adequate stopping distance.
Page 2 of 7FTW02LA136
Findings
Occurrence #1: OVERRUN
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
1. (C) PROPER TOUCHDOWN POINT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 7FTW02LA136
Factual Information
On May 2, 2002, at 1430 central daylight time, a Cessna 560 Ultra jet airplane, N397QS, 
fractionally owned by private individuals who delegated the management of the airplane to 
NetJets Aviation, Inc., of Columbus, Ohio, was destroyed when it overran the departure end of 
Runway 15 at the Real County Airport (49R), near Leakey, Texas.  The airline transport pilot-
in-command (PIC), the first officer (FO), and their four passengers were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan was filed 
for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91corporate flight.  The cross-country 
flight originated from Houston, Texas, at 1315.
According to information provided to the NTSB in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report 
(NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the PIC set up for a right hand pattern, visual approach to Runway 15.  
On the downwind leg, the PIC asked the FO for flaps "fifteen degrees," and landing gear 
"down" before proceeding with the landing checklist.  The aircraft descended from 3,100 feet at 
the downwind to base position of the pattern, which positioned the aircraft on an approximate 
3- mile final approach.  While on final, the PIC called for flaps "thirty-five degrees."  The PIC 
reported that the approach speed and descent rate were "normal,"  and the aircraft was on 
short final over the trees at the "desired speed."  Once the trees were clear, the aircraft 
descended to the runway at idle power.  During the descent the PIC noticed a 16-knot increase 
in speed above reference.  The PIC elected to continue "because the aircraft was close to the 
runway" and the PIC thought he had "extra landing distance to work with beyond what was 
required."  According to NetJets, this was the first time that the PIC and FO had landed at 
Leakey.
The PIC reported that the aircraft "floated beyond the desired touchdown point," and "at this 
point [the pilots were] committed to stopping the aircraft."  Passing the last third of the 
runway, the aircraft turned to the right "without" input from the pilots, overran the departure 
end, and collided with trees.  Once the aircraft left the runway, the PIC stowed the thrust 
reversers and attempted to shut down the engines.  Due to the "violent ride," the PIC managed 
to shut down one engine.  A post-impact fire consumed the aircraft after the crew assisted to 
evacuate the occupants.
Two eye-witnesses, who were co-located at the airport, about midfield and to the east of 
Runway 15, observed the aircraft approach and land.  Witness #1 observed the aircraft 
approach from the north, "coming in very fast, and did not touch down until half way down the 
airstrip."  The witness added, that the aircraft "continued at a fast rate of speed" and it became 
evident that the aircraft "could not stop before reaching the end."  Several seconds later, the 
witness saw the aircraft "hit the natural barrier at the end of the strip," and then observed 
smoke and flames.  Witness #2  observed the airplane coming from the north, and when it 
"went by us, it was still in the air."  He stated that the aircraft "hit hard" when it landed, and 
heard the "loud sound" of reverse thrust "just for a second."  He added that when he heard the 
reverse thrust sound, the aircraft "made a shake," and the tires started smoking for a second."  
He stated to witness #1 that, "they are not going to make it, there is no way they can."  After 
that, he observed the aircraft "rolling through the barrier" across the road, and saw flames and 
smoke.  Both witnesses proceeded to the accident site to assist.  
   
According to publications, Runway 15 was a 3,975-foot long by 50- foot wide, asphalt surface, 
Page 4 of 7FTW02LA136
and at the time of the accident, the landing surface was dry.  There were small to medium sized 
trees located approximately 200 feet from the runway threshold.  The Runway 15 threshold 
was displaced 240 feet and the reciprocal runway (33) threshold was displaced 270 feet.  
The NTSB did not travel to the accident site.  The on-site portion of the investigation was 
attended by representatives of the FAA, NetJets, and Cessna, on May 3, 2002.  The information 
they provided is summarized below.
GPS measurements at the accident site confirmed the published 3,975-foot total length.  FAA 
representatives identified the initial touch down area of the aircraft about 2,100 feet from the 
threshold of the runway, as indicated by tire tracks and the relative position of the eye-
witnesses.  Approximately 1,000 feet from the departure end of the runway, tire tracks, 
corresponding to the right landing gear, indicated that the tire was sliding.  The surface area of 
the sliding tracks was in an area of soft tar and asphalt on the right side of the runway.  The 
tracks departed to the right side of the runway and continued on a magnetic heading of 166 
degrees to the final resting position of the aircraft.  Tire tracks indicated the aircraft started 
turning to the right near the displaced threshold of Runway 33 (about 270 feet from the end of 
the paved surface).  Physical evidence showed that the aircraft  passed through a gated fence at 
the end of the pavement, continued through a ditch, crossed a paved two-lane highway, went 
over another ditch, and impacted trees and a second fence.  Approximately 6-feet of the outer 
section of the left wing was found near a 6-8 inch damaged tree.  Vegetation from the damaged 
tree forward along the energy path was burned.  The aircraft came to rest approximately 320 
feet beyond the end of the paved runway surface.  
A post-impact fire consumed most of the fuselage and the inner section of the left wing.  Flight 
control continuity was confirmed from the cockpit controls to the elevator and rudder surfaces, 
and aileron continuity was confirmed from the cockpit to the bellcrank area.  The flap control 
switch in the cockpit was in the takeoff/approach position.  The left main tire was found in the 
vicinity of the left wing debris, and the right main landing gear, including the strut, wheel, 
brake, and tire was found on the right side of the energy path, about 60-feet from the second 
fence.  The right tire was inflated and a flat area on the tread was observed.  The speed brake 
actuators were found in the spoiler extended position.  The gauge on the pneumatic pressure 
container for emergency brake and landing gear actuator indicated in the red zone, about 
1,000 psi (normal green range 1,700-2,000 psi).
On May 8, 2002, the right Wheel speed Transducer, Power Brake/Antiskid Valve, BIT Display 
Unit, and Antiskid Control Unit of the antiskid brake system were removed at Air Salvage of 
Dallas, under the supervision of the NTSB IIC.  The parts were shipped to the component 
manufacturer (Crane Aerospace Hydro-Aire Inc.) for evaluation under the surveillance of the 
FAA.  Component test and evaluation showed that all components operated normally, and were 
capable of providing their intended function at the time of the accident.  The complete test and 
evaluation report is a supplement to this report.
The aircraft was equipped with a cockpit voice recorder.  The cockpit voice recorder (CVR) 
group (NTSB, NetJets, FAA,, Cessna) convened in Washington, D.C., on May 14, 2002, and 
prepared a transcript for the last 10 minutes of the 2-hour duration recording.  The complete 
CVR report is a supplement to this report.
According to the flight manual, based 29.74 in HG, 1,808 PA, 30 degrees Celsius, zero wind, 
and an aircraft landing weight of 14, 500 lbs., the calculated total stopping distance (air and 
Page 5 of 7FTW02LA136
ground distance) at reference speed (Vref), was estimated at 2,955 feet.  According to the 
Cessna 560 Ultra flight manual, the "total distance" is based on full flaps, speed brakes after 
touchdown, Vref at 50 feet over the runway threshold, idle thrust when crossing the threshold, 
and no thrust reverse.
       
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/05/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/20/2001
Flight Time:
4835 hours (Total, all aircraft), 733 hours (Total, this make and model)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/19/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
5136 hours (Total, all aircraft), 345 hours (Total, this make and model)
Page 6 of 7FTW02LA136
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N397QS
Model/Series:
560 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
560-0531
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
10
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/22/2002, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
16500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
16.8 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Jet
Airframe Total Time:
2356.6 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
JT15D-5D
Registered Owner:
Robert E. Allen and 10 co-
owners
Rated Power:
3045 lbs
Operator:
Netjets (as program 
manager)
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.75 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
30°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Houston, TX (HOU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Leakey, TX (49R)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1315 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
Real County (49R)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1640 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
15
IFR Approach:
Visual
Runway Length/Width:
3975 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Page 7 of 7FTW02LA136
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
4 None
Aircraft Fire:
In-Flight
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
6 None
Latitude, Longitude:
29.745278, -99.750833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Alexander Lemishko
Adopted Date:
06/28/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Gary E Stamper; Flight Standards District Office (SW17); San Antonio, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
