National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Springdale, AR
Accident Number: FTW04LA090
Date & Time: 03/04/2004, 2001 CST
Registration: N30SE
Aircraft: Beech BE-200
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Business
 Analysis During the landing roll, the right main landing gear collapsed, and the airplane veered off to the right side the runway, before colliding with multiple taxiway and runway lights.
The 1,400- hour pilot reported that while on approach, the nose wheel position indication light was not illuminated when the landing gear position indication lights were tested.
After conducting a low approach to the runway, the tower advised the pilot that all wheels appeared to be down.
Subsequently, when the nose wheel landing gear touched down on the runway, the right main landing gear collapsed and the right wing struck the ground.
Inspection of the airplane revealed the clevis bolt was separated from the actuator rod on the right main landing gear assembly .
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the right main landing gear actuator clevis bolt for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
LANDING GEAR,NORMAL RETRACTION/EXTENSION ASSEMBLY - DISCONNECTED 2.
MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - NOT ENGAGED ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT Factual Information On March 4, 2004, at 2001 central standard time, a Beech BE-200 twin-engine airplane, N30SE, was substantially damaged when the right main landing gear collapsed during the landing roll at the Springdale Municipal Airport (ASG), near Springdale, Arkansas.
The commercial pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The airplane was registered to and operated by A & M Holdings LLC, of Stuttgart, Arkansas.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 business flight.
The cross-country flight originated from the Stuttgart Municipal Airport (SGT), near Stuttgart, Arkansas, approximately 1920, destined for ASG.
The 1,400-hour pilot reported in the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2) that after being cleared for the approach to runway 18 (5,302-feet wide by 75-feet wide asphalt runway), he extended the landing gear and checked the landing gear position indication lights for agreement.
However, the nose wheel position indication light was not illuminated.
The pilot contacted the ASG Air Traffic Control Tower and notified the controller of the problem.
He performed a low approach to the runway, and the controller advised the pilot that all three wheels "appeared to be down."
The pilot stated that while on downwind for the runway, he briefed his passenger about the situation.
The pilot further stated that he used the emergency landing gear manual extension procedure to lower the wheels, but the nose wheel position indication light still did not illuminate.
During final approach, the pilot "put the airplane in a nose high attitude."
Upon landing, he "kept the nose wheel off as long he could."
Subsequently, when the nose wheel landing gear touched down on the runway, the right main landing gear collapsed and the right wing struck the ground.
The airplane veered off to the right side the runway, colliding with multiple taxiway and runway lights.
An examination of the airplane by an FAA certified airframe and powerplant mechanic revealed that the fuselage aft and below the right side co-pilot's window was damaged by impact with the taxiway lights.
The inspection also revealed the clevis bolt was separated from the actuator rod on the right main landing gear assembly .
A review of the airplane logbooks revealed the airplane completed its most recent phase three and phase four maintenance inspections on October 22, 2003.
The logbook entry for these inspections stated that the "Aviadesign hydraulic landing gear 1,000-hour or 12-month inspection complied with."
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
