National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: Denver, CO
Incident Number: DEN04IA050B
Date & Time: 03/05/2004, 2025 MST
Registration: N482UA
Aircraft: Airbus Industrie A320-232
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 136 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
 Analysis The captain on the United A320 said that during their pushback, a TED A320 was being pushed back at an angle from its gate toward their position.
The captain said he relayed his concern to the ground crew, but did not receive a clear response.
As the TED A320 approached, two persons from their push crew ran out, "apparently to get a better view.
Both airplanes were finally stopped in close proximity.
We were positioned to the east of our push line, toward the other aircraft."
The captain said that he requested that his tug remain in place in case they had to return to the gate for a sick passenger.
When it was determined the passenger could fly, they started engines and released the pushback crew.
He said the crew disconnected and they received a salute and a release from guidance for a left turn out.
The captain said the TED A320 was still connected to its tug and one of its ground crew was standing to the left front of the airplane facing aft.
"He was looking toward us and holding his right hand overhead, and with his left arm out and slightly raised, indicating the wingtip clearance distance."
The captain said, "I taxied slowly forward at idle thrust and eased toward the left."
After a short distance, the wingtips collided causing minor damage to both airplanes.
The United first officer said both he and the captain looked at a ground crew member standing in front and between the two airplanes, looking at us with wand raised and other arm held out horizontally indicating wing clearance.
I called for taxi and we were cleared for a left turn out.
With wing man guidance and a visual check I told the captain we were cleared on the right.
We started to move and I glanced forward.
When I looked back out to the right, the wing walker was gone, and then the wingtips made contact.
One of the ground crew members on the TED A320 said he was wing walking for the airplane on the first officer's side.
Another ground crew member was on the captain's side of the TED A320.
The first ground crew member said the other ground crew member stopped the pushback.
He said he went around to see what was happening.
As he did, the first ground crew member saw the wings of the two airplanes "about 20 to 30 feet apart."
The first ground crew member said he looked at the first officer on the United A320 and gave him "the hold sign."
He said he then went to the tug operator  to discuss the position of the airplane.
As he was talking with the tug operator, the United A320 proceeded to move and clipped the wing of the TED A320.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: STANDING Findings 1.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - FLIGHTCREW OF OTHER AIRCRAFT 2.
(C) PROCEDURES/DIRECTIVES - IMPROPER - GROUND PERSONNEL Factual Information SEE FACTUAL NARRATIVE DEN04IA050A.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
