National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: North Pole, AK
Accident Number: ANC04LA034
Date & Time: 03/05/2004, 1130 AST
Registration: N515N
Aircraft: Cessna 170A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The private certificated pilot attempted to takeoff in his ski-equipped tailwheel airplane from a snow covered runway.
He reported that the airplane didn't seem to accelerate as quickly as it normally did, which he attributed to the snow condition.
The airplane lifted off and settled onto the runway three times before the pilot aborted the takeoff.
He was unable to stop the airplane on the runway, and it ran off the end and collided with a snowbank, receiving substantial damage to the wings, fuselage, and horizontal stabilizer.
The pilot wrote in his report to the NTSB that the accident could have been prevented "by aborting the takeoff in a timely manner."
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's delayed response  in initiating an aborted takeoff, which resulted in an overrun and collision with a snowbank.
Findings Occurrence #1: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 1.
(C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED Findings 2.
TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOWBANK Factual Information On March 5, 2004, about 1130 Alaska daylight time, a ski-equipped Cessna 170A airplane, N515N, received substantial damage when it collided with a snowbank during an aborted takeoff from the Bradley Sky Ranch airstrip, North Pole, Alaska.
The private pilot/airplane owner and the sole passenger were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, and no flight plan was filed.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident, and the intended destination was a remote, off-airport site about 100 miles north of Fort Yukon, Alaska.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 5, at 1430, the pilot related that he was departing on runway 33, which was snow covered and 3,400 feet long.
He described the snow on the airstrip as "soft and sticky."
He said the airplane didn't seem to accelerate as quickly as it normally did, which he attributed to the snow condition.
The airplane continued to accelerate slowly, lifted off, and then settled onto the airstrip.
The pilot said the airplane did this two more times, before he reduced the engine power and aborted the takeoff.
The airplane subsequently ran off the end of the runway and hit a snowbank, sustaining structural damage to the right wing, main landing gear gear box, right horizontal stabilizer, and left wing lift strut.
The pilot wrote in his report to the NTSB that the accident could have been prevented "by aborting the takeoff in a timely manner."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
