The pilot filed an instrument flight rules flight plan for the flight and was communicating with 
an air route traffic control center controller en route. The controller verified that the pilot had 
the local weather information for the intended destination and then he queried the pilot about 
the airplane™s heading (which was north of the direct heading), and the pilot reported that he 
was having trouble with the autopilot. He then asked the pilot if he was able to hold the 
assigned altitude of 8,000 ft mean sea level (msl), and the pilot responded that he could; 
however, the airplane descended below 8,000 ft msl, and the controller then issued an altitude 
of 7,000 ft msl and a heading of 200 degrees. There was no response from the pilot, and radar 
contact was lost. Shortly after, the airplane wreckage was found.
According to air traffic control radar data, the airplane turned left and then right before 
entering a descending left turn. A trajectory and performance study determined that, during 
the flight™s final 18 seconds, the airplane descended from about 8,000 to 2,200 ft msl, 
accelerated to about 300 knots indicated airspeed, and then broke up. According to the Pilot™s 
Operating Handbook, the airplane™s maximum operating limit speed was 172 knots. 
Examinations of the airframe, engines, and autopilot revealed no preimpact mechanical 
malfunctions that would have precluded normal operations, and there was no evidence of 
medical impairment that would have affected the pilot™s performance. The pilot held an 
instrument rating; however, investigators were unable to determine the extent of the pilot™s 
recent night or instrument flight experience. 
Although postaccident testing did not reveal any anomalies with the autopilot system, the pilot 
should have been able to disable the autopilot if it was experiencing a problem and then 
continue to fly the airplane. However, given the available data and his conversation with the 
controller, it is likely that the pilot became focused on the autopilot system and diagnosing the 
reported problem. Dark (moonless) night conditions prevailed for the flight, and, about the 
time of the accident, instrument meteorological conditions with restricted visibility due to rain 
prevailed. Given the pilot™s distraction, the weather conditions encountered during the flight, 
and the sustained descending left turn, it is likely that the pilot experienced spatial 
Page 2 of 11ERA14FA058
disorientation and then lost control of the airplane.
The pilot™s in-flight loss of airplane control due to spatial disorientation while operating in dark 
night instrument meteorological conditions, which resulted in the exceedance of the airplane™s 
design stress limitations and a subsequent in-flight breakup. Contributing to the accident was 
the pilot™s distraction by the reported malfunction of the autopilot system.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 2, 2013, at 1919 eastern standard time (EST), a Piper PA-46-310P, N87NF, was 
destroyed following an inflight break up, and impact with terrain in a heavily wooded area near 
Dawsonville, Georgia. Night instrument meteorological conditions prevailed and an 
instrument flight rules flight plan was filed for the flight. The private pilot was fatally injured. 
The personal flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91. The flight departed Morristown Municipal Airport (MMU), Morristown, New Jersey, 
around 1635 with the intended destination of Dekalb-Peachtree Airport (PDK), Atlanta, 
Georgia.
According to recorded Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Air Traffic Control (ATC) data, 
the airplane checked in on the Atlanta Air Route Traffic Control Center. The controller verified 
that the pilot had the local weather information for the intended destination of PDK. Then, the 
controller queried the pilot about the airplane heading and asked if he was able to hold the 
assigned airplane altitude. The pilot responded affirmative and that he was having trouble with 
his autopilot. The controller then issued the airplane a heading of 200 degrees and an altitude 
of 8,000 feet mean sea level (msl). The aircraft had descended below 8,000 feet msl and the 
controller issued a revised altitude of 7,000 feet msl. There was no response from the flight and 
radar contact was lost, with the last recorded radar data occurring at 1918. Search and Rescue 
was initiated immediately and local law enforcement received emergency calls reporting an 
aircraft crash soon after.
According to a witness, he heard the airplane fly over his house and heard the engine "sputter" 
a bit. In addition, the airplane sounded like it was in an "extremely deep dive" and it seemed 
like the pilot "tried to do full throttle out of the dive."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the pilot held a private pilot 
certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land, multiengine land, and instrument 
airplane. The most recent third-class medical certificate was issued on March 1, 2013, and had 
a restriction of "must wear lenses for distant Œ possess glasses for near vision." This pilot 
reported his flight experience on the most recent medical application, which included 3,500 
total hours and 50 hours in previous six months.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the six-seat, low-wing, retractable gear airplane was issued an 
airworthiness certificate in 1987 and was registered to Culbair LLC in 2007. It was powered by 
a Pratt and Whitney PT-6A-34 750-shaft horsepower engine. It was also driven by a 4-bladed 
Hartzell controllable pitch propeller. According to the airplane maintenance logbooks, the 
most recent annual inspection was performed on January 29, 2013, and at that time, it had 
accumulated 5904.4 hours of total time. In addition, at the time of the annual inspection the 
recorded hobbs time was 1516 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Lee Gimer Memorial Airport (GVL), Gainesville, Georgia, which was located 
approximately 12 miles southeast of the accident location, at an elevation of 1,276 feet, had an 
automated weather observation that recorded the weather at 1853 EST was calm wind, 
visibility 4 miles in mist, ceiling overcast at 500 feet above ground level (agl), temperature 10 
degrees C, dew point 9 degrees C, and an altimeter 29.86 inches of mercury (Hg).
The Atlanta composite reflectivity image at 1917 EST indicated that the last radar target was on 
the leading edge of a large area of light to moderate radar echoes on the range of 15 to 35 dBZ. 
A review of total lightning activity from 1800 through 1930 EST detected no lightning activity 
in the area, supporting light to moderate rain showers and no thunderstorms associated with 
the area of echoes.
The GOES-13 infrared imagery for 1915 EST with the most recent radar target data and the 
frontal position indicated an extensive area of overcast nimbostratus type clouds over the 
region, with a radiative cloud top temperature of negative 13.15 degrees C, which corresponded 
to cloud tops near 16,600 feet.
According to the Astronomical Applications Department at the United States Naval 
Observatory, the official sunset occurred at 1726, end of civil twilight at 1754, with the moonset 
occurring at 1727. At the time of the accident both the Sun and the Moon were more than 15 
degrees below the horizon.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted trees approximately 30 feet agl and then impacted the ground inverted. 
The wreckage path from the initial component found on the ground to the main wreckage was 
about 2,000 feet long on a 220 degree heading. An odor similar to Jet A fuel was noted in the 
field where several components of the airplane were located and at the site of the main 
wreckage.
Nose Section
The engine cowling remained attached. The nose gear was in the retracted position. Three of 
the propeller blades remained attached to the propeller flange. The spinner remained attached 
to the propeller but was impact damaged. The forth propeller blade was located in dirt 
underneath the propeller flange and it exhibited S-bending. An undeterminable amount of 
fluid that smelled similar to Jet A fuel was drained from the header tank just aft of the firewall.
Engine
The engine remained attached to the firewall through wires and all engine mounts. Several 
power turbine blades were discovered on the ground underneath the engine. The exhaust area 
of the engine exhibited impact damage. The compressor turbine and power turbine blades 
exhibited rotational scoring. In addition the compressor turbine was rotated by hand and 
mechanical continuity was confirmed between the compressor and the accessory gear box. 
Also, rotational scoring was noted on the downstream side of the power turbine vanes. The oil 
and fuel filter were removed and no debris was noted. In addition oil was discovered in the oil 
filter housing and fuel was noted in the fuel filter housing. The magnetic chip detector was 
removed with no material noted on the magnetic poles. The compressor bleed valve was 
manually operated with no anomalies noted. The fuel pump was turned by hand with no 
anomalies noted. The fuel control housing was impact damaged but remained attached to the 
engine.
Right Wing
The outboard 10 foot section of the right wing was located along the debris path about 700 feet 
from the main wreckage in the field. The wing spar was bent in the negative direction. The 
inboard approximate 7 feet remained attached to the fuselage and exhibited crush damage 
about one foot from the fuselage. In addition, the inboard section of the flap remained attached 
to the wing. The outboard section of the flap separated from the wing but was co-located in the 
field where the outboard section of the right wing was located. The outboard section of the 
right aileron was separated from the wing and found in the field located 700 feet north of the 
main wreckage. The inboard section of the right aileron was separated from the wing and 
located 2,000 feet east northeast from the main wreckage, across the pond. The flap was in the 
retracted position. The outboard section of the wing contained an undeterminable amount of 
fuel. In addition, the fuel lines located in the inboard section of the right wing contained fuel. 
The right wing main fuel tank fuel cap remained attached, seated correctly, and locked in 
position. The right main landing gear remained attached to the right wing in the retracted 
position.
Tail Section
The aft section of the fuselage was separated at the aft pressure bulkhead. The left and right 
horizontal stabilizer were separated from the empennage and found in the field 700 feet from 
the main wreckage. The left and right elevator counterweights were separated from the elevator 
and found in the field. The left and right inboard sections of the elevator remained attached to 
each other and were found in the field. The left and right midsection of the elevator were 
separated and found along the debris path, on a road approximately 900 feet from the main 
wreckage. The rudder was found in the field located 700 feet from the main wreckage. The 
vertical stabilizer was located next to the road approximately 850 feet from the main wreckage. 
Cable continuity was confirmed from the base of the rudder pedals to the rudders through 
several cable fractures. All separations exhibited tensile overload. The pitch trim drum showed 
nine threads of upper shaft extension, which was consistent with a neutral trim setting. The 
leading edges of the left and right horizontal stabilizer were splayed open and exhibited impact 
damage. The tail cone was located near the aft portion of the main wreckage and was impact 
damaged. The two static ports located of the aft right side of the fuselage were free and clear of 
debris.
Left Wing
The outboard approximate 15 foot section of the left wing was found separated from the 
fuselage and located in a field about 700 feet from the main wreckage. The wing spar was bent 
in the negative direction. The inboard section of the left aileron remained attached to the 
outboard section of the wing. The outboard section of the aileron was separated from the wing 
and found in the field. The inboard approximate 4 foot section of the left wing remained 
attached to the fuselage and exhibited slight crush and impact damage. The outboard section of 
the left wing contained an undeterminable amount of fuel and the fuel caps remained secured 
and seated. The left flap was separated from the wing. The flap was discovered in the retracted 
position. Flap control continuity was confirmed for the flaps even though the control rod 
separated from the flap motor assembly in tensile overload. The aileron was separated and 
cable continuity was confirmed from the base of the control column to the associated fracture 
points out to the aileron. The aileron cable exhibited tensile overload at all fracture points. The 
left aileron cable was noted outside the pulley retaining pin beneath the aft facing left seat. A 
flap setting could not be determined from the flap actuator because it was impact damaged. 
The left main landing gear remained in the up and locked position. The left main gear door was 
separated from the wing.
Cockpit
The cockpit exhibited extensive vertical crush damage. The engine controls were intact. The 
power lever and propeller lever were in the full forward position. The condition lever was in the 
midrange position. A hobbs meter in the airplane indicated 1602.2 hours. Both yokes remained 
attached to the control column. The top left section of the right front seat was deformed down 
and aft. The top right section of the front left seat was deformed slightly aft and down. The lap 
belts and shoulder harnesses of the front seats did not exhibit web stretching or deformation. 
In addition, all seat belts remained attached to their respective attach points. A pair of eye 
glasses was discovered in the forward section of the cabin. Flight control continuity was 
confirmed from the cockpit to all flight control surfaces through tensile overload breaks.
Cabin
The right aft facing seat bottom cushion was separated from the seat. In addition, the right 
forward facing seat bottom cushion was separated. All other seat cushions remained attached 
to their respective seat pans. All seats remained attached to their respective cabin area 
structure.
Fuselage
The fuselage came to rest beneath the initial tree impact point. It came to rest inverted and the 
top portion of the fuselage exhibited vertical crush damage. The main cabin door remained 
attached to the fuselage and the lower section was in the locked position. In addition, the aft 
utility door remained attached; however, it was found open.
There were several strikes in the tree that the airplane impacted that exhibited a few areas cut 
around a 45 degree angle. In addition, the areas of cut wood had a paint transfer similar to a 
black color.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on December 4, 2013, by the Georgia Bureau of 
Investigation, Division of Forensic Sciences. The autopsy findings included the cause of death 
as "multiple blunt impact injuries."
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The toxicology report stated no 
ethanol or drugs were detected in the blood.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Autopilot System
The airplane was equipped with a KFC 150 Flight Control System, which consisted of a three-
axis autopilot system with a flight computer. According to the Bendix King KFC 150 operating 
manual, "the flight director system [was] was computer which calculate[d] the appropriate 
pitch and roll attitudes required to intercept and maintain headings, courses, approach paths, 
pitch attitudes, and altitudes. Once computed the commands [were] displayed to the pilot." 
The autopilot system consisted of a flight computer, flight command indicator, pictorial 
navigation indicator, slaved directional gyroscope, yaw rate gyroscope, yaw computer, yaw 
servo, roll servo, pitch servo, pitch trim servo, and autopilot disconnect.
The General Emergency Procedures section of the autopilot operating handbook indicated:
1.Disengage Autopilot/Yaw Damp
a.Simultaneously regain control of aircraft and hold down Autopilot Disconnect Trim 
Interrupt button.
b.Pull Autopilot circuit breaker.
c.Release autopilot disconnect/trim interrupt button.
The autopilot system from the airplane was sent to the manufacturer for further examination 
and testing under FAA supervision. The examination revealed that the yaw servo, pitch servo, 
and roll servo tested without any anomalies noted. Both the roll and pitch servo mount slip 
clutches measured below the tolerance limits for the testing procedures. The yaw servo mount 
slip clutch was tested without any anomalies noted. The directional gyro had a resistor that was 
dislodged from the board due to impact forces. A replacement resistor was installed and the 
unit was functionally tested with no anomalies noted.
For more information concerning the examination and testing of the autopilot system, the 
examination report can be found in the public docket for this case.
Electronic Devices
A Garmin GPSMAP 696 handheld global positioning (GPS), a Garmin 496 handheld GPS, an 
Avidyne EX500, and an engine monitor were located, removed, and sent to the NTSB Recorder 
Laboratory for data download.
The Garmin GPSMAP 696 contained data that was recorded at the time of the accident flight. 
The data began at 1610 and continued until 1919. The last recorded data points indicated that 
the airplane was on a direct course to PDK, made a slight left turn, and then a right turn 
approximately 180 degrees away from the track toward PDK at 1916. Then, it made a turn back 
to the left approximately 360 degrees and continued the bank and began a descent until the 
data points ended.
Data was unable to be extracted from neither the Avidyne EX500 nor the Shadin Engine Trend 
Monitor due to impact damage.
Trajectory and Performance Studies
A trajectory study and a performance study were performed using GPS data and ATC data in 
order to determine the altitude of the inflight breakup of the airplane. An airplane performance 
history was developed using airplane characteristics, atmospheric data, and record radar and 
GPS data. The airplane had descended to about 8,000 feet msl and had a ground speed of 
about 175 knots when it started the slight turn to the left. The study determined that in the final 
maneuver, the airplane descended from about 8,000 feet msl to approximately 2,200 feet, 
accelerated to about 300 knots of indicated airspeed, and broke up in 18 seconds.
According to the manufacturer's flight manual, the airplane's maximum operating limit speed 
(Vmo) was 172 knots, and its design maneuvering speed (Va) was 137 knots at maximum gross 
weight.
For more information concerning the trajectory and performance studies, the full reports can 
be found in the public docket for this case.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Spatial Disorientation
According to the FAA Airplane Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-3), "Night flying is very 
different from day flying and demands more attention of the pilot. The most noticeable 
difference is the limited availability of outside visual references. Therefore, flight instruments 
should be used to a greater degree.– Generally, at night it is difficult to see clouds and 
restrictions to visibility, particularly on dark nights or under overcast. The pilot flying under 
VFR must exercise caution to avoid flying into clouds or a layer of fog." The handbook 
described some hazards associated with flying in airplanes under VFR when visual references, 
such as the ground or horizon, are obscured. "The vestibular sense (motion sensing by the 
inner ear) in particular tends to confuse the pilot. Because of inertia, the sensory areas of the 
inner ear cannot detect slight changes in the attitude of the airplane, nor can they accurately 
sense attitude changes that occur at a uniform rate over a period of time. On the other hand, 
false sensations are often generated; leading the pilot to believe the attitude of the airplane has 
changed when in fact, it has not. These false sensations result in the pilot experiencing spatial 
disorientation."
According to the FAA Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-15), a rapid acceleration 
"...stimulates the otolith organs in the same way as tilting the head backwards. This action 
creates the somatogravic illusion of being in a nose-up attitude, especially in situations without 
good visual references. The disoriented pilot may push the aircraft into a nose-low
or dive attitude."
The FAA publication Medical Facts for Pilots (AM-400-03/1), described several vestibular 
illusions associated with the operation of aircraft in low visibility conditions. Somatogyral 
illusions, those involving the semicircular canals of the vestibular system, were generally 
placed into one of four categories, one of which was the "graveyard spiral." According to the 
text, the graveyard spiral, "–is associated with a return to level flight following an intentional 
or unintentional prolonged bank turn. For example, a pilot who enters a banking turn to the 
left will initially have a sensation of a turn in the same direction. If the left turn continues (~20 
seconds or more), the pilot will experience the sensation that the airplane is no longer turning 
to the left. At this point, if the pilot attempts to level the wings this action will produce a 
sensation that the airplane is turning and banking in the opposite direction (to the right). If the 
pilot believes the illusion of a right turn (which can be very compelling), he/she will reenter the 
original left turn in an attempt to counteract the sensation of a right turn. Unfortunately, while 
this is happening, the airplane is still turning to the left and losing latitude.
Pulling the control yoke/stick and applying power while turning would not be a good ideaŒ
because it would only make the left turn tighter. If the pilot fails to recognize the illusion and 
does not level the wings, the airplane will continue turning left and losing altitude until it 
impacts the ground."
According to the FAA Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-15A), Chapter 11 
"Emergency Operations," stated "Factors that reduce [situational awareness] include: 
distractions, unusual or unexpected events, complacency, high workload, unfamiliar situations, 
and inoperative equipment. In some situations, a loss of [situational awareness] may be 
beyond a pilot's control. For example, a pneumatic system failure and associated loss of the 
attitude and heading indicators could cause a pilot to find his or her aircraft in an unusual 
attitude."
