Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
PAUL, ID
Accident Number:
SEA99LA079
Date & Time:
06/01/1999, 1200 MDT 
Registration:
N1665S
Aircraft:
Snow S2C
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The pilot reported that after the airplane lifted off, it was not flying as well as it had on the 
previous six flights that morning.  The pilot immediately opened the emergency dump which 
also controls the rate of application.  The pilot reported that as he flipped the metal tab out of 
the way of the dump handle, the tab would not flip clear of the handle because of interference 
with the seat frame.  The pilot was aware of this problem, however, he stated that he could hold 
the stop up with one finger and force the handle around the stop.  The airplane continued to fly 
in ground effect as the pilot continued to try to dump the load.  About one mile off the end of 
the airstrip, the airplane collided with a slight rise in the terrain.  The pilot stated that he 
thought that he could have cleared the rise if he could have dumped the load more quickly.  The 
type certificate data sheet for this aircraft indicates a gross weight of 4,400 pounds.  The pilot 
reported that he was not aware of the requirement, and had not demonstrated the maximum 
set gross weight for the conditions to the FAA per Part 137 certification.  The pilot reported that 
he estimated the weight of the load based on visual volume that had been previously weighed 
(approximately 1,000 to 1,100 pounds).  The density altitude was estimated and determined to 
be approximately 5,684 feet at the time of the accident which utilized the pilot's estimated 
temperature.  The weather reporting facility closest to the accident site reported a temperature 
10 degrees warmer than the pilot's estimate.  Utilizing the weather reporting facility, the 
density altitude would have been about 6,277 feet. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inaccurate weight and balance calculations, and his delay in jettisoning the load 
which resulted in his failure to clear rising terrain.  Contributing to the accident was the high 
density altitude, and the pilot's intentional operation with known deficiencies in equipment. 
Page 2 of 6SEA99LA079
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - INACCURATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) LOAD JETTISON - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) ALTITUDE - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - RISING
5. (F) OPERATION WITH KNOWN DEFICIENCIES IN EQUIPMENT - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH DENSITY ALTITUDE
Page 3 of 6SEA99LA079
Factual Information
 On June 1, 1999, at 1200 mountain daylight time, a Snow S2C, N1665S, registered to and 
operated by Mustang Aviation as a 14 CFR Part 137, aerial application flight, collided with the 
terrain shortly after takeoff from a private airstrip near Paul, Idaho.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the local flight.  The airplane 
was substantially damaged and the commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  
During a telephone interview and subsequent written statement, the pilot reported that this 
was the seventh flight of the day, and that the load (approximately 1,000 to 1,100 pounds of dry 
fertilizer), was based on visual volume that had been previously weighed the day before.  The 
pilot reported that he had flown 18 flights the day before under similar temperature conditions 
(62 degrees F) and load volume without incident.  
The pilot reported that after the airplane lifted off, he felt that the airplane was not flying as 
well as it had on the previous flights that day.  The pilot stated that he immediately opened the 
emergency dump which also controls the rate of application.  The pilot reported that as he 
flipped the metal tab out of the way of the dump handle, the tab would not flip clear of the 
handle because of interference with the seat frame.  The pilot reported that at the rate that was 
set for the application, it would take about three miles to empty the hopper.  The pilot reported 
that he was aware of this problem, but he could hold the stop up with one finger and force the 
handle around the stop.  The pilot reported that he was flying the airplane in ground effect and 
trying to move the dump handle around the stop, when the airplane collided with a rise in the 
terrain.  The main landing gear contacted the ground first, followed by the left wing.  The main 
landing gear collapsed and the airplane came to rest 90 degrees from the direction of travel, 
and about 50 yards from the initial impact point.  The accident site was about one mile from 
the end of the airstrip.   The pilot stated that if he could have dumped more of the load more 
quickly, he probably could have flown over the rising terrain.
The type certificate data sheet for this aircraft's serial number indicates a gross weight of 4,400 
pounds.  The pilot reported that he was not aware of the requirement, and had not 
demonstrated the maximum set gross weight for the conditions to the Federal Aviation 
Administration per Part 137 certification.
A Federal Aviation Administration Inspector from the Boise, Idaho, Flight Standards District 
Office, responded to the accident site and documented the aircraft's emergency dump system.  
The inspector reported that the design of the system in the aircraft is different than the 
manufacturers drawings.    
At 1153, the Twin Falls airport, located 36 miles west of Paul, was reporting a temperature of 72 
degrees F, and 29.81" Hg.  The elevation at Twin Falls is 4,151 feet.  Utilizing the temperature 
and pressure altitude from Twin Falls, the density altitude at Paul would have been 
approximately 6,277 feet.  Utilizing the pilot's estimated temperature of 62 degrees, the density 
altitude would have been approximately 5,684 feet.  The elevation at Paul is 4,300 feet.
Page 4 of 6SEA99LA079
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
50, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/18/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
456 hours (Total, all aircraft), 20 hours (Total, this make and model), 384 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 83 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 56 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Snow
Registration:
N1665S
Model/Series:
S2C S2C
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
1238C
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/03/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
20 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
R-985
Registered Owner:
SPAULDING AERIAL 
APPLICATION
Rated Power:
450 hp
Operator:
SPAULDING AERIAL 
APPLICATION
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Page 5 of 6SEA99LA079
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
15 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1200 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
DEBRA      J ECKROTE
Adopted Date:
08/03/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
NICK   WEBBER; BOISE, ID
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA99LA079
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
