The pilot had just taken off and was climbing at 80 percent power (5,000 rpm) when he 
noticed the EGT rising "into redline 1,625 degrees F." He leveled off, reduced power to 4,800 
rpm, and reduced propeller pitch. EGT stopped rising and came down slightly, but was still 
above redline. All other engine indications were normal. EGT continued to rise and the engine 
started losing power and was "running rough." The pilot tried to land at a nearby airport, but 
was forced to make a landing in an open field. He said he flared at the the last moment and hit 
the ground sharply. The nose wheel broke off when it struck a tire track and the airplane nosed 
over. The pilot, who also built the airplane, suspected detonation caused the rise in EGT.
the loss of engine power as a result of detonation. A contributing factor was the unsuitable 
terrain on which to make a forced landing.
On March 1, 2001, approximately 1550 mountain standard time, a Meshko-Zenair CH-701, 
N4386W, was substantially damaged when it collided with the ground during a forced landing 
in a field north of Platte Valley Airpark, Hudson, Colorado. The private pilot, the sole occupant 
in the airplane, received serious injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed for this personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91. The 
flight had originated at Greeley-Weld County Airport, Greeley, Colorado, at approximately 
1530.
According to the pilot's accident report, he had just taken off and was climbing at 80 percent 
power (5,000 rpm) when he noticed the exhaust gas temperature (EGT) rising "into redline 
1,625 degrees F." The pilot leveled off, reduced power to 4,800 rpm, and reduced propeller 
pitch. The EGT stopped rising and came down slightly, but was still above redline. All other 
engine indications were normal. EGT continued to rise and the engine started losing power and 
"running rough." The airplane began losing altitude so the pilot slowed to 45 mph and selected 
an open field. He flared "at [the] last moment [and] hit [the] ground sharply." The nose wheel 
ran over a tire track in the ground and was sheared off. The strut dug into the ground and the 
airplane nosed over.
The pilot, who was also the builder of the airplane, suspected detonation caused the rise in 
EGT.
