The pilot stated that prior to takeoff, both fuel tanks were topped off.  While enroute to the 
intended destination, the engine RPM began to decrease, and subsequently, the engine lost 
total power.  During the forced landing, the nose landing gear contacted a drainage terrace, and 
the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.  The airplane was turned upright, the right 
fuel tank was found empty, and left fuel tank contained residual fuel.  The right fuel cap was 
found unlocked and hanging out of the fuel cell by its retaining chain.  The pilot stated that 
some of the fuel may have been syphoned out of the fuel tank due to a loose fuel cap.
fuel exhaustion due to a loose fuel cap as a result of the pilot's inadequate preflight.   A 
contributory factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
On March 2, 2001, at 1545 central standard time, a Cessna 182P single-engine airplane, 
N4721K, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine power 
near Tuttle, Oklahoma.  The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.  The 
airplane was registered to and operated by Kremmling Flying, Inc., of Kremmling, Colorado.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a visual flight rules flight plan was filed for the 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The airplane departed Kremmling, 
Colorado, at 1045 mountain standard time, and was destined for the University of Oklahoma 
Westheimer Airport near Norman, Oklahoma.  
The pilot stated that prior to takeoff, both fuel tanks were topped off.  Approximately 15 miles 
from the intended destination, at 3,500 feet msl, the engine RPM began to decrease.  The pilot 
pulled the carburetor heat ON, and the "RPMs picked back up."  Approximately 10 seconds 
later, the engine RPM started to decrease again.  The pilot adjusted the mixture control, 
applied full propeller RPM, and repositioned the fuel selector, in an attempt to regain engine 
power; however, no change in engine power was noted.  The pilot contacted the Westheimer 
control tower and declared an emergency.  With the propeller windmilling, the pilot executed a 
forced landing to a field.  During the touchdown, the nose landing gear contacted a "drainage 
terrace," and the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.  
According to an FAA inspector, who responded to the accident site, after the airplane was 
turned upright, the right fuel tank was found empty, and the left fuel tank contained residual 
fuel.  The right fuel cap was found unlocked and hanging out of the fuel cell by its retaining 
chain.  
The pilot reported that the airplane was equipped with long-range 88-gallon capacity fuel 
tanks and had an endurance of approximately 6 hours and 45 minutes of flight time.  The pilot 
stated that some of the fuel may have been syphoned out of the fuel tank due to a loose fuel 
cap.
