The pilot of the helicopter was looking for a group of people to be picked up at a designated 
point. Flying over the location, he realized that they had not yet arrived, so he decided to land 
at an alternate location and await their arrival. He had landed at the alternate location 
previously but not on the day of the accident. He said the visibility was good, but there were no 
shadows due to the overcast. The approach was normal, and the pilot used a small pine tree to 
the right front quarter of the helicopter as a reference point. As the helicopter touched down, 
the pilot heard a loud noise and the helicopter yawed. Believing there had been a mechanical 
failure, the pilot lowered the collective control and closed the throttle. Postaccident inspection 
revealed there had not been a mechanical failure. Rather, the pilot had not seen the snow 
covered slope to the left front quarter of the helicopter. The main rotor blades struck the 
surface of the ground and the helicopter settled into deep snow. The transmission separated 
from its mounts, the main rotor blades were destroyed, and the tail boom was severed.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate lateral and vertical clearance during landing. Factors 
were the clouds and snow-covered high terrain.
On March 2, 2001, at approximately 1200 mountain standard time, N9HE, a Bell 407, owned 
and operated by Helicopter Express, Inc., of Lawrenceville, Georgia, was substantially 
damaged when it collided with terrain while landing about 22 miles southwest of Jackson, 
Wyoming. The commercial certificated pilot, the sole occupant aboard, was not injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the positioning flight 
being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91. The flight originated approximately 1020.
According to the pilot's accident report, the pilot was looking for a group of people to be picked 
up at a designated point. Flying over the location, he realized that they had not yet arrived, so 
he decided to land at an alternate location and await their arrival. He had landed at the 
alternate location previously but not on the day of the accident. He said the visibility was good, 
but there were no shadows due to the overcast. The approach was normal, and the pilot used a 
small pine tree to the right front quarter of the helicopter as a reference point. As the helicopter 
touched down, the pilot heard a loud noise and the helicopter yawed. Believing there had been 
a mechanical failure, the pilot lowered the collective control and closed the throttle.
Postaccident inspection revealed that the main rotor blades struck a snow covered slope to the 
left front quarter of the helicopter, and the helicopter settled into deep snow. The transmission 
separated from its mounts, the main rotor blades were destroyed, and the tail boom was 
severed.
