The pilot made an approach to a high hover due to the rough/uneven terrain.  As the pilot was 
hovering the helicopter to a level area at 40 feet agl, the helicopter began to yaw to the right.  
The pilot stated that he hover taxied through his "rotor wash," and the helicopter encountered 
"loss of tail rotor effectiveness."  The pilot increased collective in an attempt to takeoff, and the 
helicopter made "two quick revolutions."  The pilot stated that he elected to land the helicopter 
instead of continuing with the takeoff due to power lines and rising terrain.  The pilot initiated 
an autorotation, and the helicopter touched down on the soft ground while still rotating, 
collapsing the left landing skid.  Subsequently, the tail rotor and main rotor blades struck the 
ground.  The helicopter came to rest leaning toward its left side.
the helicopter's encounter with loss of tail rotor effectiveness while hovering out-of-ground 
effect, and the pilot's failure to maintain control.  A contributing factor was the soft terrain 
condition.
On March 2, 2001, at 1500 central standard time, a Hughes 369D helicopter, N8356F, was 
substantially damaged following a loss of directional control while landing near Canadian, 
Texas.  The helicopter was owned and operated by a private individual.  The airline transport 
pilot and both passengers were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a 
flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 business flight.  The 
flight had originated from a private helipad near Amarillo, Texas, approximately 1415.
According to the pilot, he made an approach to a high hover due to the rough/uneven terrain.  
As he was hovering the helicopter at 40 feet agl to a level area, the helicopter began to yaw to 
the right.  The pilot stated that he hover taxied through his "rotor wash," and the helicopter 
encountered "loss of tail rotor effectiveness."  He increased collective in an attempt to takeoff, 
and the helicopter made "two quick revolutions."  The pilot stated that he elected to land the 
helicopter instead of continuing with the takeoff due to power lines and rising terrain.  The 
pilot initiated an autorotation, and the helicopter touched down on the soft ground while still 
rotating, collapsing the left landing skid.  Subsequently, the tail rotor and main rotor blades 
struck the ground.  The helicopter came to rest leaning toward its left side. 
Examination of the helicopter by the FAA inspector revealed that the tail rotor drive shaft was 
twisted and separated about 6 inches forward of the tail rotor gearbox.  The tailboom was bent 
and one tail rotor blade was found separated.  Control continuity was confirmed from the anti-
torque pedals to the tail rotor pitch change links.  All five main rotor blades were damaged.
