The pilot reported that he had been monitoring an increase in the fuel burn rate over a period 
of time.  His normal leaning procedure for best power operating from 5,800 feet mean sea level 
required more mixture control travel.  On the day of the accident, it was the second time that 
the engine had failed to respond to throttle input.  The subsequent loss of engine power 
occurred low to the terrain.  Post accident examination of the carburetor revealed a black 
composite float that felt heavier than normal.  One pontoon exhibited light damage to the 
smooth shell.  The engine spark plugs were lightly fuel sooted.  According to Precision 
Airmotive Corporation "mandatory" Service Bulletin MSA-1(replacement of composite floats 
with metal floats), the type certificate holder of the carburetor, states that; "field reports 
indicate that composite floats may be absorbing fluid and sinking," replace the existing 
composite float with a metal float.  A sinking float may result in disruption of fuel flow to the 
engine, Precision Airmotive therefore considers the replacement of composite floats with metal 
floats mandatory.  Compliance is optional for 14 CFR Part 91 operators.
  
 
Loss of engine power caused by a fuel soaked float pontoon causing an over rich fuel/air 
mixture, in a critical phase of flight.
On June 1, 2000, at 0615 hours Pacific daylight time, a PA-18-150, N4872A, collided with 
terrain while maneuvering near Austin, Nevada.  The aircraft sustained substantial damage 
and the certificated commercial pilot and his passenger received minor injuries.  The aircraft 
was being operated as a public-use flight by the United States Department of Agriculture, 
Office of Wildlife Services, when the accident occurred.  The flight originated from the Austin 
airport at 0600.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and a VFR company 
flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that he had been monitoring an increase in the fuel burn rate over a period 
of time.  His normal leaning procedure for best power operating from 5,800 feet mean sea level 
required more mixture control travel.  On the day of the accident, it was the second time that 
the engine had failed to respond to throttle input.  The subsequent loss of engine power 
occurred low to the terrain.
Post accident examination of the carburetor revealed a black composite float that felt heavier 
than normal.  One pontoon exhibited light damage to the smooth shell.  The engine spark plugs 
were lightly fuel sooted.   
According to Precision Airmotive Corporation "mandatory" Service Bulletin MSA-1 
(replacement of composite floats with metal floats), the type certificate holder of the 
carburetor, states that; "field reports indicate that composite floats may be absorbing fluid and 
sinking," replace the existing composite float with a metal float.  A sinking float may result in 
disruption of fuel flow to the engine, Precision Airmotive therefore considers the replacement 
of composite floats with metal floats mandatory.  Compliance is optional for 14 CFR Part 91 
operators.
  
