The pilot flew the agricultural airplane around the target area (crawfish pond) to be sprayed, 
'looking for obstacles and wind direction.'  The pilot made the first spray run from the north to 
the south, and the second pass from the south to north.  After completing the second run, the 
pilot passed over power lines and executed a turn to the right and into the direction of the sun.  
According to the pilot, the sunlight and glare on the windscreen 'blocked my vision' 
temporarily.  While still in the turn, the pilot regained 'forward vision' and realized the airplane 
was flying 'into the power lines.'  After striking the power lines, the airplane came to rest 
upright in the crawfish pond. 
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the power lines while maneuvering during an 
aerial application flight. A factor was the sunglare on the windscreen. 
 On June 1, 2000, at 0820 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-401B agricultural airplane, 
N5028Q, struck a power line during an aerial application flight near Thibodaux, Louisiana.  
The airplane was owned and operated by Golden Ranch Aviation, Inc., of Schriever, Louisiana, 
under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 137.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant, received 
serious injuries, and the airplane sustained substantial damage.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The flight originated 
approximately 0800 from the Golden Ranch Aviation, Inc., private airstrip.
According to the pilot's statement, the pilot circled the target area (a crawfish pond, located 
approximately 10-12 miles northwest of the airstrip) to be sprayed, "looking for obstacles and 
wind direction."  The pilot made the first spray run from the north to the south, and the second 
pass from the south to north.  After completing the second run, the pilot passed over power 
lines and executed a turn to the right and into the direction of the sun.  According to the pilot, 
the sunlight and glare on the windscreen "blocked [his] vision" temporarily.  While still in the 
turn, the pilot regained "forward vision" and realized the airplane was flying "into the power 
lines."  After striking the power lines, the airplane came to rest upright in the crawfish pond.  
According to the U.S. Naval Observatory Astronomical Applications Department, the official 
sunrise on June 1, 2000, occurred at 0603.  
According to the FAA inspector, who examined the wreckage, the wings sustained spar 
damage, and the propeller was damaged.
