The airplane was seen high and fast on the approach to runway 36, which was 1,400 feet long.  
A witness said the airplane landed about halfway down the runway, departed the end of the 
runway, and impacted with trees.  The flight instructor (CFI) stated, that the student was at the 
controls and had turned base leg. The CFI stated, '...I assisted him to final leg he was fast and 
high.  I took over the control [and landed [on the] first 1/3 [of the runway] but I was fast [and] 
ran out the runway length.'  The FAA reported, that the pilot 'landed long' on a short grass field 
and 'failed to stop' the aircraft before impacting trees. 
the flight instructor failed to maintain control of the airplane after landing, which resulted in 
an on ground collision with a tree.  Factors in this accident were the flight instructor allowed 
the student to get too fast and high on the approach. 
 On June 1, 2000, about 1215 central daylight time, a Piper PA-38-112, N9423T, 
registered to a private individual impacted with trees after landing at Hopper Field near 
Steens, Mississippi.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan 
was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 instructional flight.  The airplane received substantial damage.  
The commercial-rated pilot/certified flight instructor (CFI) reported serious injuries.  The 
student pilot reported no injuries.  The flight departed from Fayette, Alabama, at 1100 en route 
to Steen, Mississippi.
According to the airport manager, who witnessed the accident, the airplane was high 
and fast on the approach to runway 36, which was 1,400 feet long.  The witness said the 
airplane landed about halfway down the runway, departed the end of the runway, and 
impacted with trees.
The CFI stated, "...student... turned base leg I assisted him to final leg he was fast and 
high.  I took over the control [and] landed [on the] first 1/3 [of the runway] but I was fast [and] 
ran out the runway length."
The student pilot stated, "...the third approach was also 900 feet, I asked for a go or no 
go, [the CFI] told me he had it I thought he was going to make a lower approach for a better 
look then go around and line up on final at a lower altitude.  The approach seemed a little high, 
and a slight wind out of the south could have been a factor.  Our speed on final seemed a little 
high.  Initial touchdown was about 100-150 feet from the end of the runway...the airplane 
developed lift and flew another 100 feet before touchdown.  At this point [the CFI] applied the 
brakes with full pressure, then completely locked a few seconds later.  Speed was still excessive 
at this point with only 300 feet of runway left...our speed seemed to be about 50-60 mph." 
The FAA inspector stated on his report, "...pilot landed long on a short grass field and 
failed to stop the aircraft before impacting trees."
