The pilot stated that he had been on an aerial application flight, spraying fertilizer on local 
fields.  He had applied 18 loads and was returning to pick up his 19th load of fertilizer.  During 
the landing roll on the grass airstrip, 'the aircraft started turning right and ground looped 
before [he] corrected directional control.'  The main landing gear collapsed, the fuel tank 
ruptured, and a fire erupted, which consumed the airplane.  The pilot reported that the airstrip 
was oriented north-south, and there was a 10-12 mph crosswind from the east at the time of the 
accident. 
The failure of the pilot to maintain directional control during the landing roll, which resulted in 
a ground loop.  A factor was the crosswind. 
 On June 1, 2000, at 1500 central daylight time, a Grumman-Schweizer G164B agricultural 
airplane, N48723, was destroyed when it ground looped during landing roll on a private grass 
airstrip near Natchitoches, Louisiana.  The airplane was owned and operated by Valley Air, 
Inc., of Natchitoches, Louisiana.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant, was not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and a flight plan was not filed.  The 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight originated approximately 1445.
The pilot stated that he had been on an aerial application flight, spraying fertilizer on local 
fields.  He had applied 18 loads and was returning to pick up his 19th load of fertilizer.  The 
pilot stated that during the landing roll, "the aircraft started turning right and ground looped 
before [he] corrected directional control."  The main landing gear collapsed, the fuel tank 
ruptured, and a fire erupted.  The pilot reported the airstrip was oriented north-south, and 
there was a 10-12 mph crosswind from the east at the time of the accident.    
The cockpit, fuselage, horizontal stabilizer, and vertical stabilizer were consumed by the fire.  
The cabane struts were structurally damaged, which resulted in the top wing collapsing and 
coming to rest on the forward part of the fuselage.  The three-bladed propeller and radial 
engine remained attached to the airplane.
