The private pilot stated that the airplane's preflight inspection and pre-takeoff engine run-up 
did not reveal any anomalies.  The night cross-country flight departed from runway 01L and 
the airplane was climbing through 1,100 feet msl (463 feet agl) when the pilot noticed a hot 
smell and, subsequently, the engine lost total power.  The pilot attempted to find a landing area 
and the pilot-rated passenger, who was a certified flight instructor (CFI), attempted to re-start 
the engine; however, the engine did not re-start.  The pilot then relinquished control of the 
airplane to the CFI and a forced landing was executed.  During the forced landing, the airplane 
impacted a tree and came to a stop upright.  A pilot-rated witness added that he heard the 
airplane's engine 'missing badly,' during the initial takeoff climb.  The airframe and engine 
logbooks were examined and no open maintenance discrepancies were noted.  The reason for 
the loss of engine power was not determined during the airframe examination or engine test 
run. 
the loss of engine power for an undetermined reason.  A contributing factor was the lack of 
suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
 On June 1, 2000, at 0200 central daylight time, a Piper PA-28-180, N7271W, was substantially 
damaged when it impacted terrain following a loss of engine power after takeoff from the 
Richard Lloyd Jones Jr. Airport, Tulsa, Oklahoma.  The private pilot and three passengers 
sustained serious injuries and one passenger sustained minor injuries.  The airplane was 
registered to and operated by a private individual.  Night visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight, and a flight plan was 
not filed.  The cross-country flight was originating at the time of the accident and was destined 
for the Meadow Lake Airport, Colorado Springs, Colorado.
According to the private pilot, on May 31, 2000, he flew the airplane from Colorado Springs to 
Tulsa, arrived at 2355, and experienced no anomalies with the airplane during the flight.  He 
met his brother, who was a certified flight instructor (CFI), and his brother's three children 
upon arrival and prepared for a return flight to Colorado Springs.  On June 1, 2000, at 0130 he 
topped off the fuel tanks with 38.24 gallons of 100LL type fuel from a self-serve fuel pump, 
added oil to bring the oil level to 6 quarts, and preflighted the airplane.  He then loaded his 
brother and the children into the airplane, taxied to runway 01L, performed a run-up, noted no 
anomalies, and departed.  
The pilot reported that the airplane was climbing through 1,100 feet msl (462 feet agl) when 
"he noticed a hot smell and felt that something was wrong," subsequently, the engine lost total 
power.  The pilot searched for a location to land and the CFI completed the emergency 
procedures for an engine re-start; however, the engine did not re-start.  A witness, who was 
pilot-rated, added that during the initial takeoff climb the engine began "missing badly."  The 
pilot relinquished control of the airplane to the CFI and a forced landing was executed.  During 
the forced landing, the airplane contacted a tree and came to a stop upright between a highway 
and a riverbank.  Both wings separated from the airframe and the fuselage was buckled.  
A sample of fuel was captured from the right wing fuel tank.  It was blue and free of 
contaminants.  A fuel sample from the left wing fuel tank could not be captured due to the 
integrity of the tank having been compromised during impact.  A fuel sample from the self-
serve pump reservoir was sent to BP Oil Company, Cleveland, Ohio, for testing.  According to 
the test report, the test was accomplished in accordance with ASTM D-910 and the sample met 
"all BP Oil manufacturing specifications."
According to the airframe logbook, the airframe underwent its last annual inspection on May 4, 
1999, at a total time of 2,638.00 flight hours.  The Textron Lycoming O-360-A3A engine (serial 
number L-2012-36) underwent its last 100-hour inspection on May 4, 1999, at a total time of 
2,638.00 hours and 1,475.00 hours since overhaul.  The airplane had accumulated a total of 
2679.57 flight hours and the engine had accumulated a total of 1516.57 hours since overhaul, at 
the time of the accident.  Additionally, no open maintenance discrepancies were found in the 
airframe and engine logbooks.
The airplane and engine were examined at Air Salvage of Dallas, Lancaster, Texas, by the NTSB 
Investigator-In-Charge, an FAA inspector, a representative from Textron Lycoming, and a 
representative from The New Piper Aircraft.  The cockpit was examined and the ignition key 
was found separated in the ignition and was at the BOTH position.  The flaps were in the 
retracted position and the cockpit fuel selector was found in the left tank position.  The throttle 
was found in the idle cutoff position, the mixture was in the full rich position, and the 
carburetor heat control was in the OFF position.  The fuel boost pump switch was in the OFF 
position. 
The fuel lines from each wing root to the gascolator were pressurized.  The fuel selector was 
rotated through the RH, LH, and BOTH positions, and air was observed coming through the 
line into the gascolator at each position.  The left wing and right wing fuel caps were tight, the 
seals were not compromised, and each of the fuel vents was clear.  The electric fuel pump was 
damaged by impact.  The pump did not operate when an electrical current was supplied via a 
test bench stand.  The pump's fuel screen was removed and observed to be free of 
contaminants.
The engine was examined.  The propeller was rotated and continuity was confirmed to the 
accessory drive gears.  A differential compression check was accomplished and revealed that 
the number 1 cylinder had a reading of 75/80, the number 3 cylinder had a reading of 70/80, 
the number 2 cylinder had a reading of 50/80, and the number 4 cylinder had a reading of 
22/80.  The left magneto was timed at 24 degrees and the right magneto was timed at 20 
degrees, both within manufacturers specifications.  The air filter was displaced aft and its 
element was pushed aft into the intake hose, which was collapsed.  The propeller was removed 
and the propeller seal was loose and small oil leakage was noted.  The oil dipstick was removed 
and there were 4 quarts of oil indicated on the dipstick.  The oil filter was removed, examined, 
and found to be free of contaminants.  The carburetor was damaged at impact; however, its one 
piece venturi remained in place.  Additionally, there was no blockage of intake or exhaust 
tubes.
The engine was sent to the Textron Lycoming manufacturing plant in Williamsport, 
Pennsylvania, to be test run.  According to the test run report from Textron Lycoming, upon 
initial examination the "engine rotation, continuity, and borescope inspections were normal," 
and "the internal timing was set correctly."  The report noted that the right magneto distributor 
block, #2 bottom ignition lead terminal was found corroded with the spring missing.  Each 
ignition harness lead fired when tested, except for the #2 and #4 bottom leads.  The engine was 
then placed in a test cell.  The engine was started and run at the manufacturer's required test 
points, for a duration of 25 minutes.  The engine displayed "normal" acceleration during this 
period.  The rated rpm was found to be 120 rpms low.  The left magneto displayed an 80-rpm 
drop and the right magneto displayed a 417-rpm drop at 2200 rpms.  According to the test run 
report, "the low rated rpm and high right magneto rpm drop are consistent with the corrosion 
found on the distributor block of the right magneto and the ignition leads that would not spark 
when tested."  
The two front seats of the airplane were equipped with shoulder harnesses and lap belts.  The 
two rear seats in the airplane were equipped with lap belts only.  The pilot reported that the 
two front seat occupants were not wearing the shoulder harnesses at the time of the accident, 
due to an "unsafe fit."  He reported that two of the children in the right rear seat were sharing a 
lap belt and the remaining child was using her own lap belt.  He stated that all lap belts were 
secured during loading of the airplane.  However, the children passengers were interviewed by 
an FAA inspector following the accident and they reported that they were not wearing the lap 
belts.  One of the children stated that the lap belt was "broken" and she was told to "just leave 
the seatbelt off," and another child reported that when she could not find the seatbelt she was 
told "not to worry about it."
