The airplane departed with full fuel and 150 gallons of herbicide for a local aerial application 
flight.  The airplane made three north-south spray runs, and during the third turn from the 
south to the north, the airplane contacted trees, the left wing separated, and subsequently, the 
airplane impacted the ground.  A witness stated that during the third turn he could hear, but 
could 'barely see the aircraft over the tree tops, unlike the previous two times.'  A friend of the 
accident pilot, who is also an agricultural pilot for the same operator, reported that on the 
evening of May 31, 2000, (one day prior to the accident flight) the accident pilot reported that 
he had 'hit some trees on that day and had to pull the leaves out of the boom of the airplane.'  
The accident pilot had also reported that 'he had the power lines licked, but seemed to have a 
problem clearing the tree tops.'  The pilot had successfully completed a professional 
agricultural pilot training course on May 5, 2000, and the accident flight was the pilot's second 
revenue spray flight. 
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with trees while maneuvering during an aerial 
application flight.  A factor was the pilot's lack in experience with aerial application flight 
operations. 
 On June 1, 2000, at 0700 central daylight time, a Cessna A188B agricultural airplane, N70114, 
was substantially damaged when it impacted terrain while maneuvering near Pioneer, 
Louisiana.  The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained fatal injuries.  The 
airplane was registered to and operated by Pioneer Flying Service Inc., of Pioneer.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 137 aerial application flight.  The flight originated from the operator's private 
grass airstrip, at 0635. 
According to the operator and his personnel, the airplane's fuel tanks were topped off and the 
airplane departed with 150 gallons of Trefend (herbicide) on board to spray a nearby field.  
Witnesses reported that prior to the accident, they observed the airplane making north-south 
passes over a field.  One witness stated that from his view, he saw the airplane make two 180 
degree turns from the south to the north, one following each of the first two southbound spray 
runs.  He stated that during the airplane's third turn he could hear, but could "barely see the 
aircraft over the trees tops, unlike the previous two times."  Another witness stated that he was 
working in the area when he heard a "loud pop," looked, and observed the airplane pointed 
straight up over the trees.  Subsequently, the airplane passed out of the witnesses' view behind 
trees.
According to an FAA inspector and a representative from Cessna Aircraft Company, who 
examined the accident site and airplane, the airplane was heading approximately 190 degrees 
when it initially contacted trees that were approximately 50 feet tall.  The airplane traveled an 
additional 200 feet before the airplane's left wing contacted a second area of trees that were 
approximately 70 feet tall.  Subsequently, the left wing separated from the airframe and the 
airplane descended to the ground.  The engine separated from the airframe, and the propeller 
blades, which remained attached to the propeller hub, were loose and exhibited "S" type 
bending.  Flight control continuity was established from the rudder and elevator to the forward 
cockpit.  Aileron flight control continuity was established between the right wing's aileron and 
the cabin area; the left wing's aileron cable was separated at the wing's mid-span.  The throttle, 
mixture, and propeller controls were found in the full forward position.
A friend of the accident pilot, who is also a pilot for Pioneer Flying Service, was interviewed 
following the accident.  He stated that on the evening of May 31, 2000, the accident pilot 
mentioned that he had "hit some trees on that day and had to pull the leaves out of the boom of 
the airplane."  The accident pilot added that "he had the power lines licked, but seemed to have 
a problem clearing the tree tops." 
A review of the pilot's flight logbook and flight training records revealed that he received his 
commercial certificate on April 25, 2000, and successfully completed a professional 
agricultural pilot training course administered by Ag-Flight, Inc., of Bainbridge, Georgia, on 
May 5, 2000.  He had accumulated a total of 586 flight hours during the nine month period 
preceding the accident.  Two hundred fourteen of his total flight hours were in the make and 
model of the accident airplane, and had been accumulated during a one month period 
preceding the accident.  The operator reported that the accident flight was the pilot's second 
revenue spray flight.
