Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Winkelman, AZ
Accident Number:
WPR15LA254
Date & Time:
09/01/2015, 0930 MST 
Registration:
N74ES
Aircraft:
RAUDENBUSH ERNIE LANCAIR 
SUPER ES
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The commercial pilot stated that, about 1 hour into the cross-country personal flight, he 
observed a ﬁslightﬂ loss of engine power and "fluctuating" engine exhaust gas temperature 
indications. Shortly thereafter, the engine experienced a significant loss of power, and the pilot 
subsequently chose to perform a forced landing to a rocky plateau, during which the airplane 
sustained substantial damage. Following the pilot's egress, the airplane was consumed by a 
postimpact fire. The engine was examined and disassembled following the accident, and it 
displayed significant thermal damage. No anomalies were observed that would have precluded 
normal operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination of the engine revealed no anomalies.
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR15LA254
Factual Information
On September 1, 2015, about 0930 mountain standard time, a Lancair Super ES, N74ES, was 
destroyed during a forced landing and subsequent post-impact fire after experiencing a loss of 
engine power in cruise flight near Winkelman, Arizona. The private pilot was not injured. 
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the flight, which 
departed El Paso International Airport (ELP), El Paso, Texas, about 0820, and was destined 
for Glendale Municipal Airport (GEU), Glendale, Arizona. The personal flight was conducted 
under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
The pilot stated that his preflight inspection, engine run up, and departure were uneventful 
with no anomalies noted. He departed ELP with about 50 gallons of fuel onboard for the 316-
nautical-mile flight, and climbed the airplane to a cruise altitude of 8,500 feet mean sea level 
(msl). About 1 hour into the flight, the pilot noted a "slight" loss of engine power and observed 
the exhaust gas temperature (EGT) indications from all 6 engine cylinders "fluctuating." The 
pilot adjusted the fuel mixture, and stated that about 30 seconds later, the engine stopped 
producing "most" of its power and was "struggling to stay running." He then manipulated the 
throttle, mixture, and propeller controls, but none of these inputs produced any response from 
the engine. The pilot established the airplane's best glide speed and elected to land the airplane 
on a rocky plateau. The airplane came to rest upright and the pilot egressed. The airplane was 
subsequently consumed by a post-impact fire. 
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for rotorcraft-helicopter and 
instrument helicopter, and a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single engine 
land. He did not hold a current Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) medical certificate. The 
pilot reported 1,650 total hours of flight experience, of which 240 hours were in the accident 
airplane make and model. 
The experimental amateur-built airplane was issued an FAA airworthiness certificate in 2000. 
It was equipped with a Continental IO-550 series, 310-hp reciprocating engine. The airplane's 
most recent annual inspection was completed on October 24, 2014. At the time of the accident, 
the airframe and engine had accumulated about 620 total hours of operation. According to the 
pilot, the engine underwent extensive maintenance about 100 hours prior to the accident, 
including honing of the cylinder barrels and replacement of the crankshaft and camshaft; 
however, despite repeated requests, the pilot did not provide documentation of this 
maintenance. 
The engine was examined on March 13, 2016. The engine remained attached to its mount, 
which was separated from the airframe. The engine and all components exhibited significant 
thermal damage, and all steel components were rusted. The crankshaft could not be rotated 
due to thermal damage. The propeller remained attached to the crankshaft, and all three blades 
exhibited s-bending and leading edge damage. The exhaust system remained attached to the 
cylinders, and the intake filter and tube upstream of the throttle body were not observed.
The right magneto remained attached to the engine, and the left magneto mounting location 
contained a cover plate, indicative of an electronic ignition system; however, the ignition 
control was not observed and was presumed destroyed by the post-impact fire. All fuel lines 
remained attached to their respective fittings, and the housing around the fittings was partially 
melted away. The fuel metering unit and throttle body fittings were secure. The throttle and 
mixture cables remained attached to their respective levers; however, the controls could not be 
Page 3 of 5WPR15LA254
manipulated due to thermal damage.
All six cylinders remained attached to the crankcase and exhibited little-to-no combustion 
deposits; consistent with prolonged lean fuel/air mixture operation. Numerous cylinder 
through-bolts were displaced from the engine case, and several through-bolt nuts and cylinder 
attach nuts were fractured; however, the crankcase and main bearings did not display any 
evidence that indicated that the through-bolts were displaced prior to the post-crash fire.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Military; Private
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/15/2010
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/14/2013
Flight Time:
1650 hours (Total, all aircraft), 240 hours (Total, this make and model), 1470 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 4 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
RAUDENBUSH ERNIE
Registration:
N74ES
Model/Series:
LANCAIR SUPER ES 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
KIT74
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/24/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
20 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
620 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550 SERIES
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5WPR15LA254
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KCGZ, 1462 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
56 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1635 UTC
Direction from Accident Site:
266°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.95 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
EL PASO, TX (ELP)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
GLENDALE, AZ (GEU)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
0820 
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
33.015556, -110.654444
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Allison N Diaz
Adopted Date:
07/11/2016
Additional Participating Persons:
Johnny C Portillo; FAA/FSDO; Scottsdale, AZ
Nicole L Charnon; Continental Motors Inc; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
07/11/2016
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=91905
Page 5 of 5WPR15LA254
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
