National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Rosedale, MI
Accident Number: CEN09LA557
Date & Time: 09/02/2009, 1310 EDT
Registration: N6446F
Aircraft: CESSNA 150F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control on ground
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The 84-year-old pilot reported that the airplane did not seem to have enough power to become airborne during the takeoff.
The airplane veered off the right side of the runway, where it came to rest after contacting trees and scrub brush.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage and wings.
Neither the pilot nor the airplane had flown during the past 3 years.
The pilot did not hold a current medical certificate.
The pilot's wife reported that he suffered a fall 3 years ago and that his physical and mental capabilities were such that he should not have been trying to fly the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during the takeoff ground run.
Contributing to the accident were the pilot's deteriorated physical and mental capabilities.
The private pilot was not injured.
The airplane received substantial damage to the fuselage and both wings.
The local personal flight was operating under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The 85-year-old pilot reported that the airplane did not seem to have enough power to become airborne during the takeoff.
The airplane veered off the right side of the runway where it came to rest after contacting trees and scrub brush.
The pilot had not flown during the past 3 years, nor had the airplane been flown in 3 years.
The pilot did not hold a current medical certificate.
The pilot's wife reported he suffered a fall 3 years ago and that his physical and mental capabilities were such that he should not have been trying to fly the airplane.
Marie, MI (PVT) Type of Flight Plan Filed: None Destination: Sault Ste.
