Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sarasota, FL
Accident Number:
MIA03LA090
Date & Time:
04/01/2003, 1815 EST 
Registration:
N4952J
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28R-180
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that he had  performed maneuvers in the practice area and was on his way 
back to the Sarasota/Bradenton Airport, Sarasota, Florida,  at 1,600 feet, when all of a sudden, 
the  airplane's engine ceased operating. He said he made a forced landing and during the 
landing rollout the airplane collided with a curb and a sign, incurring damage to the wings. 
Postaccident examination of the accident airplane revealed that the Bendix magneto had 
become displaced from its mount. In addition,  there was a discontinuity within the engine 
accessory section. There was the presence of oil in the area of the airframe/engine tubular 
mount structure, and on the lower left portion of the fuselage. The crankshaft gear bolt was 
loose and had a flat mark on one of the threads, the lock tab was bent and twisted, and the 
dowel pin had sheared. The gears within the accessory section of the engine, including the 
impulse coupling  for the left magneto were undamaged. There was also no damage to the 
crankshaft gear's teeth, and the center internal bore displayed signatures consistent with there 
having been a side load. The NTSB Metallurgical Laboratory in Washington DC, conducted an 
examination of the left "Bendix" magneto, the bottom magneto clamp, the dowel pin, the 
crankshaft gear, the lock tab, the crankshaft, and the crankshaft bolt. The damage noted was 
consistent with a loss of torque on the crankshaft assembly. The dowel was found to have 
fatigue fractures emanating from multiple origins at the outer diameter surface, consistent 
with having been produced by grinding and wear/fretting.  Airplane records indicate that on 
September 1, 1993 the engine had undergone a field overhaul,  had accumulated 1450.35 hours 
since the overhaul. On October 30, 2002, the engine had undergone maintenance, and had 
both the left and right crankcase halves replaced, about 200 hours before the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to the crankshaft bolt losing torque, the gear disengaging, and the 
engine ceasing to operate as a result of inadequate maintenance installation.
Page 2 of 6MIA03LA090
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - INADEQUATE - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
2. ENGINE ASSEMBLY,GEAR - LOOSE PART/BOLT/NUT/CLAMP/ETC
3. ENGINE ASSEMBLY,GEAR - DISENGAGED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
4. OBJECT - SIGN
Page 3 of 6MIA03LA090
Factual Information
On April 1, 2003, about 1815 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28R-180, N4952J, registered to 
and operated by Cirrus Aviation, as a Title 14 CFR part 91 personal flight, made a forced 
landing in Sarasota, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was 
filed. The private-rated pilot and one pilot-rated passenger were not injured, and the airplane 
incurred substantial damage. The flight originated in Sarasota, the same day, about 1725.
The pilot stated that he had  flown to the practice area and had performed steep turns, slow 
flight, and steep spirals, and was on his way back to the Sarasota/Bradenton Airport, Sarasota, 
Florida,  at 1,600 feet, when all of a sudden, the  airplane's engine ceased operating. He said he 
saw a road and elected to land on it, but a car later turned onto the road, so he chose to land on 
a  field  instead. During the landing rollout the airplane collided with a curb and a sign, 
incurring damage to the wings.
Postaccident examinations of the accident airplane revealed that the left magneto, 
manufactured by "Bendix",  was found to have wear on the aluminum flange  in the area where 
the bottom mount clamp is normally secured. The clamp installed that was intended for a 
"Slick" manufactured magnetos, and the Bendix magneto had become displaced from its 
mount. In addition,  there was a discontinuity within the engine accessory section. There was 
the presence of oil in the area of the airframe/engine tubular mount structure, and on the 
lower left portion of the fuselage. The crankshaft gear bolt was loose and had a flat mark on one 
of the threads, the lock tab was bent and twisted, and the dowel pin had sheared. The gears 
within the accessory section of the engine, including the impulse coupling  for the left magneto. 
were undamaged. There was also no damage to the crankshaft gear's teeth, and the center 
internal bore displayed signatures consistent with there having been a side load.
The NTSB Metallurgical Laboratory in Washington, D.C., conducted an examination of the left 
"Bendix" magneto, the bottom magneto clamp, the dowel pin, the crankshaft gear, the lock tab, 
the crankshaft, and the crankshaft bolt. The damage noted was consistent with a loss of torque 
on the crankshaft assembly. The dowel was found to have fatigue fractures emanating from 
multiple origins at the outer diameter surface, consistent with having been produced by 
grinding and wear/fretting.  Airplane records indicate that on September 1, 1993, the engine 
had undergone a field overhaul,  and had accumulated 1450.35 hours since the overhaul. On 
October 30, 2002, the engine had undergone maintenance and had both the left and right 
crankcase halves replaced about 200 hours before the accident.
Page 4 of 6MIA03LA090
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/27/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/29/2001
Flight Time:
388 hours (Total, all aircraft), 42 hours (Total, this make and model), 327 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 19 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N4952J
Model/Series:
PA-28R-180 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28R-30698
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/18/2003, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
55 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
5731 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360
Registered Owner:
Cirrus Aviation
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
Cirrus Aviation
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA03LA090
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SRQ
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1753 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.3 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Sarasota, FL (SRQ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1725 
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
27.561944, -82.395278
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John W Lovell
Adopted Date:
03/30/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Steven Stiyer; FAA FSDO; Tampa, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA03LA090
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
