National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Omaha, NE
Accident Number: CEN11LA089
Date & Time: 12/02/2010, 0430 CST
Registration: N3246D
Aircraft: CESSNA 180
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During the landing approach and 1/2-mile from the runway, the engine lost power.
During the ensuing forced landing, the airplane impacted a tree and terrain.
During postaccident functional testing of the engine, it lost power when the throttle was moved quickly from a low power setting to a high power setting, and became more pronounced as the engine got warmer.
The carburetor was removed from the engine and a visual inspection was conducted.
A roughness was felt in the accelerator pump while manually moving the control at the carburetor, and very little fuel flow came from the accelerator pump.
The carburetor was disassembled and all check valves, ports and vents, the venturi, nozzle bleed holes, carburetor bowl vent channels, and float assembly were cleaned.
After reassembly, a much higher fuel output was achieved.
The carburetor and accelerator pump were reinstalled on the engine, and all functional checks were normal.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power due to a stuck check valve in the carburetor acceleration pump, resulting in an improper fuel mixture when the pilot attempted to add power.
Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 without a flight plan.
The pilot, the sole occupant on board.
was not injured.
The cross-country flight originated in Butte, Montana, with a refueling stop in Philip (PHP), South Dakota, and was ultimately destined for London (LOZ), Kentucky.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors, the pilot was on landing approach and 1/2-mile from runway 14L when the engine lost power.
During the ensuing forced landing, the airplane impacted a small tree and terrain, and came to rest with the nose facing south and the left wing tip in the water.
The right wing was compressed, and the horizontal stabilizer was torn off.
The engine cowling, both elevators, both ailerons, and both wing tips were damaged.
Fuel was seen leaking from the compromised fuel tanks.
The airplane was removed to a nearby airport hangar.
It was examined on December 3 and 7, 2010.
During the examinations, both wing fuel sumps, the engine fuel sump, fuel bowl and carburetor fuel and inlet screens were found clear of contamination.
Both magnetos were turned and all spark plugs fired.
There were no leaks in the intake system, and all cylinders had satisfactory compression.
Valve train continuity was established.
On December 9, a bench propeller was installed.
During functional testing, the engine lost power when the throttle was quickly moved from a low power setting to a high power setting, and became more pronounced as the engine got warmer.
A roughness was felt in the accelerator pump while manually moving the control at the carburetor.
Very little fuel flow came from accelerator pump.
The carburetor (model number MA-4-5, serial number 3986073- R MF-V) was removed, disassembled, and all check valves, ports and vents, the venturi, nozzle bleed holes, carburetor bowl vent channels, and float assembly were cleaned.
After reassembly, a much higher fuel output was achieved.
The carburetor and accelerator pump were reinstalled on the engine.
All functional checks were normal.
The inspectors concluded that the carburetor acceleration pump or the check valve below it had become stuck, resulting in an improper fuel mixture when the pilot attempted to add power, causing the engine to lose power.
