National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Peoria, AZ
Accident Number: WPR11LA069
Date & Time: 12/01/2010, 1700 MST
Registration: N765MH
Aircraft: SABRE TRIKE
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During a personal flight, the experimental light-sport weight-shift-control aircraft was observed by witnesses in a spiraling descent until it impacted the ground.
Postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no mechanical failures or malfunctions that would have precluded normal operation.
The reason for the loss of control was not determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: An in-flight loss of control for undetermined reasons.
Findings Not determined Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause) Factual Information HISTORY OF FLIGHT On December 1, 2010, about 1700 mountain standard time (MST), an experimental light-sport weight-shift-control Sabre Trike, N765MH, impacted terrain during an uncontrolled descent near Pleasant Valley Airport, Peoria, Arizona.
The owner/pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
The sport pilot was fatally injured; the trike sustained substantial damage to both wings and fuselage structure.
The local personal instructional flight departed Peoria at an unknown time.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
Witnesses near the airport saw the trike in a spiraling descent before losing sight of it.
After a short search of the area, the accident site was located about 0.5 nm south of the airport.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector from the Scottsdale Flight Standards District Office responded to the accident site.
The debris field, including the trike and all of the components and control surfaces, were within the immediate impact area.
A 60-pound bag of dry ready cement was found in the front area of the trike wreckage.
It was later discovered that the pilot was using the cement bag as a ballast to simulate a front seat passenger.
The accident site was documented, and the trike was recovered for further examination.
On December 2, 2010, the Maricopa County Medical Examiner conducted an autopsy on the pilot.
The cause of death was determined to be blunt force trauma of torso and extremities.
The manner of death was by accident.
On December 8, 2010, investigators examined the wreckage at Air Transport, Inc., Phoenix, Arizona.
The engine was examined; after minor adjustments the engine was started, and ran without issues.
Examination of the airframe revealed no abnormalities that would have precluded normal operations.
