National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Madras, OR
Accident Number: WPR11LA068A
Date & Time: 12/01/2010, 1130 PST
Registration: N23619
Aircraft: TAYLORCRAFT BC-65
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event: Midair collision
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The propeller of a Taylorcraft airplane and the empennage of a Cessna airplane came in contact with each other while both aircraft were on final approach to the same runway.
The pilot of the Cessna had completed a landing and performed a standard entry (left) onto the downwind leg of the traffic pattern.
The pilot of the Taylorcraft was returning from a local area training flight and entered the downwind leg of the traffic pattern from a standard mid-field 45-degree entry.
The Cessna pilot was announcing his position on the common traffic advisory frequency during each segment of the pattern; however, the pilot of the Taylorcraft could not hear the transmissions since his airplane was not equipped with a radio.
Just prior to impact, the pilot of the Taylorcraft observed the empennage of the Cessna underneath the left wing of his airplane.
The pilot of the Cessna never observed the Taylorcraft, but heard a loud bang come from the aft end of his airplane at impact.
Both pilots were able to land their airplanes without further incident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of both pilots to see and avoid the other airplane while in the traffic pattern to land, which resulted in a midair collision.
The certified flight instructor (CFI) and his student in the Taylorcraft, which was not radio equipped, were not injured, but the airplane, which was owned and operated by Berg Air, sustained substantial damage to the forward part of its fuselage.
The commercial pilot and his passenger in the Cessna were also uninjured, but the Cessna, which was owned and operated by the passenger, sustained substantial damage to its empennage and aft fuselage.
The occupants of the Taylorcraft were on a 14 Code of Federal Regulation Part 91 local instructional flight, and the occupants of the Cessna were on a 14 Code of Federal Regulations personal pleasure flight.
The pilot of the Cessna was on his second circuit of the VFR pattern to runway 16.
The occupants of the Taylorcraft were on their first circuit of the VFR pattern to runway 16, after returning from a training flight in the local area and entering the pattern via a standard 45 degree entry to the downwind.
Neither aircraft was on a flight plan.
He said that at the precise moment that he noticed the Cessna, it seemed to slow, and as it did, its nose lowered and its tail pitched up.
The CFI therefore immediately tried to bank to the right to avoid contact, but the propeller of the Taylorcraft came in contact with the Cessna before he could gain separation.
After impacting the Cessna, the Taylorcraft's propeller stopped turning, and therefore the CFI made a power-off landing in the extended 1,800-foot paved stop-way of the old military runway.
Immediately after he heard the bang, the airplane pitched down and rolled to the right, but the pilot was able to regain control and continue flying straight ahead.
It was not until after landing at the airplane's home airport and inspecting the airplane that the pilot of the Cessna realized there had been a mid-air collision.
Both pilots had flown standard VFR left hand patterns for runway 16.
The pilot of the Cessna entered the downwind from the crosswind after completing his first touch-and-go landing.
The pilot of the Taylorcraft entered the downwind near mid-field from a 45 degree entry leg.
The pilot of the Cessna was making position/intention radio calls at each segment of the pattern.
The Taylorcraft was not radio-equipped, nor was it required to be.
Therefore the pilot of the Taylorcraft was unable to announce his position/intentions, nor was he able to hear the transitions of the pilot of the Cessna.
Neither occupant of either airplane noticed that there was another airplane in the VFR pattern at the same time as they were.
At the time of the accident, there were broken clouds about 6,500 feet above ground level (AGL), and a visibility of more than 10 miles.
Neither pilot reported any pre-impact anomalies or malfunctions associated with his airplane.
