The airplane contacted a runway light with the left wing following a loss of directional control 
during the takeoff phase of a touch and go landing.  The student pilot reported the airplane 
touched down 1/3 (1,800 feet) down the runway during the landing.  He reported the airplane 
veered to the left when he applied power for takeoff.  He reported he reduced the power to idle 
and attempted to stop the airplane, but it continued off the side of the runway where it 
contacted the runway light.  The landing was being made on runway 31.   The winds reported at 
the airport 5 minutes after the accident were from 160 degrees at 11 knots.  The pilot reported 
the winds were from 140 degrees at 10 knots.  The student pilot had a total flight time of 31 
hours and was on a solo cross-country flight when the accident occurred.
The student pilot's failure to maintain directional control of the airplane during the takeoff 
phase of a touch and go landing.  Factors associated with the accident were the student's lack of 
total experience and the runway light which the airplane contacted.
On December 3, 2001, at 1410 central standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N248ND, operated by 
the University of North Dakota, collided with a runway light during a touch and go landing.  
The accident occurred while the student pilot was landing on runway 31 (5,509 feet by 150 feet, 
dry asphalt) at the Devils Lake Municipal Airport, Devils Lake, North Dakota.  The student 
pilot was not injured and the airplane received substantial damage.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and a VFR flight plan was filed for the solo cross-country flight.  The flight 
originated from Grand Forks, North Dakota, at 1300.
The student pilot reported that he received the local weather from the automated weather 
observing system upon arriving in the Devils Lake area.  He then circled the airport to check 
the windsock prior to entering the traffic pattern for runway 31.   The pilot reported the 
airplane touched down approximately 1/3 (approximatley 1,800 feet) down the runway during 
the landing.  He reported the airplane veered to the left when he applied full power for the 
takeoff portion of the touch and go.  The pilot reported he reduced the power to idle and 
attempted to stop the airplane; however, it continued off the side of the runway where it 
contacted a runway light with the left wing.
The winds reported at Devils Lake Municipal Airport at 1415, were from 160 degrees at 11 
knots.  The pilot reported the winds were from 140 degrees at 10 knots.
