The airplane impacted the ocean in an uncontrolled descent after experiencing a loss of control 
while maneuvering.  The certified flight instructor (CFI) demonstrated a 4-point roll and 
transferred control of the airplane to the pilot under instruction (PUI) so that he could 
demonstrate the maneuver.  Shortly after transferring control, the airplane's nose pitched 
down 20-30 degrees.  The PUI asked the CFI if he was causing the nose to pitch down, to which 
the CFI responded in the negative.  The CFI attempted to correct the nose down pitch but the 
control stick had no effect and the trim would not budge.  Both the CFI and the PUI bailed out 
of the airplane before it impacted the ocean.  The airplane was not recovered, and the reason 
for the loss of control was not determined.
the loss of aircraft control while maneuvering for undetermined reasons.
On December 2, 2001, at 1121 Pacific standard time, a Bellanca 8KCAB, N50554, was destroyed 
during an uncontrolled descent into the Pacific Ocean near Long Beach, California.  The 
certified flight instructor (CFI) received serious injuries and the commercial pilot under 
instruction (PUI) received minor injuries.  Hart Air was operating the airplane, registered to a 
private individual, under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the instructional flight and a company flight plan had been filed.  The local flight 
originated from Long Beach about 1035.
According to the CFI who was in the rear seat, he was observing the commercial pilot in the 
front seat as part of a 30-day recurrency checkout.  At 4,500 feet msl, the flight instructor 
demonstrated a 4-point roll and then asked the PUI to conduct one.  The CFI transferred 
control to the PUI and shortly thereafter, the nose dropped 20-30 degrees below the horizon.  
The PUI asked the CFI if he was doing that intentionally, to which the CFI replied no.  The CFI 
then pulled the control stick aft to no avail.  He told the PUI to try the trim, but it would not 
budge.  The CFI then told the PUI to bail out twice.  The PUI jettisoned the door and bailed out.  
The CFI struggled over the seat before reaching the door.  He pulled himself out and pulled his 
parachute ripcord just prior to impacting the water.  The CFI estimated that the time between 
the loss of airplane control and impact with the water was 30-45 seconds.
An eyewitness, located approximately 3 miles from the accident site, reported seeing several 
single engine airplanes conducting flight maneuvers offshore.  All of the airplanes were flying 
above what the witness estimated to be 4,000 feet above ground level (agl).  His attention was 
drawn to one of the airplanes, which had descended to approximately 2,000 feet agl.  
According to the witness, the airplane was making steep turns, climbs, and descents, and he 
believed the airplane was "too low for those types of maneuvers."  The witness observed a 
parachute open in the sky adjacent to the airplane, while the airplane continued to fly in the 
aforementioned manner.  Once the airplane reached approximately 500 feet, the airplane dove 
"nearly straight down towards the ocean."  The witness then observed the airplane pull up 
within 6 feet of the ocean surface.  The airplane "climbed nearly vertical to approximately 300 
feet, rolled over into a dive and impacted the water at a high rate of speed."
The airplane accumulated a total of 1,786 hours, and underwent its last annual inspection 40 
hours prior to the accident.  The airplane was not recovered.
