After flying for 2 hours the airplane arrived at the destination airport.  Upon entering the 
traffic pattern the left seated pilot performed a prelanding check.  However, he did not 
reposition the fuel tank selector from the nearly empty right auxiliary fuel tank to a main tank.  
Seconds after turning onto the final approach leg, the pilot performed another prelanding 
check.  Again, he did not reposition the fuel tank selector away from the right auxiliary tank.  
Seconds thereafter, the engine sputtered and lost all power.  The pilot then tried to reposition 
the fuel tank selector, but the pilot-rated passenger had already accomplished that task.  
Engine power was restored just prior to the airplane impacting a berm, about 500 feet short of 
the runway.  The left seated pilot held commercial and certified flight instructor certificates.  
He had about 612 total flight hours including 32 hours in Comanches.  The right seated pilot-
rated passenger also held commercial and certified flight instructor certificates.  He had about 
1,740 total flight hours, including 40 hours in Comanches.  The subsequent airplane 
examination revealed that the left auxiliary fuel tank and the two main tanks jointly contained 
a total of 50 gallons of fuel.  The right auxiliary fuel tank was dry.  
Fuel starvation on final approach due to the pilot's fuel mismanagement, and his 
inattentiveness in following established prelanding procedures.
On December 1, 2001, about 1930 hours mountain standard time, a Piper PA-24-250, N7213P, 
experienced fuel starvation on final approach to runway 21R at the Ernest A. Love Field, 
Prescott, Arizona.  During the ensuing forced landing, the airplane impacted a berm 
approximately 0.1 mile short of the runway.  The pilot in the left seat was handling the 
airplane's flight controls, and he held commercial pilot and flight instructor certificates.  The 
pilot in the right seat also held commercial pilot and flight instructor certificates, although he 
was riding as a passenger.  The airplane, manufactured in November 1960, was registered to a 
private individual and was operated by the left seated pilot.  During the accident, the airplane 
was substantially damaged, and both occupants sustained minor injuries.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed.  The personal flight was performed under 14 CFR Part 91, 
and no flight plan was filed.  The flight originated from Los Angeles, California, about 1630 
Pacific standard time (1730 mountain standard time).
The left seated pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that he 
is currently employed as a certified flight instructor (CFI).  His total flying experience was 612 
hours, of which 32 hours were obtained piloting various Piper Comanches, including the PA-
24-250.  The pilot indicated that he was unaware whether the Comanches owner's handbook 
addressed landing with the fuel selector positioned to an auxiliary fuel tank.  He indicated that 
prior to taking off for the nonstop flight, the two main and two auxiliary fuel tanks had been 
completely filled.  During flight, he had repositioned the fuel selector several times.  The fuel 
gauges were functioning, and no evidence of any mechanical malfunctions was noted during 
the flight.  
Regarding the accident sequence, the pilot reported that when he entered the traffic pattern for 
landing, the fuel selector was still set to the right auxiliary fuel tank.  Seconds after he turned 
onto the final approach leg he performed the "GUMP" (gas, undercarriage, mixture, propeller) 
prelanding check.  The fuel selector was not repositioned at that time.  The engine stopped 
producing power about 5 seconds after completing the prelanding check.  The pilot stated that 
he immediately pitched the airplane to obtain the best glide speed, and he began performing 
other emergency functions, including repositioning the fuel selector toward the fullest fuel 
tank.  However, the pilot-rated passenger had already just repositioned the selector.  The 
power off approach continued.  Engine power was restored seconds prior to impacting the 
ground. 
According to the pilot-rated passenger, his total flying experience was 1,740 hours, of which 40 
hours were obtained piloting the PA-24-250 airplane.  The pilot reported that his friend had 
completed the prelanding check upon entering the traffic pattern from the 45-degree entry leg.  
Seconds after the pilot turned onto the final approach leg and commenced descending he 
performed the "GUMPS" check.  Approximately 5 seconds thereafter, the engine sputtered and 
quit.  The pilot-rated passenger additionally reported that as the pilot was performing 
functions, including checking the auxiliary fuel pump switch position and the mixture control 
position, he (the pilot-rated passenger) repositioned the fuel selector to the right main fuel 
tank.  About 1 second before impact the engine restarted. 
The pilot additionally reported that the impact occurred approximately 500 feet before 
reaching the approach end of runway 21R.  Thereafter, the airplane rolled about 50 feet before 
colliding with a berm and bouncing over it.  The airplane came to rest about 300 feet from the 
runway facing 90 degrees right of centerline. 
The airplane was examined on scene prior to its recovery.  Recovery personnel verbally 
reported to the Safety Board investigator that the four fuel tanks remained intact.  Regarding 
residual fuel, about 10 gallons of fuel remained in the left auxiliary fuel tank, 25 gallons of fuel 
were in the left main fuel tank, and 15 gallons of fuel were in the right main fuel tank.  The right 
auxiliary fuel tank was completely dry.  
During the 1960's, the Piper Aircraft Corporation published an "Owner's Handbook" for 
various models of Comanches, including the PA-24-180 and the PA-24-250.  In these 
handbooks, guidance was provided to pilots regarding positioning of the fuel selector.  In 
pertinent part, in the "Approach and Landing" section of Piper's 1961 model year handbook, 
the pilot was advised to position the fuel selector to the "proper tank" when performing the 
landing check list.
