Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Rome, NY
Incident Number:
ERA10IA094
Date & Time:
12/03/2009, 0747 EST 
Registration:
N701FX
Aircraft:
CESSNA 208B
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The airplane was climbing through 7,500 feet when the pilot heard a grinding noise and saw 
that the gas generator speed indicator had dropped to zero. The engine then seized and the 
pilot declared an emergency. An air traffic controller provided vectors toward an airport; 
however, the airplane landed in a field about 3 miles short of the runway. Subsequent 
disassembly of the engine revealed compressor turbine blade fractures at varying heights above 
the platform and downstream damage to the power turbine blades. Further examination 
revealed that 13 blades were fractured at the platform, with 8 of those exhibiting fatigue 
fractures at the leading edge, and overload fractures toward the trailing edge. The remaining 
five blades exhibited ductile overload fractures over the entire fracture surface. A number of 
blades were also fixed to the disc, with the mating surfaces of both the blades and the disc 
exhibiting corrosion. Examination of blade serrations revealed an accumulation of orange dust, 
with black corrosion blisters observed at various locations. Dust analysis revealed sulphidation, 
with airborne salts likely reacting with the oxide layer on the blades to result in oxide layer 
decay. Subsequent to the incident, the operator increased engine water washes from once every 
50 hours of engine operation to weekly, and incorporated borescope inspections into the 
engine maintenance program at every 100 hours of operation.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The operator's inadequate engine wash intervals, which resulted in compressor turbine blade 
sulphidation and subsequent turbine blade failure.
Findings
Aircraft
Compressor section - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Personnel issues
Scheduled/routine maintenance - Not specified
Organizational issues
Maintenance scheduling - Operator (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA10IA094
Factual Information
On December 3, 2009, at 0747 eastern standard time, a Cessna 208B, N701FX, operated as 
Wiggins Airways flight 8409, experienced a loss of engine power followed by a forced landing 
to a field near Rome, New York. The certificated airline transport pilot was not injured, and 
there was no damage to the airplane. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the landing 
site. The airplane was operating on an instrument flight rules flight plan from Syracuse 
Hancock International Airport (SYR), Syracuse, New York, to Plattsburgh International 
Airport (PBG), Plattsburgh, New York. The unscheduled cargo flight was operating under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.
According to the company vice president of operations, the airplane was climbing through 
7,500 feet when the pilot heard a ﬁgrinding noise,ﬂ and saw the Ng indication drop to zero. The 
engine then seized, and the pilot declared an emergency. Air traffic control provided vectors 
toward Griffiss International Airport (RME), Rome, New York; however, the airplane forced 
landed in a field about 3 miles short of runway 15.
The engine was subsequently disassembled under Federal Aviation Administration oversight at 
Pratt and Whitney Engine Services, Bridgeport, West Virginia. Disassembly revealed 
compressor turbine (CT) blade fractures at varying heights above the platform, and 
downstream damage to the power turbine blades. The CT disc was forwarded to Pratt and 
Whitney Canada facilities in Montreal, Quebec, for further examination.  
According to Pratt & Whitney Canada Engine/Component Investigation Report No. 09ASA06, 
a total of 13 blades were fractured at the platform, with 8 of those exhibiting smooth fracture 
surfaces at the leading edge, consistent with fatigue. Those blades also exhibited a "dull 
dendritic appearance" toward the trailing edge, consistent with overload. The remaining five 
blades exhibited a dull dendritic appearance over the entire fracture surface, consistent with 
ductile overload.
During disc disassembly, only 14 of the blades were easily removed, and the others had to be 
pushed out, which was partially attributed to the disc having rubbed against the case. 
Several other blades were extracted with little or no evidence of rubbing, suggesting they were 
fixed to the disc. Further examination revealed black corrosion blisters on the mating surfaces 
of both the blades and the disc.  
Examination of blade serrations revealed an accumulation of orange dust, with black corrosion 
blisters also observed at various locations. Dust analysis indicated the presence of calcium and 
sulphur, with sulphates noted by the report as being common in "concrete, runway dust and in 
marine atmospheres." Analysis was also conducted on "grayish nodules" in a corroded area of 
one blade, which indicated features consistent with sulphidation. "The sulphur in the dust, 
most likely a salt, was the corrosive element."  
Spectrum analysis revealed that the chemical composition of the blades and blade coatings 
were within specifications.      
Subsequent to the incident, the operator increased engine water washes from once every 50 
hours of operation to weekly, and incorporated borescope inspections into the engine 
maintenance program at every 100 hours of operation.
Page 3 of 5ERA10IA094
History of Flight
Enroute-climb to cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/26/2009
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/01/2009
Flight Time:
8200 hours (Total, all aircraft), 4500 hours (Total, this make and model), 4460 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 126 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 37 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N701FX
Model/Series:
208B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
208B0420
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/13/2009, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
8750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
14 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
6606 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A SER
Registered Owner:
FEDERAL EXPRESS 
CORPORATION
Rated Power:
750 hp
Operator:
Wiggins Airways, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
AXSA
Page 4 of 5ERA10IA094
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
RME, 481 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
3 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0753 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
150°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3300 ft agl
Visibility
8 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 4000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.25 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / 10°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Rain; No Obscuration
Departure Point: 
Syracuse, NY (SYR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Plattsburgh, NY (PBG)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0730 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
43.233889, -75.406944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
08/03/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Joseph A Yacko; FAA/FSDO; Albany, NY
Murray Little; Wiggins Airways, Inc.; Manchester, NH
Publish Date:
08/03/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75155
Page 5 of 5ERA10IA094
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
