Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lindsay, OK
Accident Number:
DFW08FA060
Date & Time:
02/02/2008, 1713 CST 
Registration:
N824BJ
Aircraft:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP SR22
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The certified flight instructor and the private pilot were returning to the airport in a single-
engine airplane after completing a biennial flight review. Data obtained from the onboard 
primary flight display revealed that as the airplane approached the airport, it entered a snap 
roll maneuver, and began to descend.  The airplane did not have enough altitude to recover and 
subsequently collided with terrain inverted approximately one-quarter of a mile away from the 
airport. Examination of the airframe and engine revealed there were no pre-mishap anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The flight instructor's failure to maintain control of the airplane, which resulted in an 
inadvertent stall while maneuvering.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 9DFW08FA060
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 2, 2008, approximately 1713 central standard time, a Cirrus SR22, N824BJ, 
single-engine airplane, was destroyed when it collided with terrain while maneuvering near the 
Lindsay Municipal Airport (1K2), Lindsay, Oklahoma.  The certified flight instructor and the 
private pilot were fatally injured.  The airplane was registered to and operated by the private 
pilot.  No flight plan was filed and visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
instructional flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The flight instructor, who was also a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) certified airframe 
and power plant mechanic (A&P), operated a maintenance facility from a private airstrip about 
5 miles southeast of the Lindsay Airport.  According to one of his customers, the instructor had 
called him on the day of the accident, and told him that he had completed the annual 
inspection on his airplane. The instructor planned to reposition it to Lindsay Airport, because 
he was already scheduled to be there to give the private pilot, whom the customer knew as well, 
a "biennial flight review."  Later that day, the customer saw the accident airplane in the traffic 
pattern and drove to the airport.  When he arrived, he saw the airplane departing to the north.  
The customer then drove over to a friend's hangar, picked him up, and drove to the departure 
end of Runway 10 so they could watch the airplane land.  About 20 minutes later, he "heard an 
engine accelerate then a boom."  The customer said that he had not seen or heard the airplane 
prior to the sound of the engine accelerating.
Another witness was in his backyard when he heard the airplane's engine "wind up hard."  He 
said, "I turned to look at the plane, and it looked like it fell to the ground in a 45 degree angle - 
The plane disappeared behind a row of trees - then I saw a ball of smoke - then I heard it hit 
the ground."  The witness also stated that he heard an airplane making "circles" around the 
airport before the crash but he was not sure it was the accident airplane.  Several other people 
heard the airplane flying in the vicinity of the airport and reported hearing the airplane's 
engine "missing" or "cutting out."
Lindsay Municipal Airport is an uncontrolled airport and pilots communicate via a common 
traffic advisory frequency (CTAF).  There were no reports that the pilots made any distress calls 
prior to the accident.  
A review of radar data revealed a VFR target at an altitude of 1,700 feet mean sea level (msl) 
north of Lindsay Municipal Airport, at 1659.  The target continued to track to the north before 
it made a left turn to the northwest and flew for approximately 15 miles.  During this time, the 
target climbed to an altitude of 3,000 feet msl. 
Approximately 1704, when the target was at an altitude of 2,800 feet msl it entered a left turn 
to the south. The target then descended to 2,700 feet msl, and then climbed to 2,800 feet msl, 
as it continued on a southerly heading. 
At 1705, the target made a right, 360-degree turn at an altitude of 2,800 feet msl before it 
returned to a southerly heading. 
At 1708, the target entered a left turn to the east-southeast at an altitude of 2,700 feet msl.  The 
target was northwest of the airport and began to track toward the southeast.  During this 
portion of the flight, the target climbed to an altitude of 2,900 feet and then began a steady 
Page 3 of 9DFW08FA060
descent as it approached the airport from the northwest before the data ended at 1712.  At that 
time, the airplane was located approximately three-quarters of a mile northeast of the 
approach end of Runway 19, and was at an altitude of approximately 1,500 feet msl.
PILOT INFORMATION
The flight instructor held a commercial certificate for airplane single-engine land, and 
instrument airplane. He also held a certified flight instructor rating for airplane single-engine 
land, and instrument airplane.  In addition, he was a certified airframe and power plant 
mechanic, with inspector authorization (IA).  His last FAA second-class medical was issued on 
January 30, 2007.  A review of his logbook's revealed that his last entry was made on October 
30, 2007.  At that time, he had accrued a total of 1,438.8 hours.  There was no entry that he had 
any previous experience in the same make and model as the accident airplane.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land, and instrument 
airplane.  His last FAA third class medical was issued on January 17, 2008.  A review of his 
logbook revealed that he had accumulated approximately 1,327 hours, of which 230 hours were 
in a Cirrus SR22 airplane.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a 2006 Cirrus SR22, serial number 2119, and was powered by a Teledyne 
Continental Motors (TCM), IO-550-N (42), serial number 689918 engine. A Hartzell PHC-
J3YF-1RF/ FP4809B propeller was attached to the engine.
A review of the airframe logbooks revealed that the last annual inspection was completed on 
October 2, 2007, at an airplane total time of 155.7 hours.  At the time of the accident, the 
airplane and engine had accrued a total of 198.3 hours.
METEORLOGICAL INFORMATION
Weather at Paul's Valley Municipal Airport (PVJ), approximately 20 nautical miles southeast 
of the accident site, at 1750, was reported as wind from 080 degrees at 5 knots, visibility 10 
miles, clear skies, temperature 57 degrees Fahrenheit, dewpoint 37 degrees Fahrenheit, and a 
barometric pressure setting of 29.99 inches of Mercury.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest in a pasture approximately .25-miles northwest of Lindsay Municipal 
Airport on a magnetic heading of approximately 240 degrees at a field elevation of 965 feet 
msl.  A post-impact fire consumed the main wreckage of the airplane, which consisted of the 
cockpit, fuselage, tail section, left and right wings, main landing gear, and the engine.  
The initial impact mark was about 45 feet from where the main wreckage came to rest.  The 
initial impact mark included two horizontal impact marks (consistent with the leading edge of 
the wings) that expanded to the left and right of a 3- foot by 4- foot- wide crater.  A piece of red 
navigational lens was found at the far most end of the right impact mark.  
The three-bladed propeller and numerous pieces of Plexiglas were found imbedded in the 
initial impact crater. One blade exhibited an "S" bend.  The second propeller blade exhibited 
leading edge damage and the third propeller blade was fractured at the blade root.  This blade 
exhibited an "S" bend, and was bent toward the non-cambered side of the blade, beginning at 
the blade root. 
Page 4 of 9DFW08FA060
The nose wheel, Cirrus Airframe Parachute System (CAPS), parachute rocket motor, engine 
cowling, and sections of airframe were found scattered along the wreckage path between the 
initial impact point and the main wreckage.
Examination of the airplane's safety equipment revealed that the CAPS activation handle was 
intact and in its holder, the rocket motor was expended, and the deployment pack consisted of 
a partially packed parachute (risers extended out of the bag).  A portion of the front right seat's 
shoulder harness, including a deployed airbag, was found in the wreckage.  
Flight control continuity was established for all flight controls from the respective surface to 
the cockpit.  Examination of the flap actuator revealed the flaps were fully retracted.   
The engine was examined at Teledyne Continental Motors on June 17, 2008, under the 
supervision of the Safety Board.  Examination of the engine revealed that it had sustained 
impact and thermal damage, but all six cylinders remained attached to the engine.  The left and 
right magneto exhibited impact and thermal damage; however, the left magneto was only 
partially attached to the engine.  The spark plugs were removed.  The number three top plug 
was damaged, but each of the plugs exhibited normal operating wear signatures in accordance 
with the Champion aviation check-a-plug comparison chart.  The fuel pump remained attached 
to the engine and exhibited thermal and impact damage. The fuel mixture control was in the 
"full rich" position. The pump was removed from the engine and the drive coupling was intact.   
The cylinders were inspected using a lighted borescope.  The cylinder bores were free of scoring 
within the bore ring travel area.   A complete teardown examination of the engine revealed 
there were no mechanical deficiencies that would have precluded the engine from operating 
normally at the time of the accident.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Oklahoma Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma conducted 
autopsies on both pilots on February 3, 2008.  The cause of death was determined to be 
multiple blunt force injuries.
The FAA Toxicology Accident Research Library, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, conducted 
toxicological Testing.  Both pilots tested negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, ethanol, and 
drugs.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The airplane was equipped with an Avidyne EXP5000 primary flight display (PFD) and an 
Avidyne EX5000 multi-function flight display (MFD). The Avidyne displays are the main two 
elements of the airplane™s Electronic Integrated Flight Deck.  The displays present navigation 
and flight data to the pilot on liquid-crystal computer screens, replacing the individual gauges 
and flight instruments found in earlier generation general aviation airplane cockpits. The PFD, 
which records performance parameters, samples and stores several data streams in a 
sequential fashion; when the recording limit of the PFD is reached, the oldest record is 
dropped and a new record is added. The MFD, which records engine RPM and manifold 
pressure, generates new data files for each power on cycle. New MFD data are sampled every 6 
seconds, and recorded to memory once every minute. If an interruption of electrical power 
occurs during the minute between MFD memory-write cycles, data sampled during that 
portion of a minute are not recorded. 
In this case, the MFD data ended at 17:12:29.7, but the PFD data recorded until 17:13:13.8. 
Page 5 of 9DFW08FA060
Consequently, the last 44 seconds of MFD data were lost, most likely due to the 1-minute data-
writing interval.
A Safety Board National Resource Specialist for Aircraft Performance performed an Aircraft 
Performance study.  This study described the results of using weight and balance information, 
PFD and MFD data, POH information, and flight-test data to define the position of the airplane 
relative to the runway 19 threshold, and to compare the performance of the airplane during the 
last 44 seconds of the flight with the nominal performance of the SR22. 
The results of the performance study showed that the airplane was within the allowable weight 
and balance envelope at the time of the accident. The lift and drag coefficients were consistent 
with the expected flaps-up performance of the SR22 at idle power, and a gross weight of 3,150 
pounds.  The data revealed:
At 17:12:30, as the airplane descended through 1,700 feet msl (735 feet agl) at a reduced power 
setting (16.4 inches of Mercury, manifold pressure 2,000 RPM), on a track consistent with a 
right downwind for runway 01 at Lindsay Airport. 
While there was no engine data available after 17:12:30, the computed coefficient of drag after 
this time matched the data obtained from flight tests of the SR22 with the flaps retracted and 
the engine at idle power. Consequently, it was likely that the power remained at idle speed for 
the remainder of the flight.
At 17:12:47, while descending through 1,520 feet (555 feet agl), the airplane entered a right 
bank, and reached a 47-degree bank angle at 17:12:56.  This right turn was consistent with 
making a turn onto left base for runway 19.  During this time, the airplane's angle of attack 
increased from about 6.5 degrees at 17:12:47 to 10 degrees at 17:12:56.
At 17:13:05, when the airplane was at an altitude of 1,200 feet (235 feet agl), the airplane rolled 
through a wings-level attitude at a roll rate of 25 degrees per second into a steep left bank, in a 
turn towards runway 19.  During this maneuver, the airplane's descent ceased but the angle of 
attack increased from 10 degrees to 15 degrees.
At 17:13:08, at a left bank angle of 53°, the airplane over flew the extended centerline of runway 
19 at an altitude of 1,188 feet msl (223 feet agl).  A second later, the left bank angle reached 60 
degrees and the angle of attack exceeded 17 degrees.  This angle of attack was consistent with 
flight test data for a flaps-retracted, wings level stall.
According to the Aircraft Performance Study, "Analysis of the angle of attack distribution along 
the wing during the final seconds of the flight indicated that at about 17:13:09, the angle of 
attack at every point along the left wing, from the centerline to the wingtip, exceeded the 
wings-level stall angle of attack of 17 degrees, while the angle of attack along the right wing was 
below 17° everywhere. This angle of attack distribution may have caused the left wing to stall 
before the right wing, decreasing the lift and increasing the drag on the left wing. This in turn 
would have generated additional yawing and rolling moments to the left, which may have 
produced the increase in left rolling and yawing rates observed at 17:13:09, and the increase in 
bank angle from -60° to -80°.
Between 17:13:09 and 17:13:11, the roll and yaw accelerations and rates reversed suddenly, and 
the airplane rolled and yawed violently to the right. The rapid roll rate to the right also reversed 
the distribution along the span, so that the right wing became deeply stalled, while the 
outboard portions of the left wing dropped below 17° angle of attack. This new angle of attack 
Page 6 of 9DFW08FA060
distribution generated an additional right rolling moment, accelerating the roll to the right.  
The reversal in yaw acceleration at 17:13:10 preceded the reversal in roll acceleration slightly. 
Hence, the initiating event of the roll and yaw reversals seems to have been the sudden yaw 
acceleration to the right. Such acceleration might have been provided by an abrupt and large 
right rudder input. In fact, the sudden application of a large rudder input during an accelerated 
stall is a well-known method of entering a snap roll. The circumstances of the sudden roll and 
yaw reversal to the right during the final moments of the accident flight appear similar to those 
of a snap-roll maneuver. It is possible that the pilots, faced with the increased roll rate to the 
left due to the stall of the left wing, input right rudder along with right aileron in an attempt to 
recover to wings-level, resulting in the snap-roll to the right. Once inverted, there was 
insufficient altitude to recover before impact with the ground."
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was released to a representative of the owner's insurance company.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
72, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/30/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1438 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 7 of 9DFW08FA060
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
53
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/17/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1327 hours (Total, all aircraft), 230 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP
Registration:
N824BJ
Model/Series:
SR22 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2119
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/02/2007, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
42.6 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
198.3 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550-N
Registered Owner:
JACKSON WILLIAM P
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
JACKSON WILLIAM P
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 8 of 9DFW08FA060
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PVJ
Distance from Accident Site:
20 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1750 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
150°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
80°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Lindsay, KS (1K2)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1659 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Lindsay Municipal (1K2)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
965 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
On-Ground
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
34.857222, -97.586389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Leah D Yeager
Adopted Date:
12/28/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Joseph R Broker; Federal Aviation Administration; Oklahoma City, OK
Rodney Martinez; Teledyne Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Brannon Mayer; Cirrus; Duluth, MN
Fred Barber; Avidyne Corporation; Bedford, MA
Publish Date:
07/16/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 9 of 9DFW08FA060
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
