Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Murrieta, CA
Accident Number:
LAX08LA056
Date & Time:
02/01/2008, 1116 PST 
Registration:
N601KS
Aircraft:
Smith Zodiac 601XL
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During the takeoff climb, the engine was starved of fuel and lost power.  Following the power 
loss, the pilot activated the auxiliary fuel pump and tried unsuccessfully to restart the engine.  
The pilot was turning in a 10-degree bank toward an off-airport emergency landing site in open 
terrain, when the left main landing gear touched down first on the upsloping terrain.  About 50 
feet from the initial touchdown, the nose landing gear dug into the soft terrain and separated, 
and the airplane came to rest on its nose.  The pilot reported that prior to the loss of power, the 
fuel pressure gage went to zero and he received a low fuel pressure warning.  He further 
reported that on the daytime flight, he was operating all of his electrical systems; strobes, 
transponder, and radios.  He said he believed that with the full operation of all the electrical 
devices, the electrically driven fuel pump did not have sufficient amperage to run.  An 
inspection of the airplane revealed that the carburetor bowl was empty; even though there was 
fuel onboard the airplane.  With the fuel pump not operating, fuel was not being supplied to 
the carburetor, thus allowing the engine to lose power as a result of fuel starvation.  When 
functionally checked the fuel pump operated normally. The pilot reported that there was no 
recent maintenance done on the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to fuel starvation, which was induced by the electrical system 
lacking sufficient power to run all of the electrical devices on the airplane and the electrical fuel 
pump.
Page 2 of 6LAX08LA056
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) ELECTRICAL SYSTEM - OVERLOAD
2. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,PUMP - FAILURE,TOTAL
3. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT
Page 3 of 6LAX08LA056
Factual Information
On February 1, 2008, at 1116 Pacific standard time, a single engine experimental Smith Zodiac 
601XL, N601KS, experienced a loss of engine power on takeoff and came to rest nose down in 
an open field following an emergency landing adjacent to French Valley Airport (F70), 
Murrieta/Temecula, California. The pilot/owner operated the personal local area flight under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The pilot, the sole occupant 
was not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight and no flight plan had been filed. 
During a telephone interview and subsequent written statement, the pilot reported that he was 
going to fly locally in the area.  He had flown the airplane about a month prior to the accident 
and encountered no problems.  On the accident flight, the preflight was normal, and the run-up 
was "good."  He reported that on the takeoff roll all of the gages were in the "green." He rotated 
the airplane at 65 miles per hour (mph), and established a normal climb rate to about 200 feet 
above ground level (agl), when the engine lost power and quit.  The pilot stated that he 
activated the auxiliary fuel pump, and tried unsuccessfully to restart the engine. 
The pilot stated that he banked the airplane to the left about 30 degrees and selected a landing 
site, while maintaining 75 mph. He noted that the terrain was undulating at his chosen landing 
site and he aimed for relatively flat terrain.  About 2 feet above the ground he flared for 
landing; however, the airplane was still in a left bank about 10 degrees and the left main 
landing gear touched down on slightly upsloping soft terrain. About 50 feet from the initial 
touchdown, the nose landing gear touched down and dug into the soft dirt; it separated at the 
strut. The airplane spun around 180 degrees from its original direction of travel, the wing tips 
touched down and the airplane stopped and came to rest in a nose low attitude.  The forward 
cockpit, engine, and cowl were damaged. The pilot also stated that there had been no recent 
maintenance on the airplane.
In a follow-up interview with the pilot, he reported that the fuel pressure gage went to zero and 
he received a low fuel pressure warning just prior to the engine failure.  The pilot stated that he 
believed the electrical system was overpowered with the operation of strobes, transponder, 
radios, and other systems; he stated that he was "running it all."  When he checked the 
carburetor he noted that there was no fuel in the carburetor bowl.  The pilot stated that the fuel 
pump quit as a result of an electrical drain.  In turn there was no fuel being supplied to the 
carburetor and thus the rest of the fuel system was starved of fuel allowing the engine to quit.  
He functionally checked the fuel pump and indicated that it operated normally.  The pilot 
further reported that there was fuel onboard the airplane.
According to a responding deputy from Riverside County Sheriff's Department, the airplane 
came to rest about 1/4 mile southeast of the airport. The right wing was "smashed" and had 
multiple dents, the landing gear had separated from the airplane, and the front end of the 
airplane had sustained damage.
Page 4 of 6LAX08LA056
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/01/2006
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/01/2006
Flight Time:
138 hours (Total, all aircraft), 13 hours (Total, this make and model), 90 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Smith
Registration:
N601KS
Model/Series:
Zodiac 601XL 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
6-5930
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/01/2007, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1320 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
General Motors
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
Corvair/T1123
Registered Owner:
Kenneth R Smith
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
Kenneth R Smith
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX08LA056
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
F70, 1350 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1116 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 12000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.02 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Murrieta/Temecu, CA 
(F70)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (F70)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1116 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
FRENCH VALLEY (F70)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
1350 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.579167, -117.116667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tealeye C Cornejo
Adopted Date:
07/30/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
Gabriel Serrano; Federal Aviation Administration; Riverside, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX08LA056
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
