Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Palo Alto, CA
Accident Number:
LAX08LA055
Date & Time:
02/01/2008, 0830 PST 
Registration:
N49811
Aircraft:
CESSNA 152
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Hard landing
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
Prior to the accident flight, a maintenance inspection was performed.  A piece of the baffling 
was found in the throat of the carburetor venturi.  The carburetor was inspected and reinstalled 
on the airplane.  On the accident flight, the pilot/mechanic performed a post maintenance run-
up with no mechanical problems noted.  She taxied the airplane to the runway for takeoff and 
performed another run-up.  Again there were no mechanical problems noted, and all the gages 
showed normal indications.  On the takeoff roll the engine developed 2,300 rpm™s.  About 500 
feet mean sea level (msl), she noticed a hesitation in the engine and decided to make a 180-
degree turn back to the runway.  The airplane was still high on the approach, so the pilot 
reduced the airspeed, performed S-turns, and then slipped the airplane to lose altitude.  She 
was still high, and about halfway down the runway, she further reduced the airspeed, which 
increased the sink rate.  She lowered the nose to slow the sink rate, and was in the process of 
raising the nose again to flare for landing when the nose struck the runway.  An inspection of 
the engine revealed zero compression of the number 1 cylinder with blow-by past the piston 
rings and exhaust valve.  Maintenance personnel also noted that the bottom number 1 cylinder 
spark plug was "excessively" fouled with carbon deposits.  There were no problems noted with 
the carburetor.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Loss of engine power during the takeoff initial climb due to lack of compression to a cylinder.
Findings
Aircraft
Recip eng cyl section - Damaged/degraded (Cause)
Personnel issues
Repair - Maintenance personnel
Page 2 of 5LAX08LA055
Factual Information
On February 1, 2008, at 0830 Pacific standard time, a single-engine Cessna 152, N49811, 
experienced a loss of engine power on takeoff and landed hard following an emergency landing 
on runway 13 at Palo Alto Airport of Santa Clara County (PAO), Palo Alto, California. West 
Valley Flying Club operated the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91 as a positioning flight. The commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was 
not injured.  The airplane sustained structural damage to the firewall and fuselage. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area flight that was originating at the time of 
the accident. The flight was destined for San Carlos Airport (SQL), San Carlos, California, and 
no flight plan had been filed.
According to the pilot™s written statement, she reported that during maintenance work the 
previous day, a piece of baffling was found in the throat of the carburetor venturi.  The 
carburetor was removed, cleaned, inspected, and reinstalled.  The following morning, she 
performed a post maintenance run-up inspection and then intended to return the airplane to 
SQL.  After start up, she performed a run-up, and all indications were normal.  She taxied to 
runway 31 where she performed another run-up with no problems noted.
On the takeoff roll, the engine developed 2,300 rpm™s, and all gages were in the "green."  On 
climb out, she reported a 600-foot-per-minute climb at 70 knots.  She lowered the nose to 
reduce the climb rate, but left the throttle and mixture in the full forward position.  About 500 
feet mean sea level (msl), the engine experienced a "hesitation."  The pilot stated that she did 
not believe she could complete the pattern and land on runway 31, so she made a 180-degree 
turn back to runway 13 and informed the controller of her intent to land.  With the runway in 
front of her, she reduced the airspeed to just above a stall and performed a "couple of S-turns 
and then slipped the [airplane]."
The pilot stated that the airplane was still high and she was concerned about overshooting the 
runway.  About halfway down the runway in an attempt to lose altitude, she reduced the 
airspeed as much as possible and the sink rate increased.  She lowered the nose and attempted 
to slow the sink rate, and then raised the nose again to flare prior to landing; however, the sink 
rate was too high and she was not able to raise the nose before it struck the runway.
Rossi Aircraft, Inc., Palo Alto, California, performed an engine inspection.  The engine 
inspection revealed that the bottom number 1 cylinder spark plug was "excessively" fouled with 
carbon deposits.  The other spark plugs exhibited normal operating signatures.  Maintenance 
personnel performed a compression check of all the cylinders.  Cylinder numbers 2, 3, and 4 
showed normal compression results.  The number 1 cylinder had zero compression.  
Maintenance personnel reported blow-by past the piston rings and exhaust valve of the 
number 1 cylinder.  The carburetor heat box was inspected with no damage noted that would 
have restricted the airflow; however, the seals were missing.  The carburetor was removed and 
inspected with no mechanical discrepancies noted; they did note about 2 ounces of water in the 
fuel bowl.
Page 3 of 5LAX08LA055
History of Flight
Prior to flight
Aircraft maintenance event
Takeoff
Loss of engine power (total)
Landing-flare/touchdown
Hard landing (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
37, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/03/2007
Flight Time:
1000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300 hours (Total, this make and model), 905 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N49811
Model/Series:
152 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15281332
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/01/2007, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1670 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
50 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6730 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-235-L2C
Registered Owner:
Kevin R Pinger
Rated Power:
110 hp
Operator:
West Valley Flying Club
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5LAX08LA055
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PAO, 4 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0847 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 20000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Palo Alto, CA (PAO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
SAN CARLOS, CA (SQL)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0815 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Palo Alto Airport (PAO)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
13
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2443 ft / 70 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; 
Precautionary Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.450000, -122.100000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Tealeye Cornejo
Adopted Date:
12/24/2008
Additional Participating Persons:
James Friel; Federal Aviation Administration; San Jose, CA
Publish Date:
12/24/2008
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5LAX08LA055
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
