The pilot of another airplane, while taxiing for takeoff, observed the accident airplane during 
the initial climb out. The airplane was observed in a right 45-degree bank, the nose of the 
airplane was up about 30 degrees and the airplane appeared to have stalled. At approximately 
the same time, the pilot radioed and reported that he was having a problem and wanted to 
return; the pilot never stated the problem. The airplane suddenly started losing altitude and 
just before colliding with the ground, the airplane was last observed in a 20 to 30 degree right 
bank, and a 50 to 60 degree nose-down attitude. Seconds later, a fireball was observed in the 
vicinity where the airplane was last seen. The fuselage assembly received heavy fire damage. 
The center section of the airframe and the cockpit area was fire damaged. The subsequent 
examination of the engine and airframe assemblies failed to reveal a mechanical problem or 
component failure. 
The pilot's failure to maintain flying speed during initial climb which resulted in a stall and 
uncontrolled collision with terrain. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1,1999, at 1548 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-34-200, N15478, collided with the 
ground during takeoff from runway 27 at the Tallahassee International Airport in Tallahassee, 
Florida. The personal flight was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 
91 with a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan filed. Visual weather conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident. The airplane was destroyed and there was a post-impact fire. The pilot 
was fatally injured. The accident occurred during the takeoff from Tallahassee, Florida; the 
flight was en route to Memphis, Tennessee.
At 1401, a man who identified himself as the pilot of N15478 telephoned Gainesville, Florida 
Federal Aviation Administration Flight Service Station (AFSS). The pilot closed his flight plan 
from Memphis, Tennessee to Tallahassee, and requested a weather briefing from Tallahassee 
to Memphis. The pilot reported that he would be departing Tallahassee within an hour. 
According to the fixed base operator at Tallahassee, after landing the airplane was serviced 
with 60 gallons of aviation fuel. The pilot had flown from Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and was 
enroute to Memphis. 
At 1501, the pilot of N15478 telephoned Gainesville AFSS and requested a standard briefing 
from Tallahassee to Memphis. The briefer recalled that the pilot was given a standard briefing 
followed by the pilot filed a flight plan. At 1526, the pilot of N15478 radioed Tallahassee 
Ground Control and requested taxi instructions.  The flight was cleared to runway 27, and the 
pilot was given a radio frequency for departure control and a transponder code. At 1546, 
Tallahassee Tower cleared N15478 for takeoff.        
The flight was cleared for a visual departure from runway 27. However, the pilot of another 
airplane taxiing for takeoff observed N15478 during the initial climb out.  The pilot of the other 
airplane reported that as N15478 continued the climb, it was observed in a right 45-degree 
bank, and turning through a 360-degree magnetic heading. At this point, the nose of N15478 
was up about 30 degrees and the airplane appeared to have stalled. 
At approximately the same time, the pilot of N15478 radioed Tallahassee Tower and reported 
that he was having a problem and wanted to return; the pilot never stated the problem. The 
airplane suddenly started losing altitude and appeared to have stalled a second time. The pilot 
of the other airplane further stated that the "stabilator" assembly appeared to be "full pitch up."  
Both propellers appeared to be turning throughout the entire sequence of flight gyrations. Just 
before colliding with the ground, N15478 was last observed in a 20 to 30 degree right bank, and 
a 50 to 60 degree nose-down attitude. Seconds later, a fireball was observed in the vicinity 
where N15478 was last seen.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Information on the airplane is included in this report on page 2 of the factual report under the 
data field labeled ''Aircraft Information".  A review of the fire damaged airplane maintenance 
logs disclosed that the airplane had been issued a special flight permit (ferry permit) for the 
flight from St. Vincent, West Indies, to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, only. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Information about the First Pilot is included in this report on page 3 of the factual report under 
the data field labeled "First Pilot Information". 
METEOROLOGICAL NFORMATION
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. Weather information is 
contained in this report on page 3 of the factual report under the data field labeled "Weather 
Information".
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site disclosed that wreckage debris was scattered over an area 210 
feet long and 90 feet wide. The wreckage path was oriented on a 070-degree magnetic heading.  
The vegetation and the wreckage debris in the immediate vicinity of the fuselage were burned. 
The center and nose sections of the fuselage sustained heavy fire damage. The accessory 
sections of both engines were also fire damaged.
Examination of the left wing assembly showed that the wing remained attached to the fuselage 
and sustained extensive fire damage throughout the entire structure. The nacelle area of the 
left wing along with the cowl assembly also sustained fire damage. Both fuel tanks were fire 
damaged. The left wing flight control surfaces were recovered at the accident site. The flight 
control cables, connecting rods, bell cranks and attach fittings were also located at the accident 
site.
A four-foot section of the right wing assembly was located about 30 feet from the main 
wreckage. Both right wing fuel tanks sustained fire damage and they were destroyed. 
Examination of the right main landing gear hydraulic cylinder assembly was in the extended 
position. 
The fuselage assembly received heavy fire damage. The center section of the airframe and the 
cockpit area was fire damage. All flight control surfaces and related assemblies were located in 
the immediate vicinity of the main wreckage. The subsequent examination of the horizontal 
stabilator and the rudder control failed to disclose a mechanical problem with control cables, 
pulley assemblies and control surface attach fittings. 
The subsequent examination of the engine assemblies failed to reveal a mechanical problem or 
component failure. No mechanical problems were discovered during the examination of the 
airframe wreckage.      
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On April 2, 1999, the postmortem examination on the pilot was conducted by Dr. Stewart at the 
Office of the State Medical Examiner in Tallahassee, Florida. The toxicological examinations 
were negative for alcohol and other drugs.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
On April 2, 1999, at about 2100, the hangar where the airframe wreckage was secured for the 
accident investigation was forcibly entered. None of the wreckage or associated components 
were missing after break-in.   The Tallahassee Police Department conducted a criminal 
investigation of the break-in (see attached police report).
The aircraft wreckage was released to Mr. Harry Brooks (insurance adjuster) Atlanta, Georgia.
