The pilot reported that during maneuvering flight, at about 500 feet agl, and 
1/2 mile offshore, the engine and cowling began to shake, the engine began to sputter, and the 
windscreens became covered with oil. He made a turn westbound toward land, and declared an 
emergency, intending to land at the nearest airport. He reported the engine power available 
would not sustain level flight, and he started a slow descent. Neither the pilot nor his front seat 
passenger acquired a visual on the airport. The pilot overflew the airport and forced landed in a 
residential area 2 miles west of the airport. Examination of the engine revealed failure of the 12 
cylinder holddown studs of the No. 7 cylinder. 
The pilot's failure to select a suitable forced landing site following a partial loss of engine power 
due to failed cylinder holdddown studs, and the subsequent collision with trees.  A factor in the 
accident was the reduced forward visibility from the dual open cockpits due to windshield 
obscuration by engine oil. 
 On April 2,1999, about 1557 eastern standard time, a Waco YMF-5, N820MM, 
registered to MD Aero, Inc., operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed in a 
residential area in Boca Raton, Florida, following an engine failure. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan  was filed.  The airplane received substantial damage, 
the private-rated pilot sustained serious injuries, and a passenger sustained minor injuries. 
The flight originated from Fort Lauderdale's Executive Airport (FXE), about 17 minutes before 
the accident.
According to the pilot, the flight was maneuvering at 500 feet agl, about 1/2 mile off the 
coast northeast of Boca Raton when the engine and cowling began to shake, the engine began 
to sputter, and the windscreens became covered with oil. He stated that the engine power 
available was not enough to sustain level flight, so he set up a slow rate of descent and an 
immediate turn westbound.  He declared an emergency with FAA Pompano Control Tower, 
told them he would try to make an emergency landing at Boca Raton Airport, and was given the 
unicom frequency for Boca Raton.  He switched to the Boca frequency and raised a young 
woman's voice who said she would get help.  He stated he could hear other aircraft in the traffic 
pattern stating they would yield to the emergency, but he made no further calls. 
At about 1543, according to FAA Pompano Control Tower personnel, N820MM called 
that he just departed FXE eastbound and asked for clearance to transit their area along the 
beach in a south to north direction. At about 1552, he had reached the northern limit of 
Pompano's airspace and was cleared for a radio frequency change.  At about 1554, Pompano 
tower heard a Mayday call from N820MM, and at about 1555, the pilot said he had an oil leak 
and would try to land at the Boca Raton Airport.  
According to a pilot in the traffic pattern at Boca Raton Airport, when N820MM 
declared his emergency and stated his engine problem, he obtained a visual on the Waco and 
watched him proceed westbound from a point about 2 miles east of the airport.  It became 
obvious to the pilot that the Waco pilot and passenger did not or could not see the Boca airport, 
because they flew "..right over the numbers for runway 23 at Boca, but kept on flying 
westbound".
According to the Boca Raton Police Services Department, the pilot advised them that the 
airplane "..developed engine problems and was trying to make Boca Raton Airport and was 
unable to see the runway and overshot the airport and crashed in the field."  The airplane 
collided with trees in a residential area and came to rest inverted.
According to FAA inspectors, the airplane crashed about 2 miles west of the Boca Raton 
Airport, within a residential area. Postcrash examination of the Jacobs radial engine by FAA 
inspectors revealed the power loss was caused by the failure of the No. 7 cylinder holddown 
studs and the resultant lifting of the cylinder off its seat.  Three of a total of 12 holddown studs, 
located on the aft side of the cylinder, revealed rust on their fractured surfaces.  The remaining 
studs exhibited overload fractures.  Piston wear marks on the walls of No. 7 cylinder reveal 
tilting of the cylinder away from the studs with rusted fracture sites.  The power loss and oil 
leakage were the result of induction piping and oil line connections being stripped when the 
cylinder started lifting off its seat.  Inspectors reported that the only thing holding No. 7 
cylinder on the engine was baffling jammed against the cowl.  About 140 engine operating 
hours before the accident, on March 3, 1998, the engine was reinstalled by General Aviation, 
Inc. of Lansing, Michigan, after a Jacobs Engine, Inc. factory teardown inspection due to a 
landing nose over incident.
