After a dual instructional flight, the student pilot (SP) departed for his first solo flight.  The SP 
was attempting a touch and go landing, when the airplane's nose wheel contacted the runway, 
and the airplane bounced back up into the air.  The airplane bounced two to three times, and 
it's propeller struck the runway.  The airplane came to rest on the runway.  Examination of the 
airplane did not reveal evidence of any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions of the airframe or 
engine.  The airplane's nose gear had been driven up into the fuselage, damaging the firewall.  
The SP reported 35 hours of total flight experience, of which, 24 hours were in the past 90 
days. 
The student pilot's improper flare, and his improper recover from a bounced landing. 
 On April 2, 1999, about 0856 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172P, N66162, was 
substantially damaged while landing at the Lawrence Municipal Airport, Lawrence, 
Massachusetts.  The certificated student pilot (SP) was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the local instructional flight 
conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the CFI, after a dual flight lesson, which included touch and go landings, 
balked landings, and go-arounds, he felt the SP was ready for his first solo flight.   The 
SP stated his intent was to perform a touch and go landing, and then a landing to a full stop.
The CFI observed the flight from the ground.  He stated the airplane entered the traffic 
pattern for runway 5, and the SP's approach seemed very standard and normal.  He further 
stated:
"...the flare and round out seemed a little flat.  The nose wheel of the aircraft made contact with 
the runway, this caused the aircraft to porpoise back up into the air.  The oscillations got worse 
and worse until finally the propeller made contact with the runway.  I estimate about three 
bounces before the [propeller] struck the runway."
The airplane came to rest on the runway.
The SP stated he believed he landed a "little too fast," which caused the airplane to 
balloon, and bounce.
Examination of the airplane by an FAA Inspector did not reveal evidence of any pre-
impact mechanical malfunctions of the airframe or engine.  The airplane's nose gear had been 
driven up into the fuselage, damaging the firewall.
The SP reported 35 hours of total flight experience, of which, 24 hours were in the past 
90 days.
