The airplane was in cruise flight at 3,500 feet mean sea level when the engine lost power. The 
pilot restarted the engine, and it ran for about 20 seconds before again losing power. He 
applied carburetor heat, but the cycle of losing power and restarting for a few seconds occurred 
several times. The pilot attempted to land in a field, but collided with trees at the edge of the 
field. There was no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction found during a postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine. The meteorological conditions at the time of the 
accident were conductive to serious carburetor icing at cruise power. Although the pilot applied 
carburetor heat after the initial power loss, the engine likely did not run long enough to melt 
the ice and restore power.
The pilot™s delay in using carburetor heat, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to an 
encounter with carburetor icing conditions.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 3, 2011, about 0945 Pacific standard time, an Aeronca 0-58C, N47503, collided 
with trees near San Luis Obispo, California. The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The private pilot sustained 
minor injuries, and one passenger sustained fatal injuries; the airplane sustained substantial 
damage to the fuselage and wings. The cross-country personal flight departed Paso Robles, 
California, about 0920, with a planned destination of Oceano, California. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector interviewed the pilot, and provided the 
following information. The pilot stated that the airplane was in cruise flight at 3,500 feet mean 
sea level (msl). The engine started to cough and lose power. He attempted to restart the engine, 
and it ran for about 20 seconds. He then applied carburetor heat, but the cycle of losing power 
and restarting for a few seconds occurred several times. The pilot attempted to land in a field, 
but collided with trees at the edge of the field.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot reported that he held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine 
land. He was issued a third-class medical certificate on July 19, 2010, with the limitation that 
he must wear corrective lenses.
The pilot reported that he had a total flight time of 315 hours. He logged 4.1 hours in the last 90 
days, and 0.5 in the last 30 days. He stated that he had 20 hours in this make and model, and 
completed a biennial flight review on September 3, 2010.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was an Aeronca O-58C (L-3B), serial number 43-8212. The owner reported that 
the airplane had a total airframe time of 910 hours. It had an annual inspection on April 30, 
2010.
The engine was a Continental Motors A-65-8, serial number 5292968.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The closest official weather observation station was San Luis Obispo, California (KSBP), which 
was 4 nautical miles (nm) southeast of the accident site. The elevation of the weather 
observation station was 212 feet msl.
An aviation routine weather report (METAR) for KSBP was issued at 0956 PST. It stated: wind 
calm; visibility 10 miles; sky clear; temperature 9/48 degrees Celsius/Fahrenheit; dew point 
4/39 degrees Celsius/Fahrenheit; altimeter 30.48 inches of mercury; relative humidity 71 
percent.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Examination of the airframe and engine was conducted on February 8, 2011, at the facilities of 
Aircraft Recovery Services, Pearblossom, California. No evidence of preimpact mechanical 
malfunction was noted during the examination of the airframe and engine. Detailed 
examination notes are in the public docket.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA Aircraft Certification Service published Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin 
(SAIB) CE-09-35 on June 30, 2009, to inform pilots of the potential hazards associated with 
carburetor icing.
The SAIB noted that carburetor icing doesn™t just occur in freezing conditions; it can occur at 
temperatures well above freezing temperatures when there is visible moisture or high 
humidity. It states that icing can occur in the carburetor at temperatures above freezing. 
Because vaporization of fuel, combined with the expansion of air as it flows through the 
carburetor (the venturi effect) causes sudden cooling, a significant amount of ice can build up 
within a fraction of a second. The SAIB contains a graph that illustrates the probability of 
carburetor icing for various temperature and relative humidity conditions.
The conditions for this accident fell within the range of serious icing at cruise power.
The FAA™s Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge states that application of carburetor heat will 
cause a further reduction in power, and possibly engine roughness as melted ice goes through 
the engine. It states that these symptoms can last from 30 seconds to several minutes, 
depending on the severity of the icing.
