National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: San Marcos, TX
Accident Number: CEN12LA229
Date & Time: 04/03/2012, 1930 CDT
Registration: N1162X
Aircraft: PIPER PA-34-200T
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Collision during takeoff/land
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
 Analysis The pilot called the Flight Service Station (FSS) before departing on a cross-country flight to ask if there were any restrictions along his flight route that he needed to be aware of; none were mentioned.
Upon arrival at his destination about dusk, the pilot listened to the Automated Terminal Information Service (ATIS); the control tower was closed at the time.
The pilot then landed the airplane on runway 8, and during the landing roll, the airplane struck construction barriers on the runway, which resulted in the main landing gear shearing off and substantial damage to the left wing.
The ATIS recording did not include information about runway 8 being closed.
A March 21, 2012, NOTAM was in effect and stated that runway 8/26 was closed due to construction; this information was not provided or requested during the FSS briefing.
The Airman™s Information Manual states that an FSS is required to advise pilots of pertinent NOTAMs if a standard briefing is requested.
It further states that pilot's should remind the briefer to advise of NOTAMs if the information is not received in the brief.
It is ultimately the pilot™s responsibility to ensure that he is familiar with all relevant NOTAMs.
Further, FAA Order JO7210.3X states, in part, that facilities with runway construction must ensure ATIS message content is complete, accurate, and contains the proper information related to runway closures.
The pilot stated postaccident that reflective ribbons and directional flashing lights, could have helped him see the barrier.
He also stated that he flew into the same airport about a week after the accident and noted that the runway closure was included on the ATIS recording.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to ensure that he was aware of the NOTAM describing the runway closure, which resulted in a landing on the closed runway and subsequent collision with a barrier.
Contributing to the accident was the failure of air traffic control personnel to include the runway closure information on the recorded ATIS information, which the pilot had listened to prior to landing.
The commercial pilot, who was the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed for the positioning flight being operated under the provision of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The flight originated at 1800 from Carrizo Springs, Texas, and San Marcos was its destination.
According to FAA records, the pilot called Fort Worth Flight Service Station (FSS) at 1700 before departure from Carrizo Springs to ask if any Temporary Flight Restrictions (TFRs) were in effect between Carrizo Springs and San Marcos.
After an uneventful flight, he landed the airplane on runway 08 at San Marcos.
During the landing roll, the airplane struck construction barriers resulting in sheared main landing gear and substantial damage to the left wing.
The San Marcos control tower had closed at 1900.
A Notice to Airman (NOTAM) was published and in effect since March 21, 2012, stipulating that runway 08/26 was closed due to construction.
The pilot reported that he had called the Fort Worth FSS prior to the flight and asked for TFR's along the route and asked the briefer if "there was anything else that [he] needed to be aware of."
The briefer did not mention the NOTAM that was in effect for the runway 08 closure, nor did the pilot specifically ask about NOTAMs.
He stated that upon arrival to San Marcos, about dusk, he listened to the Automated terminal Information Service (ATIS).
He said that the ATIS recording did not include the closure of runway 08.
He planned to land the airplane a bit long on the 6,600 foot runway to limit taxi time.
During the landing roll, he was not able to avoid the barricade.
Chapter 5, paragraph d., of the Airman's Information Manual, states in part that Flight Service stations are required to advise pilots of pertinent NOTAMs if a standard briefing is requested.
It also states that pilot's should remind the briefer to advise of NOTAMs if the information was not received in the brief.
Chapter 10, Section 4, paragraph d., of FAA Order JO7210.3X, dated February 9, 2012, states in part that facilities with runway construction must ensure ATIS message content is complete, accurate, and contains the proper information related to runway closures.
On the submitted NTSB Form 6120, Recommendation Section, the pilot stated that reflective ribbons, directional flashing lights, could have helped him see the barrier.
He also stated that the accident would have been avoided if the runway closure information was included in the ATIS.
He said that he flew into San Marcos about a week after the accident, April 24, and noted that the runway closure was included on the ATIS recording.
The pilot offered that had the FSS briefer mentioned the NOTAM and/or if the NOTAM was included in the ATIS recording, the accident would not have occurred.
