The accident occurred during the fourth leg of a visual flight rules cross-country flight. The 
pilot departed on the first leg of the trip shortly after sunrise, about 11 hours prior to the 
accident. The pilot made 3 intermediate stops during the day, where he purchased fuel. The 
accident flight was approximately 1 hour in duration and was conducted in night visual 
meteorological conditions. Radar track data depicted the airplane established on a west-
southwest course and at a constant altitude. About 15 seconds prior to the accident, the 
airplane entered a descending left turn, and spiraled down, ultimately impacting an open field. 
A postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any anomalies consistent with a 
preimpact failure or malfunction. Postmortem toxicology testing was consistent with the prior 
use of a prescription anti-anxiety medication and marijuana. Due to limited samples, a 
determination could not be made as to when the substances were last used. Accordingly, no 
determination was made as to whether the pilot was impaired at the time of the accident. 
While the departure from controlled flight suggested spatial disorientation, and the extended 
duration of the trip likely contributed to pilot fatigue, the exact nature of the loss of control 
could not be determined.
The pilot's loss of control for undetermined reasons. Contributing to the accident was the 
pilot's fatigue.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 3, 2011, about 1852 central standard time (cst), a Cessna 172H, N1416F, was 
substantially damaged during an in-flight collision with terrain near Walnut Grove, Missouri. 
The pilot was fatally injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot. The 
personal cross-country flight was being conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91 without a flight plan. Night visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The flight departed 
Waynesville-Forney Field Airport (TBN), Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri, about 1745. The 
intended destination was Bartlesville Municipal Airport (BVO), Bartlesville, Oklahoma.
A friend of the pilot reported that she drove him to Lancaster Airport (LNS), Lancaster, 
Pennsylvania, on the morning of the accident. They arrived at the airport about 0700 eastern 
standard time (est) and waited for the sun to rise. The pilot fueled the airplane and she 
watched him depart about 0750 est. She noted that the pilot called her about 1430 cst and 1730 
cst that afternoon to check in. He reportedly stated that he was planning to spend the night in 
Oklahoma, and had arranged for a hangar for the airplane and a limousine to pick him up at 
the airport.
A receipt for several food and beverage items was recovered from the airplane. The receipt was 
dated the same day as the accident and included a time stamp of 0539 est.
Fueling records recovered from the airplane indicated that the pilot purchased fuel at: 
Pickaway County Memorial Airport (CYO), Circleville, Ohio, at 1158 est; Lawrenceville-
Vincennes Airport (LWV), Lawrenceville, Illinois, at 1521 cst; and TBN about 1739 cst.
Radar data recorded by the Springfield-National Airport (SGF) Air Traffic Control Tower 
(ATCT) appeared to depict the accident airplane in the vicinity of Lebanon, Missouri, about 
1817. The radar target proceeded west-southwest. At 1839, the airplane was 19.5 nautical miles 
northeast (035 degrees) of SGF, at 3,300 feet mean sea level (msl).  About 1851:55 (hhmm:ss), 
the airplane appeared to enter a left turn from 3,400 feet msl. About 5 seconds later, the 
airplane altitude was recorded as 3,100 feet msl. The final radar data point was recorded at 
1852:05, about 0.10 nm south of the accident site.
A witness, who subsequently located the wreckage, reported hearing an airplane engine for 
about 2 seconds, followed by the sound of the impact.
The accident site was located in an open field about 11 miles north-northeast of SGF. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a single engine land airplane rating. He was issued 
a third-class airman medical certificate without limitations on March 17, 2011. The pilot's most 
recent flight review endorsement was dated March 9, 2010.
The pilot had logged approximately 405 hours total flight time, with about 340 hours in Cessna 
172 airplanes and 109 hours of total night flight experience. He had logged approximately 11 
hours within the preceding 90 days.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was a 1966 Cessna 172H, serial number 17254911. It was powered by a 
Continental O-300-D six-cylinder engine, serial number 34505-D-6-D, capable of producing 
145 horsepower.
Maintenance records indicated that the most recent annual inspection was completed on 
January 27, 2010. The airframe had accumulated approximately 2,134 hours at the time of the 
accident, with about 71 hours since the inspection.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
Weather conditions recorded by the Springfield-Branson National Airport (SGF) Automated 
Surface Observing System (ASOS), located approximately 11 miles south-southeast of the 
accident site, at 1852, were: Wind from 210 degrees at 5 knots, clear skies, and 10 miles 
visibility.
The sun and the moon were both below the horizon at the time of the accident.  Sunset 
occurred at 1709 and civil twilight ended at 1738. The moon had set at 1641, with a new moon 
occurring at 0303 the following morning (January 4th).
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted an open field about 10.5 nm north-northeast of SGF. The main 
wreckage was located about 12 feet north of the ground impact crater. The impact crater 
measured about 6 feet in diameter and 3 feet deep, and was oriented on an approximate 350-
degree (north) bearing. A debris field, emanating from the impact crater, was approximately 
150 feet long by 75 feet wide. Small debris was located up to 200 feet from the main wreckage.
The airplane was fragmented. The nose landing gear separated and was located at the ground 
impact crater. The cockpit/cabin area was compromised. The cabin entry doors separated from 
the fuselage. The seats, with portions of the seat tracks attached, were separated from the 
airframe. The wings were separated and deformed. Portions of both ailerons remained 
attached to the wings. The empennage was located with the main wreckage. The horizontal and 
vertical stabilizers, with attached portions of the rudder and elevators, were deformed. Rudder 
and elevator control cables remained attached to their respective control surface bellcranks, as 
well as to their respective cockpit controls. Separations in the rudder and elevator cables 
appeared consistent with overload failures. The aileron control cables exhibited continuity at 
the aileron bellcranks and the cockpit control yoke. Separations in the aileron control cables 
between the cockpit and the wings appeared consistent with overload failures.  
The engine separated from the airframe and was embedded into the ground. The propeller had 
separated from the engine. The crankcase was fractured and portions of 2 cylinders were 
separated consistent with impact damage. The separated cylinder sections were recovered at 
the accident site.
A postaccident examination of the airplane did not reveal any anomalies consistent with a 
preimpact failure or malfunction.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy of the pilot was performed at the Greene County, Missouri, Medical Examiner's 
office on January 4, 2011. The cause of death was attributed to blunt force trauma sustained in 
the accident.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) forensic toxicology testing report stated:
0.131 (ug/ml, ug/g) Nordiazepam detected in Liver
0.072 (ug/ml, ug/g) Nordiazepam detected in Kidney
1.976 (ug/ml, ug/g) Tetrahydrocannabinol (Marijuana) detected in Lung
0.122 (ug/ml, ug/g) Tetrahydrocannabinol (Marijuana) detected in Kidney
0.2494 (ug/ml, ug/g) Tetrahydrocannabinol Carboxylic Acid (Marijuana) detected in Liver
0.2081 (ug/ml, ug/g) Tetrahydrocannabinol Carboxylic Acid (Marijuana) detected in Kidney
0.0372 (ug/ml, ug/g) Tetrahydrocannabinol Carboxylic Acid (Marijuana) detected in Lung
No ethanol was detected in tissue samples tested.
No history of substance dependence or abuse was noted by the pilot on any of his FAA airman 
medical certificate applications.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
According to local law enforcement, 12 bags, each containing approximately 1 ounce of 
marijuana, were recovered from the airplane after the accident.
