The instrument-rated pilot was on the return leg of a three-leg cross country flight at night 
when he encountered clouds in his path. He considered climbing above the clouds, but he was 
concerned that he would not be able to descend back down through them. He elected to 
descend below the clouds, and misjudged the distance between the clouds and the ground. The 
airplane collided with trees and terrain at an elevation of about 2,200 feet in a remote, wooded 
area. The airplane sustained substantial damage by impact forces and post-crash fire. The pilot 
reported he did not see the trees or the terrain prior to the collision. Additionally, he stated 
that there were no mechanical issues with the airplane during the flight.
The pilot's failure to maintain clearance from terrain during the night flight. 
On January 2, 2011, about 1917 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-161, N42997, was 
destroyed following an in-flight collision with trees and terrain near Benton, Pennsylvania. The 
airplane was operated by Tech Aviation Flight School. The certificated private pilot sustained 
serious injuries. Night instrument meteorological conditions were present in the area, and no 
flight plan was filed for the solo instructional flight. The flight was conducted under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The flight originated at Williamsport, 
Pennsylvania (IPT) about 1900, and was destined for  Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Airport (AVP), 
Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania.
An inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration responded to the accident site and 
examined the wreckage. The airplane crashed in a remote, wooded area, about 32 nautical 
miles (nm) west of AVP, at an elevation of about 2,200 feet. He reported that the airplane was 
completely destroyed by fire. The cockpit and all flight instruments were burned beyond 
recognition. Both wings were torn from the fuselage and were found next to the fuselage. 
A Pennsylvania State Patrolman responded to the accident site and spoke with the pilot. 
According to the patrolman, the pilot reported that he was trying to maneuver under a cloud 
when the accident occurred.
After recovering from his injuries, the pilot was interviewed by the NTSB investigator-in-
charge on April 5, 2011. The pilot reported that he was on the return leg of a three-leg cross 
country, at night, with no flight plan filed, when he encountered clouds in his path. He 
considered climbing above the clouds, but was concerned that he would not be able to descend 
back down through them. He decided to go under the clouds, and misjudged the distance 
between the clouds and the ground. He "...just ran out of space." He did not see the ground or 
the trees before he crashed. He stated that there were no mechanical issues with the airplane 
during the flight.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with airplane single engine land and instrument 
airplane ratings. 
Weather, recorded at AVP at 1901, included winds from 340 degrees at 7 knots, visibility 10 
statute miles, sky broken at 2,600 feet, temperature 2 degrees C, dew point -3 degrees C, an 
altimeter setting of 29.96 inches Hg.
Weather, recorded at IPT at 1854, included winds from 290 degrees at 14 knots, visibility 10 
statute miles, sky clear, temperature 2 degrees C, dew point -8 degrees C, an altimeter setting 
of 30.04 inches Hg. IPT was located about 22 nm west of the accident site.
