The pilot and passenger were on a pleasure flight in the multi-engine airplane and at the last 
moment the pilot decided to conduct a touch-and-go landing and takeoff at a nearby airport. 
During a short final leg of the landing approach, the pilot recalled seeing white and red lights 
on the left side of the runway and believed these were visual approach slope indicator lights. 
He was uncertain of what light color arrangement indicated a proper glide path to the runway. 
As the airplane approached the runway, the lights started to flicker, at which time the pilot 
applied full engine power, but the airplane immediately collided with trees and came to rest 
inverted. The pilot stated that there was less ambient light than he had anticipated and that 
there was haze in the air. He was not aware of the trees at the approach end of the runway. The 
airport was not tower controlled and none of the 4 runways were equipped with visual 
approach slope indicator lights. The intended landing runway has a published displaced 
threshold that is 850 feet from the runway™s original threshold. Published information cautions 
about trees at the approach end of that runway. The pilot did not review any publication for the 
intended airport before the flight. Additionally, the pilot did not hold a multi-engine rating or a 
multi-engine solo endorsement. The last entry in his flight logbooks for night flight was in 
2000. The pilot reported no mechanical issues with the airplane before the accident.
The pilot did not maintain separation from trees during landing. Contributing to the accident 
was the pilot™s inadequate preflight planning and lack of recent night flight experience.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2011, about 1757 eastern standard time, a Cessna 310F, N6725X, registered to 
and operated by an individual, crashed in a wooded area adjacent to the Orange Municipal 
Airport (ORE), Orange, Massachusetts, during a visual approach to runway 19. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time. The personal flight was conducted under Title 
14 of Federal Regulations Part 91, and no flight plan was filed. The airplane incurred 
substantial damage. The pilot received minor injuries and the passenger was killed. The flight 
departed from Dillant-Hopkins Airport (EEN), Keene, New Hampshire, earlier that day, about 
1630, 
A Massachusetts State Police representative (MSPR) stated that there were no eye witnesses to 
the accident. Residents near the airport, along the approach path to runway 19, reported 
hearing the airplane and noted from its sound that it was flying low compared to what they 
were accustomed to.  Moments later they heard the crash. One witness ran toward the area 
where a person (the pilot) was yelling the passenger™s name, the pilot instructed the witness to 
call 911.  
The pilot stated to the MSPR that he became a pilot in 1989 and has about five hundred hours 
of flight experience.  For a period of 6 to 7 years he stopped flying and resumed about a year 
ago with an instructor.  He purchased the accident airplane around May or June of 2010.  
About 1630 he and the passenger departed from EEN and flew over Franklin County where the 
pilot is originally from.  He had decided to practice a ﬁtouch and goﬂ landing at ORE before 
returning to EEN; the pilot mentioned he had flown to ORE previously. When the pilot 
approached the airport there was less ambient light than he™d anticipated and there was a 
ﬁhazeﬂ in the air; he also found the airplane to lose altitude faster than his previous airplane. 
He recalled seeing white and red lights off to the left near the runway, believing there were a 
visual slope indicator. He was uncertain of what arrangements indicate a proper glide path 
onto the runway. As the airplane approached  the runway, the lights started to flicker, at which 
time he applied full engine power. He was unaware of the tree until after the crash and he was 
on the ground.  He reported no mechanical issues with the airplane prior to the accident.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, who was seated in the left seat, held a private pilot certificate with rating for airplane 
single engine land. He did not hold a multiengine rating. He was issued a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) third-class medical certificate on September 10, 2010, with limitations 
that he must wear correcting lenses for distant and possess glasses for near vision. He had 
documented 500 total hours at that time. A review of the pilot™s flight logbook by FAA showed 
the pilot had about 50 hours of multi-engine instructional time. There was no multi-engine 
solo endorsement. The last entry for night time flight was in 2000.   
The passenger, seated in the right seat, held no FAA certificates.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Cessna 310F, a 4 place all metal, low wing, multi-engine airplane, with retractable landing 
gear, serial number 310-0025, was manufactured in 1960, and issued a standard airworthiness 
certificate, in the normal category. The airplane was powered by 2 each Continental IO-470-D, 
260-horsepower engine and equipped with Hartzell two bladed, variable-pitch, propellers. 
The airplane™s last annual inspection was February 1, 2010 and had a total of 5,416, hours at 
that time. The airplane™s engines were last inspected on February 1, 2010.  The airplane last 
had maintenance on September 4, 2010; addressing a FAA Condition Notice. At the time of the 
accident, the airplane had accumulated a total of 5,471 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The ORE 1752 METAR, was winds from 310 degrees at 3 knots; visibility, 9 statute miles; clear 
sky; temperature 02 degrees Celsius (C); dew point minus 1 degrees C; altimeter 30.00 inches 
of mercury.
The United States Naval Observatory Astronomical Applications Department recorded the 
phase of the Moon, on 1 January, 2010 for Orange, Massachusetts, as waning crescent with 8 
percent of the Moon's visible disk illuminated. The Moon™s position was recorded just above 
the horizon during the time of the accident. The sunset was at 1648 and the end civil twilight 
was 1658. 
 
AIRPORT  INFORMATION
Runway 19 at ORE is an asphalt, 5000 foot long by 75 foot wide, with a 850 feet displaced 
threshold, at an elevation of 533 feet mean sea level (msl). The airport does not have a control 
tower and none of the 4 runways are equipped with a visual slope indicator. Information 
cautioning trees at the approach end of runway 19 are published. The runway lighting system is 
controlled by the airport™s common traffic frequency.
 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The main wreckage came to rest at latitude 42 degrees, 34.604 minutes north and longitude 
072 degrees, 17.407 minutes west, at an elevation of 536 feet msl; the nose of the airplane was 
on a heading of 080 degrees.  The airplane™s energy path was on a 200 degrees heading. The 
airplane initial contact was with a 70 foot tall tree, about 202 feet north from the main 
wreckage. The second contact was with a tree at a height about 55 feet above ground level (agl). 
The right aileron was located 125 feet north from the main wreckage.  The third contact was 
with a thick tree at a height of 45 feet agl.  Near that location a section of the right outboard 
wing was located on the ground. The fourth contact was with a thick tree at a height of 40 feet 
agl. The mid section of the right wing along with the right main landing gear, in the extended 
position, was located at the base of that tree.
Several trees were impacted thereafter along the energy path until the airplane™s left forward 
inboard wing to fuselage area struck a large diameter tree about a height of 25 feet agl.  The 
airplane lodge itself at that location. The tree broke over near the base, which resulted in the 
airplane impacting the ground, in a fresh water creek, inverted. The left out board wing section 
with the tip fuel tank was located 20 feet southeast of the main wreckage. The nose gear 
assembly was located the furthest from the initial tree contact, about 45 feet east of the main 
wreckage.  The left engine came to rest about 5 feet from the main wreckage, left wing area. 
The right engine came to rest about 30 feet east of the main wreckage. The engines and the left 
outboard wing section came to rest across the creek on public property. The distant from the 
initial tree contact to the beginning of the displaced threshold was about 640 feet and 1,490 
feet to the touch down zone of runway 19.
An on-scene wreckage examination showed all of the flight control surfaces and control cable 
continuity were accounted for. The right wing was the first to contact the trees separating, the 
tip tank, the wing section between the engine nacelle and tip tank and then separating the wing 
from outboard of the engine to the fuselage. The right aileron was observed separated from the 
wing and early in the wreckage path. The right fuel tip tank was observed stuck in the tree 
approximately 60 feet agl. The left wing was observed separated just outboard of the engine. 
There was an impact with a tree approximately, 12 inches in diameter, just outboard of the left 
side of the fuselage which severed the main spar.
Both horizontal stabilizer were observed to have impact damage from the trees approximately 
6 inches inboard of the tip. Both control yokes were observed in the respective locations in the 
instrument panel and moved together. The rudder pedals moved when the rudder was moved 
by hand. The elevator cables in the tailcone were observed connected; impact damage to the 
forward fuselage prevented the control yokes from moving when the elevator was moved by 
hand.
The aileron cables were continuous from the cockpit to the left wing aileron bellcrank.  The 
aileron cables for the right wing were not observed, due location of the wreckage and damage 
to the right wing. All four of the flap panels were observed extended. The flap actuator was not 
observed due to the position of the wreckage. The empennage flight control surfaces were 
observed attached to their respective aerodynamic surfaces. All three trim tabs were observed 
attached to their respective control surfaces. The trim tab actuator measurement for the rudder 
was observed beyond the limits displacing the rudder tab to the right. The right aileron was 
observed separated from the wing. The left aileron was observed attached to the left wing.
Both front seats were observed separated from the seat pedestals and found outside the 
aircraft. The seat pedestal for the left front seat was observed distorted. The seat pedestal for 
the right front seat was observed with minor damage. The top forward section of the cabin area 
was crushed inward. The left side of the cabin area absorbed most of the impact. Both forward 
center attachment tabs for the front, left and right, lap seat belt systems were observed with 
their respective bolts ripped through the metal tab.  The forward windshield was broken; 
remnants remained. Both of the rear seats remained attached to the fuselage. The left engine 
magneto switch was observed in the ﬁBothﬂ position. The right engine magneto switch was 
observed in the ﬁLeftﬂ position. The left fuel selector was observed in the ﬁLeft Mainﬂ position. 
The right fuel selector was observed in between ﬁRight Mainﬂ and ﬁRight Auxﬂ position. Engine 
control levers (throttles, propellers, and fuel mixtures) were observed in the full forward 
position. The altimeter setting was observed at 29.95 inches of mercury. 
The left engine™s number 2 cylinder™s valve cover was observed with impact damage. Tree 
debris was observed in the area in between the engine cowling and top cylinders. Engine 
continuity was established by rotating the propeller and observing the alternator belt rotate. 
The fuel control assembly was intact. The fuel divider was observed with clean screen and fuel 
was present when opened. All top cylinder spark plugs were removed and observed with 
indication of the engine running rich. The left engine™s propeller was attached at the engine 
crankshaft flange. The propeller hub was compromised by impact damage. Both blades were 
bent aft at mid span. One blade was observed in the low pitch and the other in the high pitch 
angle. No cord scoring was observed on the blades.
The right engine™s number 1 cylinder valve cover was observed with impact damage. The oil 
sump pan was crushed. The fuel control assembly separated and was observed with impact 
damage.   Engine continuity was established by rotating the propeller and observing the 
alternator belt rotate. The fuel engine driven fuel pump drive shaft was intact. The fuel 
divider™s top screws were not properly safety wired. The fuel divider was observed with clean 
screen and fuel was present when opened. The top cylinder spark plugs were removed; 
unremarkable. The right engine™s propeller was attached at the engine crankshaft flange. The 
propeller hub was unremarkable. One of the blades was observed with cord ﬁSﬂ twisting and 
bent aft, the other blade was bent aft at mid span. Erosion on the leading edge of the blades 
was observed. One blade was in the low pitch and the other in the high pitch angle.
TEST AND RESEARCH
The airport™s runway and taxiway lighting system was inspected and discovered one red lens 
cover separated from a light assembly for the left side threshold displacement lighting system 
for runway 19. There were no other discrepancies noted.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Medical Examiner™s Office in Holyoke, Massachusetts, conducted a postmortem 
examination of the passenger. The cause of death was blunt force trauma.
