Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Charlotte Amali, VI
Accident Number:
MIA08LA149
Date & Time:
06/01/2008, 1250 AST 
Registration:
N411FS
Aircraft:
AERO COMMANDER 500-B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Injuries:
7 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
While inbound for landing, undetected fatigue cracks in a hard aluminum hydraulic line near a 
flared end cracked through the tube wall thickness resulting in the loss of hydraulic fluid and 
the inability of the pilot to fully extend all landing gears using either the normal or emergency 
landing gear extension systems. During the landing roll, the left main landing gear collapsed. 
Fatigue cracking of the tube was likely caused by vibratory loads due to in-service bends and 
improper clamping; the tube was only clamped in one location though two clamps were 
required. Additionally, wear on the tube in the area of the clamp was consistent with a loose 
clamp. The airplane was last inspected in accordance with an Annual/100-Hour inspection on 
April 30, 2008, or approximately 62 hours earlier. Inspection of the tube for condition is 
required during the 100 hour inspection.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of maintenance personnel to identify inadequate clamping of the aluminum line 
during inspection, and the undetected fatigue cracking of the line which resulted in the loss of 
hydraulic fluid.
Findings
Aircraft
Hydraulic, main system - Fatigue/wear/corrosion (Cause)
Hydraulic power system - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Scheduled/routine maintenance - Maintenance personnel (Cause)
Page 2 of 5MIA08LA149
Factual Information
On June 1, 2008, about 1250 Atlantic standard time, an Aero Commander 500-B, N411FS, 
registered to a private individual and operated by Bevins Air Service, Inc., experienced collapse 
of the left main landing gear during the landing roll at Cyril E. King Airport (TIST), Charlotte 
Amalie, U.S.V.I. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and a visual flight rules 
(VFR) flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135 non-
scheduled, international, passenger flight from Cane Field (TDCF), Roseau, Dominica. The 
airplane was substantially damaged and the certificated commercial pilot and six passengers 
were not injured. The flight originated about 1050, from TDCF.
The pilot stated that after takeoff the flight proceeded to the destination airport and when it 
was approximately 20 miles from there, the airplane's hydraulic pressure which actuates the 
landing gear and flaps, began to fluctuate. He lowered the landing gear using the normal gear 
extension system but the left main landing gear did not go into the down and locked position. 
He advised the control tower of the situation and attempted to extend the left main landing 
gear by bouncing the right main landing gear on the runway but was unsuccessful. He 
departed, and attempted to extend the left main gear using the emergency extension procedure 
which was also unsuccessful. The flight returned for landing, and during the landing roll, the 
left main landing gear collapsed.
The National Transportation Safety Board was notified of the accident on July 21, 2008. 
According to the mechanic who inspected the airplane after the accident, he found a cracked 
aluminum tube in the left hand nacelle. The tube was cracked beneath the sleeve at the flare for 
the B-nut which attaches at the inboard side of the left engine nacelle. The tube was supported 
by one phenolic block about midway along its length. Additionally, all hydraulic fluid was 
drained from the primary stand pipe reservoir. The tube, P/N 6790246-101, identified as Tube 
Assembly Hydraulic Pressure, was removed from the airplane and sent to the National 
Transportation Safety Board (Safety Board's) Materials Laboratory, in Washington, D.C.
Examination of the tube by personnel from the Safety Board's Materials Laboratory revealed 
that the majority of the crack was perpendicular to the surface and contained faint crack arrest 
positions consistent with fatigue cracking. Small ratchet marks were noted in the central 
portion of the crack adjacent to the outside diameter surface, indicating that initiation of the 
crack was from multiple origin areas at the beginning of the flared end. No evidence of material 
defects or mechanical damage was noted in the origin area. The flared end of the tube adjacent 
to the fracture surface showed evidence of use but did not contain large amounts of 
deformation. The flared end at the opposite end of the tube was out-of-round. Further 
examination of the tube revealed a circumferential wear area approximately 4 inches from the 
middle radius of a 90-degree bend near the cracked end of the tube; the wear was consistent of 
being made by a loose clamp. A second area of wear was noted near the first but on the 
opposite side of the tube. The tube also exhibited gradual bends that were not consistent with 
discrete bends associated with a newly manufactured tube.
Personnel from the airplane Type Certificate Data Sheet holder reported that the cracked tube 
is required to be supported within 6 inches of the tangent point of each bend; therefore, a 
minimum of two clamps are required. Inspection of the tube for condition is specified in the 
100-Hour inspections.
The operator reported that the total time on the tube is the same as the airplane total time, or 
Page 3 of 5MIA08LA149
18,153.9 hours. Additionally, the mechanic reported the airplane is maintained in accordance 
with the manufacturer's inspection program, and the last Annual/100-Hour inspection 
occurred on April 30, 2008. The airplane total time at that time was 18,092.3 hours.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power) (Defining event)
Landing-landing roll
Landing gear collapse
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
27, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/16/2007
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/29/2007
Flight Time:
4677 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3150 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AERO COMMANDER
Registration:
N411FS
Model/Series:
500-B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1162-85
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/30/2008, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
6750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
62 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
18092 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
TIO-540 SER
Registered Owner:
ROMAIN BEVIN G
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
Bevins Air Service, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
B5VA
Page 4 of 5MIA08LA149
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TIST, 23 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1253 AST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Roseau (TDCF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Charlotte Amali (TIST)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1050 AST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Cyril E. King (TIST)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
7000 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
6 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
7 None
Latitude, Longitude:
18.337222, -64.973333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
09/30/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Manuel Perez; FAA/FSDO; San Juan, PR
Publish Date:
08/04/2011
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5MIA08LA149
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
