National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: Eufaula, AL
Incident Number: ATL03IA073
Date & Time: 04/01/2003, 1030 CST
Registration: N696SP
Aircraft: Cessna 182P
Aircraft Damage: Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The purpose of the personal flight was undetermined.
While in cruise flight at 5000 feet, the pilot noticed the elevators on the canard wings vibrating abnormally.
The vibrations increased throughout the airplane and the left canard was observed hanging down.
The pilot reported the airplane's condition to Columbus Approach Control, and requested radar vectors to the nearest airport, Weedon Field, Eufaula, Alabama.
The flight landed without further incident.
The airplane was a 1973 model Cessna 182P.
It was refurbished in 1998 when the canard was added through STC #SA485SW.
The pilot did report the airplane having a mechanical malfunction with the nose control assembly left hand canard elevator.
The part had a total time of 453 hours on it.
The post-landing examination of the airplane revealed a separation of the left canard elevator bell crank from the elevator.
The bell crank fasteners were intact.
Further examination of the airplane revealed the end rib for the left canard flap was fractured at the location where the left control rod attachment bracket was attached.
Wear was observed on the left control rod end fitting.
The fatigue features emanated from multiple origins at both the exterior and interior sides of the end rib, consistent with reverse-bending fatigue.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be: Fatigue failure of end rib for the left canard flap.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) FLIGHT CONTROL,ELEVATOR ATTACHMENT - FATIGUE Factual Information On April 1, 2003 at 1030 central standard time, a Cessna 182P, N696SP, registered to and operated by a private pilot, sustained structural flight control damage while flying at cruise altitude near Eufaula, Alabama.
The personal flight was operated under the provision of Title 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight plan was filed.
The canard modified airplane sustained minor damages.
The commercial pilot and passengers were not injured.
The flight departed Tishomingo County Airport, Belmont, Mississippi, at 0900.
The purpose of the personal flight was undetermined, however the flight was enroute to Cook County Airport in Adel, Georgia.
According to the pilot, while in cruise flight at 5000 feet, the he noticed the elevators on the canard wings vibrating abnormally.
The vibrations increased throughout the airplane and the left canard was observed hanging down.
The pilot reported the airplane's condition to Columbus Approach Control, and requested radar vectors to the nearest airport, Weedon Field, Eufaula, Alabama.
The flight landed without further incident.
The airplane was a 1973 Cessna 182P.
It was refurbished in 1998 when the canard was added through STC #SA485SW.
The pilot did report the airplane having a mechanical malfunction with the nose control assembly left hand canard elevator.
The part had a total time of 453 hours on it.
The examination of the airplane revealed a separation of the left canard elevator bell crank from the elevator.
The bell crank fasteners were intact.
Further examination of the airplane revealed the end rib for the left canard flap was fractured at the location where the left control rod attachment bracket was attached.
Several cracks were observed in the attachment flange areas of the attachment frame.
The left control rod was bent in the threaded region adjacent to the forward rod end fitting.
Wear was observed on the left control rod end fitting.
In many areas the fractures of the end rib corresponded to the profiles of the nut plates that were riveted to the internal side of the flap end rib.
The fracture features included step fractures between planes and these features are consistent with fatigue.
The fatigue features emanated from multiple origins at both the exterior and interior sides of the end rib, consistent with reverse-bending fatigue.
The right control rod attachment bracket was removed and upon inspection, cracks were observed on the right canard flap end rib.
Cracks around one of the nut plates were opened and had fatigue features similar to those observed on the left canard end rib extending across the thickness of the end rib.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
