National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: AVONDALE, AZ
Accident Number: LAX03LA122
Date & Time: 04/01/2003, 1300 MST
Registration: N30913
Aircraft: Ayres S2R-T34
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The airplane struck power lines during the final agricultural spray application of the day.
This particular pass involved flying underneath power lines.
There was a backhoe parked near the pilot's intended flight path; as a result, he flew a higher than normal flight path.
The airplane impacted the lower power lines.
The pilot then flew the airplane back to his original departure point.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot failed to maintain adequate visual lookout and did not maintain clearance from power lines.
The backhoe's location, which caused the pilot to alter his planned flight path, was a factor.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(F) OBJECT - VEHICLE 2.
(F) MANEUVER TO AVOID OBSTRUCTIONS - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION 4.
(C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On April 1, 2003, about 1300 mountain standard time, an Ayres S2R-T34, N30913, struck power line wires during a low altitude aerial application pass near Avondale, Arizona.
Pierce Aviation was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 137.
The commercial pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured; the airplane sustained substantial damage.
The local aerial application flight departed a private strip near Buckeye, Arizona, about 1230.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The accident occurred at 33 degrees 20 minutes north latitude and 112 degrees 20 minutes west longitude.
In a written statement submitted by the pilot, he reported that the purpose of the flight was to spray the last of seven fields.
This particular pass involved flying underneath power lines.
There was a backhoe parked near the pilot's intended flight path; as a result, he flew a higher than normal flight path.
The airplane impacted the lower power lines, resulting in damage to the propeller, top canopy, vertical stabilizer, horizontal stabilizer, elevator, and rudder.
The pilot then flew the airplane back to his original departure point.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial; Flight Engineer Age: 62, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
