National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Taunton, MA
Accident Number: NYC03LA078
Date & Time: 04/02/2003, 1435 EST
Registration: N88387
Aircraft: Piper J3C-65
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, prior to takeoff, he noted the wind sock was 70 to 90 degrees different to the wind he physically felt on the ground.
He departed runway 30, and while in flight he observed smoke near the airport which indicated a crosswind of approximately 135 degrees to the runway, which he thought appeared to be the same as on take off.
The pilot said when he landed on runway 30, the wind shifted and the tail of the airplane was picked up by the "tail/cross wind."
The airplane then veered left and started to depart the runway.
Unable to correct with rudder or brakes, the pilot applied full power to abort the landing.
After lift off, to avoid trees, the pilot banked right which, "...caused the right wing to stall and slide into the ground by the wind sock."
The pilot did not report any pre-impact mechanical difficulties with the airplane.
Winds at the airport were reported to be from 110 degrees at 7 knots about 20 minutes after the accident, and as calm 45 minutes before the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for the winds, and his failure to maintain airspeed which resulted in the inadvertent stall.
A factor in the accident was the tailwind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND 4.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On April 2, 2003, at 1435 eastern standard time, a Piper J3C-65, N88387, was substantially damaged during an aborted landing at the Taunton Municipal Airport (TAN), Taunton, Massachusetts.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed for the local personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, prior to departing TAN, he noted the wind sock was 70 to 90 degrees different to the wind he physically felt on the ground.
He departed runway 30, and while in flight, he observed smoke near the airport which indicated a crosswind of approximately 135 degrees to the runway.
He said this, "Appeared to be the same as on take off."
The pilot said when he landed on runway 30, the wind shifted and the tail of the airplane was picked up by the "tail/cross wind."
The airplane then veered left and started to depart the runway.
Unable to correct with rudder or brakes, the pilot applied full power to abort the landing.
After lift off, to avoid trees, the pilot banked right.
The pilot further stated, "..I had to bank right behind the wind sock, the combination of the tail wind and bank caused the right wing to stall and slide into the ground by the wind sock."
The pilot did not report any pre-impact mechanical difficulties with the airplane.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, examination of the airplane revealed the right wing spar was broken at the fuselage.
Winds at TAN were reported to be from 110 degrees at 7 knots about 20 minutes after the accident, and as calm 45 minutes before the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
