National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CORDOVA, AK
Accident Number: ANC99LA136
Date & Time: 09/01/1999, 2030 AKD
Registration: N9130D
Aircraft: Piper PA-18
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis During takeoff from an off airport river bank on a flight to spot moose, the airplane's left wingtip contacted tall brush.
The airplane spun around, and the right wing and right main landing gear attachment sustained substantial damage.
The private pilot said the winds were light and variable.
He indicated to the NTSB investigator-in-charge that he had landed and taken off from the same site on previous occasions, but failed to avoid contacting the brush during this takeoff.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to avoid obstructions during takeoff.
A factor associated with this accident was the high brush along the river bank.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH VEGETATION 2.
The solo private pilot was not injured.
The flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91 as a personal flight to spot moose.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident, and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot told the NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) during a telephone interview on September 13, and in his Pilot/Operator report, that during the takeoff roll, the left wing contacted brush located on the edge of the river, and the airplane spun around.
The right wing sustained substantial damage, and the right main landing gear collapsed.
He indicated the winds were light and variable.
The pilot said he had operated from the same area previously, but did not avoid striking willows during this takeoff.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Front Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
