National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: DELHI, CA
Accident Number: LAX99LA293
Date & Time: 09/01/1999, 0615 PDT
Registration: N59551
Aircraft: Bell 206B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot reported that the engine rpm began decreasing during the takeoff climb, about 200 to 300 feet agl, while he was over a grove of trees.
He extended his autorotative glide to make it past the trees, which resulted in a further decrease of main rotor rpm.
The helicopter landed hard, about 20 to 30 miles per hour of forward velocity, and rolled over.
Postcrash examination by a FAA inspector revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunction; however, the fluid found in the airframe fuel filter and mechanical fuel pump screen was noted to be about 90 percent water.
About 30 percent of the fluid found in the Ceco fuel system screen was also water.
The FAA inspector reported that the fuel cap was loose in the opening and did not appear to seal properly; the shaft seal was worn in the cap and the cap locking mechanism was not adjusted properly.
When the fuel cap was removed, the inspector noted that the bottom of the fuel filler opening was deformed from the fuel nozzles being inserted in the opening.
The pilot reported that he had washed the helicopter the night before the accident.
He further reported that during the preflight he had drained fuel from the airframe fuel filter and fuel sump and hadn't noted any water or contaminants.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power due to the pilot's inadequate preflight, which failed to detect water contamination of the fuel system.
The operator's inadequate maintenance of the loose fitting fuel cap and the deformed filler opening, which allowed water to leak into the fuel tank, were also causal.
A factor in the accident was the trees along the autorotative flight path, which required the pilot to stretch the glide and resulted in a low main rotor rpm situation for the landing flare.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,CAP - LEAK 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,REPLACEMENT - INADEQUATE - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL 3.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION,WATER 4.
(C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF ---------- Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 5.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 6.
(F) PROPER GLIDEPATH - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND 7.
The helicopter, operated by Bettencourt Flying Service, Inc., Delhi, was substantially damaged during the hard landing.
The commercial pilot was not injured.
The local aerial application flight was conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 137 and originated from a private airstrip at 0605.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that the night before the accident, he washed the helicopter and then stored it for the night.
He stated that on the morning of the accident, he completed the preflight inspection, during which he drained fuel from the airframe fuel filter and the fuel sump.
He reported that he didn't note any water or contaminants in the fuel.
The pilot stated that he started the engine and, after 5 minutes of warm-up, he lifted off and performed a pass down the runway before departing to the southeast.
He reported that he was still in the initial takeoff climb, about 200 to 300 feet agl and about 1/3-mile off the end of the runway, when he heard the engine begin to unspool.
He checked the rotor and engine tachometer and noticed that the rpm was decreasing.
The pilot stated that the throttle was fully opened and he verified that the fuel valve was open.
He was over a grove of almond trees as he began an emergency descent.
He reported that he had to alter the angle of descent to make it past the trees, which resulted in further decrease of main rotor rpm.
The pilot stated that the low rpm warning horn was sounding as he impacted the ground.
He estimated that his speed on impact was approximately 20 to 30 miles per hour.
The landing gear collapsed and the main rotor blades severed the tail boom.
The helicopter came to rest on its left side.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector from the Fresno Flight Standards District Office responded to the accident site and examined the aircraft and powerplant.
He stated that the throttle and governor linkage appeared to function normally.
He inspected the turbine wheel through the exhaust stack and noted no abnormalities.
The engine rotated freely.
The inspector removed the airframe fuel filter and noted that approximately 90 percent of the fluid in the filter was water.
Further, approximately 90 percent of the fluid found in the mechanical fuel pump screen and about 30 percent of the fluid from the Ceco fuel system screen was also water.
He reported that the fuel cap did not appear to seal properly; the cap could be moved in the opening even when locked.
He stated that it appeared that the shaft seal was worn in the cap and the cap locking mechanism was not adjusted properly.
When the fuel cap was removed, the inspector noted that the bottom of the fuel tank opening was deformed in a dimensional shape that corresponded to the fuel nozzles used by the operator to refuel the helicopter.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 36, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
