National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: HEBER CITY, UT
Accident Number: DEN99LA161
Date & Time: 09/01/1999, 1615 MDT
Registration: N86096
Aircraft: Aeronca 11BC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that during the takeoff roll on runway 21, a gust of wind lifted his right wing.
He said that he reduced the power to idle, but the airplane departed the left side of the runway and impacted an airport 'light stand.'
He pilot had the airplane examined by a mechanic, and the pilot continued his flight the following morning.
The airplane's left rear strut was subsequently replaced.
The pilot reported that the sign was approximately 630 feet from the point where power was first applied, and that the sign was approximately 54 feet left of the runway's edge.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during takeoff roll.
Factors were the gusting crosswind conditions, and the airport sign.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 3.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) OBJECT - SIGN Factual Information On September 1, 1999, approximately 1615 mountain daylight time, an Aeronca Chief 11BC, N86096, was substantially damaged during takeoff when the left wing strut impacted an airport sign at Heber City Municipal Airport, Heber City, Utah.
The private pilot, the sole occupant in the airplane, was not injured.
The airplane was being operated by the pilot under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country flight which was originating at the time of the accident.
No flight plan had been filed.
The pilot reported that during the takeoff roll on runway 21, a gust of wind lifted the right wing.
He reduced power to idle, but the airplane departed the left side of the runway and impacted an airport "light stand."
The pilot had the airplane examined by a mechanic, then continued the flight the following morning.
The airplane's left rear strut was subsequently replaced.
The pilot reported that the "light stand" was approximately 630 feet from the point where power was first applied, and approximately 54 feet left of the runway's edge.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 68, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
