National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CAIRO, GA
Accident Number: ATL99LA121
Date & Time: 09/01/1999, 0845 EDT
Registration: N8965Q
Aircraft: Aero Commander S2R
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis Shortly after liftoff from the runway, the engine backfired and lost power.
An  eyewitness at the airport reported seeing black smoke coming from the airplane during  the attempted takeoff.
The pilot turned right and selected a field for the emergency landing.
After clearing a nearby pond, the pilot dumped the load of chemicals, and landed in a field about 300 yards beyond the pond.
The examination of the airplane failed to disclose a mechanical problem.
During the examination of the engine, fuel was recovered from the fuel system.
Examination of the carburetor also failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction or component failure.
A review of the weather data disclosed that the temperature was 68 degrees, and the dew point was 66 degrees.
According to the Icing Probability Curves, conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor ice.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Factors were weather conditions favorable for the formation of carburetor ice.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED 2.
The aerial application flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 137 with no flight plan filed.
Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the commercial pilot was not injured.
The flight departed Cairo, Georgia, at 0844.
According to the pilot, shortly after liftoff from runway 12 at the Cairo-Grady Municipal Airport, the engine backfired and lost power.
An eyewitness at the airport reported seeing black smoke coming from the airplane during the attempted takeoff.
The pilot turned right and selected a field for the emergency landing.
After clearing a nearby pond, the pilot dumped the load of chemicals, and landed in a field about 3000 yards beyond the pond.
The pilot reported that during the emergency landing, the landing gear collapsed and the right forward wing spar sustained damage.
The examination of the airplane failed to disclose a mechanical problem.
During the examination of the engine, fuel was recovered from the fuel system.
Examination of the carburetor also failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction or component failure.
A review of the weather data disclosed that the temperature was 68 degrees, and the dew point was 66 degrees.
According to the Icing Probability Curves, conditions were favorable for the formation of carburetor ice (see attached icing probability curves).
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 48, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Center Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
