National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: MIDLAND, MI
Accident Number: CHI99LA354
Date & Time: 09/01/1999, 2000 EDT
Registration: N1316Q
Aircraft: Cessna 150L
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot was on his first solo flight.
His first takeoff, and traffic pattern went well.
The student pilot said that his instructor told him to proceed with another takeoff and landing.
On final approach, the student pilot said that he thought he was going to land short of the runway.
He attempted a go around, but 'applied too much left rudder, thereby heading to the grassy area between the runway and the taxiway.
The nose wheel hit the ground and [the airplane] skidded to a stop.'
Examination of the airplane revealed no anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the student pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during an attempted go-around.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR) Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The instructional supervised solo flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
No flight plan was on file.
The student pilot reported no injuries.
The local flight originated at Midland, Michigan, at 1950 edt.
In his written statement, the student pilot said that he was on his first solo flight.
His first takeoff, traffic and pattern went well.
The student pilot said that his instructor told him to proceed with another takeoff and landing.
On final approach, the student pilot said that he thought he was going to land short of the runway.
He attempted a go-around, but "applied too much left rudder, thereby heading to the grassy area between the runway and the taxiway.
The nose wheel hit the ground and [the airplane] skidded to a stop."
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane at the Jack Barstow Airport.
The firewall, nose wheel and engine mount were bent upward.
The rear window was broken out.
The left wingtip was broken aft.
The left wing rear spar was bent downward.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
No anomalies were revealed with the engine, engine controls, or other airplane systems.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
