After leading a three-ship formation to the destination airport, and while in pattern to land, the 
lead airplane was observed to be in a very steep right turn that immediately turned to a near 
vertical nose-down descent. The airplane then impacted terrain in a near vertical nose-down 
attitude. A postimpact fire consumed portions of the cockpit, fuselage, right aileron, left 
elevator, rudder, and vertical fin. Prevailing winds were from 40 degrees from runway heading 
at 10 knots gusting to 19 knots. The investigation could not determine if the wind conditions 
contributed to the pilot's decision to use a steeper-than-normal bank angle. federal Aviation 
Administration Advisory Circulatory 61-67C informs pilots that accelerated stall can occur at 
higher-than-normal airspeed if there are abrupt and/or excessive control inputs such as during 
steep turns. An examination of the engine and airframe did not reveal any preimpact 
anomalies.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed while maneuvering on approach, which 
resulted in an accelerated stall and subsequent loss of control. 
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 3, 2009, approximately 1345 central standard time (CST) a Nanchang China CJ-6, 
N99YK,  was destroyed and consumed by a post crash fire after a loss of control and impact 
with terrain while on base leg for landing at the Propwash Airport (16X), Justin, Texas.  The 
private pilot and passenger sustained fatal injuries.  The aircraft was owned by a corporation, 
operated by a private individual, and flown in accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Part 91.  No flight plan was filed for the local area flight.  Visual meterological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane was leading a three-ship formation on a local area pleasure flight.  The pilot called 
the flight and announced an overflight of Propwash airport in loose trail formation conducting 
a right break to enter the traffic pattern at 3 second intervals for landing on runway 17.  The 
pilot of the second aircraft initiated his break, established on downwind leg, and completed his 
landing checklist.  When he looked outside the cockpit for the lead aircraft's position he noticed 
lead flying on the base leg approximately 300-400 feet above ground level in a very steep right 
turn that immediately turned to a near vertical nose down descent.  The airplane impacted the 
ground near vertical and 180 degrees from the intended landing direction.  Witnesses on the 
ground confirmed this same scenario.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 69, held a private pilot certificate for airplane single engine and multi engine 
land, and instrument airplane.  A third class medical certificate was issued on August 27, 2007 
with the restriction that glasses must be available for near vision.  The pilot™s log book was not 
found prior to the completion of this report.  However, on the pilot™s last application for a 
medical certificate the pilot reported accumulating 2,500 total hours with 400 logged in the 
previous six months.
The passenger, age 61, held a commercial pilot certificate for airplane single engine and multi 
engine land, and instrument airplane.  A second class medical certificate was last issued on 
July 15, 2005 with no restrictions.  In addition, the passenger held a flight instructor certificate 
for airplane single engine land and instrument airplane.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The tandem two-seat, dihedral wing, retractable tricycle landing gear airplane, serial number 
1332010, was manufactured in 1965.  It was powered by a 360-horsepower Vendeneyev M14P 
radial engine driving a MT MTV-9-B-C three-bladed, variable pitch, metal propeller.  The 
airplane was certified under an experimental exhibition category on November 2, 2006 and 
reported to have accumulated 4,590 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1353, an automated weather reporting station at the Fort Worth Alliance Airport (KAFW), 
Alliance, Texas, about 7 miles south of the accident site, reported wind from 210 degrees at 10 
knots gustng to 19 knots, visibility 10 miles, clear skies, temperature 82 degrees Fahrenheit (F), 
dew point 48 F, and a barometric pressure of 29.64 inches of Mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Propwash Airport (16X) is a privately-owned, non-towered airport located at an elevation of 
800 feet mean sea level.  Runway 17, the landing runway, was a 3,000 foot long by 60 foot wide 
asphalt runway.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest in a nearly vertical attitude.  The empennage was bent to the right 90 
degrees just aft of the wings and was rotated clock-wise 90 degrees.  The flight instruments and 
engine were found just forward and to the left of the cockpit.  A post-impact fire consumed 
portions of the cockpit, fuselage, right aileron, left elevator, rudder, and vertical fin.  The 
landing gear was found extended.  The split flap was found extended.  Both wings displayed 
accordion crushing with the right wing displayed a higher degree of damage than the left wing.  
Control continuity was established from the cockpit area to each of the control surfaces.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on January 4, 2009, by the Tarrant County Medical 
Examiner™s District, Fort Worth, Texas.  The autopsy ruled the cause of death to be from 
ﬁmultiple blunt force injuriesﬂ and the manner of death to be an accident.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The toxicology report stated that no 
carbon monoxide, cyanide, or drugs were detected in blood.  No ethanol was detected in 
vitreous.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA Advisory Circulatory (AC) 61-67C, Stall and Spin Awareness Training, dated 
September 25, 2000, informs pilots that "[a]accelerated stalls can occur at higher-than-normal 
airspeeds due to abrupt and/or excessive control applications.  These stall may occur in steep 
turns, pullups, or other abrupt changes in flightpath."
