The pilot landed with 4 to 5 gallons of fuel on board following a 4.5-hour cross-country flight.  
After landing, the pilot made numerous attempts to locate fuel in order to continue the flight so 
that his passenger could be at work in the morning. The pilot left a note and money after 
having siphoned fuel from another airplane parked at the airport.  After about 2 hours and 45 
minutes on the ground, the airplane took off again.  Impact marks indicate that the airplane 
stalled during the takeoff, impacting the terrain with the left wing prior to catching fire and 
coming to rest inverted.  The accident occurred at night as the airplane was departing on the 
second leg of a cross-country flight.  Calculations show that the airplane was slightly over the 
maximum gross takeoff weight and the center of gravity (CG) was slightly aft of the aft limit at 
the time of the accident.  A pilot of another single-engine airplane, who landed a few minutes 
after the accident airplane landed, and who took off about 30 minutes later (which would have 
been about 2 hours before the accident) reported that he had to wipe a ﬁslight frost buildupﬂ off 
of his wings and tail with a towel prior to takeoff.  The investigation could not determine 
whether the slight frost, slight overgross condition, or slight aft CG contributed, either 
individually or in combination, to the aerodynamic stall of the airplane. Additionally, several 
people reported that it was not uncommon to see deer on the airport property and one person 
reported seeing many deer on the runway earlier in the day prior to when the pilot landed; 
however the investigation could not determine whether deer were present on the runway at the 
time of the accident.   
The pilot™s failure to maintain adequate flying speed during the night takeoff for undetermined 
reasons, which resulted in an inadvertent aerodynamic stall and subsequent loss of control
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2009, at 2048 central standard time, a Lancair 360, N3603R, impacted the 
terrain following a loss of control while taking off on runway 12 (2,937 feet by 100 feet, dry 
asphalt) at the Joliet Regional Airport (JOT), Joliet, Illinois.  The commercial pilot and 
passenger were fatally injured.  The airplane was destroyed by impact forces and a post impact 
fire.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  The personal 
flight was operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  The flight was originating 
at the time of the accident with an intended destination of the Watertown Municipal Airport 
(RYV), Watertown, Wisconsin.  
The first segment of the cross country flight originated from the Executive Airport (ORL), 
Orlando, Florida, between 1000 and 1100 on the day of the accident.
The pilot landed at JOT about 1800.  A pilot flying a Diamond DA-40XL who was landing at 
JOT at the same time stated the accident pilot asked him over the radio if he could land first as 
he was low on fuel.  After landing, the accident pilot discovered there were no fuel services 
available due to the New Year's holiday.  The accident pilot left a message on the airport 
answering machine asking that his airplane be fueled so that he could depart by 0700 the 
following morning so his passenger could get to work.  He requested they fuel the airplane with 
10 gallons of fuel in each wing.  
The accident pilot told several people that he landed with 4 to 5 gallons of fuel on board and 
that he needed fuel to continue the flight to Wisconsin.  He called a friend who researched 
nearby airports where he could possibly obtain fuel.  The friend stated she called two near-by 
did have fuel.  DPA personnel recalled this telephone call which was followed by another call 
from a person identifying himself as the pilot of the airplane at Joliet. The pilot asked if they 
would sell him 5 gallons of fuel in a fuel container.  DPA personnel told the pilot that they 
normally only sold fuel that was put directly into airplanes; however, if he was stuck, they 
would sell him the fuel.  DPA personnel stated the pilot never came to the airport to purchase 
the fuel.  
The accident pilot spoke with the Diamond pilot who landed after him and two other people 
who were at JOT to meet the Diamond pilot regarding his need to obtain fuel.  The Diamond 
pilot stated he gave the accident pilot an outdated Airport Facility Directory so that he would 
have some information regarding nearby airports.  In addition, the Diamond pilot stated he 
had to clear frost off the wings of his airplane prior to taking off about 30 minutes after he 
landed.  The two other people at the airport gave the pilot and his passenger a ride to a 
restaurant located next to the airport.  
An employee and the owner of the restaurant recalled the pilot and passenger.  They stated the 
pilot used the employee's computer to look up information regarding nearby airports.  The 
pilot told them they were flying from Orlando to Madison and that the flight from Orlando to 
JOT took 4.5 hours.  They landed with 5 gallons of fuel on board and talked about going to DPA 
to get fuel.  They also spoke about siphoning fuel from another airplane at the airport and 
leaving money for the fuel.  The pilot also stated that the global positioning unit in the airplane 
was not working.  There were no other known witnesses who saw the pilot and passenger after 
they left the restaurant.  
The accident sequence was recorded on a security camera at a gas station located near the 
approach end of the runway.  Night conditions existed at the time of the accident and the lights 
from the airplane are visible in the recording.  At 2041, the airplane can be seen taxiing from 
the ramp area to the approach end of the runway.  At 2047, the airplane's strobe lights are 
activated while the airplane is on the runway.  At 2048, a flash is seen off the left side of the 
runway followed seconds later by a larger flash.  
  
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot-in-command, age 50, held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single-engine 
land and sea and instrument airplane ratings.  The certificate also contained private pilot 
privileges for multi-engine land airplanes.  The pilot was issued a second-class medical 
certificate on November 20, 2008.  The medical certificate did not contain any limitations.  
The pilot's family provided a copy of a computerized pilot log.  The flights in this log were dated 
between April 3, 1991, and February 19, 2008.  The log was not complete as there were entries 
which did not have any flight times associated with them.  The log showed the pilot had a total 
time of 2,058.65 hours of flight time.  On his application for medical certificate dated 
November 20, 2008, the pilot reported having 3,425 hours of flight time of which 85 hours 
were flown in the previous 6 months.  
The aircraft maintenance logbook showed the pilot was checked out to fly the accident airplane 
on June 12, 1996.  The co-owner of N3603R provided an aircraft flight log for N3603R.  This 
log contained entries dated between April 10, 1996, and December 18, 2002, indicating times 
that the pilot flew the airplane.  Those entries totaled 221.4 hours of flight time.  None of the 
records indicated the date of the pilot's last biennial flight review. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was an amateur-built Lancair 360, serial number 238-320-007.  The 
Lancair 360 is a high performance, laminar flow low-wing, two place composite airplane.  The 
airplane flight manual indicates the airplane consumes 10.5 gallons per hour of fuel at a 75 
percent power setting at sea level.  The total fuel capacity is 57 gallons.  
The airplane was built by a flying club and the first flight was logged on September 27, 1992.  
The pilot became a member of the flying club after the airplane was built.  The pilot and a co-
owner purchased the airplane from the flying club in November 2008.  
The airplane was powered by a 180-horsepower, Lycoming O-360-A1A engine, serial number 
L-663-36.  
The last condition inspection on both the airframe and engine was performed on February 13, 
2008, at a total aircraft time of 1,429.3 hours.  The aircraft total time at the time of the accident 
was 1,445.5 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
The weather conditions reported at JOT at 2045, were:  Wind from 210 degrees at 8 knots; 
visibility 10 statute miles; broken clouds at 9,000 feet; temperature minus 1 degree Celsius; 
dew point minus 4 degrees Celsius; altimeter 29.80 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The main wreckage was located in the grass on the north side of the taxiway which runs 
parallel to the north side of runway 12.  The position of the wreckage was approximately 1,800 
feet from the departure end of the runway.  The magnetic heading of the debris path from 
initial impact to the main wreckage was 84 degrees.  The initial impact ground scar was located 
approximately 96 feet north of the runway in an area of grass between the runway and parallel 
taxiway.  This impact mark was approximately 27 feet long and it contained pieces of red glass 
consistent with the red position light which would have been located on the left wing of the 
airplane.  The next impact area contained two slashes in the terrain, one of which contained a 
red paint transfer.  These marks were followed by pieces of canopy and debris which led up to 
the south edge of the taxiway.  A scattering of wreckage was present across the taxiway.  
Scorched terrain was visible beginning on the northern half of the taxiway up to and 
approximately 70 feet beyond the location of the main wreckage.  The main wreckage was 
located approximately 140 feet from the north edge of the taxiway. The propeller separated 
from the crankshaft and was located between the taxiway and the main wreckage.   One 
propeller blade was loose in the hub.  Both propeller blades tips were gouged and the propeller 
spinner was shattered.   
The airplane came to rest inverted.  The wreckage was burned from the engine rearward to aft 
of the cockpit area.  Photographs taken by rescue personnel show the wings, engine, and 
empennage were attached to one another after the accident.  However, these sections were cut 
and separated by rescue personnel to facilitate removal of the occupants.  
The left wing sustained impact damage to the leading edge.  The wingtip was separated and 
both the upper and lower surfaces of the wing were burned.  The left wing from the fuselage 
attach point outboard to the landing gear contained only the front and rear spar.  The portion 
of the wing between the spars in this area was consumed by the post impact fire.  The left wing 
flap was attached to the wing at the inboard attach point.  An outboard portion of the aileron 
remained attached to the wing and the inboard portion of the left aileron was burned away.  
The entire lower surface of the right wing was burned with the exception of the aileron and 
wingtip.  Both the flap and the upper portion of the aileron remained attached to the wing.  As 
with the left wing, the inboard section of the right wing from the fuselage attach point outboard 
to the landing gear contained only the front and rear spar.  The portion of the wing between the 
spars in this area was consumed by post impact fire.  The upper surface of the right wing from 
the landing gear attach point outboard to the wing tip was not burned.  The upper surface of 
the right wing tip, forward of the position light, was scraped.  Both main landing gear remained 
attached to their respective wings and were in the extended position.  The position of the flap 
actuator was consistent with a 10 degree flap extension.   
The forward section of the aft fuselage was burned.  The leading edge of the top of the vertical 
stabilizer sustained impact damage and the top of the vertical stabilizer was split open.  The 
rudder was relatively undamaged and it remained attached to the stabilizer at its lowest attach 
point.  
Continuity of the flight control system could not be established due to the extent of the impact 
and fire damage.  The elevator push tube was intact from the elevator to the aft cockpit area 
where it had been cut by rescue personnel.  
The engine sustained heat and fire damage.  The top of the number 2 cylinder sustained impact 
damage with one of the push rods separated and found along the wreckage path and the other 
push rod was bent.  All of the ignition leads sustained fire and heat damage.  The magnetos 
were removed from the engine and spark was visible on all 4 terminals of both magnetos when 
they were turned by hand.  The fuel line from the electric fuel pump to the engine driven fuel 
pump was removed and no fuel was present in the line.  The fuel line from the engine driven 
fuel pump to the carburetor was also removed and no fuel was present.  The engine driven fuel 
pump was removed and no fuel was present in the pump.  The pump rotated smoothly when 
turned by hand.  The engine rotated freely when turned by hand.  The top spark plugs were 
removed from each cylinder and the cylinders were inspected with a boroscope.  No anomalies 
were noted with the cylinders with the exception of debris present in the number 4 cylinder.  
The number 4 cylinder exhaust pipe was crushed open at the flange.  Thumb compression was 
noted on the number 1, 2, and 3 cylinders.  Compression was achieved on the number 4 
cylinder after debris was cleared from around the valves.  Movement was visible on all of the 
cylinder valves with the exception of the number 2 cylinder which had the missing and 
damaged push rods.  All of the accessory gears moved when the engine was rotated.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on January 3, 2009, by the Will County Coroner's 
Office.  The autopsy report listed the cause of death as "Blunt Head and Chest Trauma."  
Forensic Toxicology Fatal Accident Reports were prepared for the pilots by the FAA Civil 
Aeromedical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The results for all tests conducted were 
negative.      
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Records obtained from ORL showed N3603R was fueled with 47.7 gallons of fuel when it 
arrived there on December 26, 2008.  The pilot purchased a quarter bushel of grapefruit prior 
to departing from ORL.  According to the merchant the weight of the quarter bushel of 
grapefruit was about 12 pounds.  The baggage and miscellaneous contents were recovered from 
the airplane, dried, and weighed following the accident.  The total weight for these items was 
125 pounds.  Weight and balance calculations indicate the weight of the airplane at takeoff was 
approximately 1,809 pounds with a center of gravity (cg) of 66.2 inches.  The maximum takeoff 
gross weight for the airplane is listed in the operating manual as being 1,800 pounds with a cg 
range of 59.9 to 65.7 inches.  
Flight plan information was found among the paperwork scattered around the accident site.  
This information showed a flight planned from (ORL) to the Lebanon Municipal Airport 
(M54), Lebanon, Tennessee, then to RYV.  Personnel at M54 reported there was no record that 
N3603R fueled at their airport.  
On January 2, 2009, a note and money were found inside a Cessna 172 operated by JF Aviation 
at JOT.  The note stated, "We were stuck and needed 5 gal of 100LL from your left wing tank 
here is $30 Thanks."   This airplane was full of fuel following its last flight on December 31, 
2008.  After the note was discovered, the airplane was fueled and it was determined that 21.1 
gallons of fuel were missing.  Approximately 5 to 6 gallons of fuel were missing from the left 
fuel tank and the remainder was missing from the right fuel tank.  A step ladder and a piece of 
garden hose were found near the fuel pumps.  The inside of the hose had an odor similar to 
aviation fuel.  
Two people contacted the investigator in charge stating that they had seen deer on or near the 
runway at JOT.  One caller stated that around 1700 on the day of the accident he saw 
approximately a dozen deer out on the runway.  In addition to these callers, several other 
people stated that it was not unusual to see deer near the runway.  The south side of the airport 
is bordered by a portion of the Will County Forest Preserve.  A 4-foot high chain link fence runs 
along the south, west, and north side of the airport.  The southeast corner and east side of the 
airport are not fenced.
