The pilot reported that during a local personal flight, the engine lost power as a result of fuel 
exhaustion.  During the forced landing, he maneuvered to avoid power lines and subsequently 
impacted trees.  The pilot related that he thought he had enough fuel for a short local flight. 
Post accident, the pilot stated that he did not realize he had flown the airplane for more than 4 
hours since it had been refueled.  The airplane's fuel endurance is about 4 hours.
A loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion as a result of the pilot™s inadequate preflight 
planning.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 3, 2009, about 1445 Pacific standard time, an experimental PZL, PZL-104-35A, 
Wilga, N226PF, impacted trees following a loss of engine power in Redwood Regional Park, 
Oakland, California.  The owner/pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.  The commercial pilot sustained minor injuries; the 
airplane sustained substantial damage by impact forces.  The local personal flight departed 
Oakland about 1435.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been 
filed.
The pilot reported that while maneuvering, the engine "ran out of gas just passed the western 
arm of the San Leondro Reservoir."  He attempted a restart without success.  During the 
descent, he saw power lines in front of him and he turned the airplane to the north. The 
airplane subsequently impacted trees.
The pilot extricated himself from the wreckage and obtained transportation to a local hospital 
for treatment of his injuries.
The pilot thought he departed Oakland Airport with enough fuel for the local flight based on 
the readings of the two fuel gauges.    
On January 12, 2009, the pilot contacted the National Transportation Safety Board 
investigator in-charge (IIC) and related that he had researched the amount of flight time he 
had on the accident airplane since refueling it.  The airplane was refueled on October 18, 2008, 
to maximum capacity.  The pilot reported that he had flown a total of 4.1 hours since refueling.  
The airplane's fuel endurance was a little more than 4 hours.
