Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Boulder, CO
Accident Number:
CEN11FA259
Date & Time:
04/01/2011, 1715 MDT 
Registration:
N633BG
Aircraft:
BURKHART GROB FLUGZEUGBAU 
G102 CLUB ASTIR IIIB
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Data obtained from an onboard tracking device depicted the glider maneuvering between 
21,000 to 23,800 feet mean sea level (msl) before entering a spiral descent, which is consistent 
with a loss of control. Several eyewitnesses observed the glider descending in a steep spiral 
turn toward the ground. The glider collided with high voltage transmission wires and terrain in 
a sparsely wooded area. An examination of the wreckage did not reveal any preimpact 
anomalies with the glider. Testing of the glider™s oxygen bottle, regulator, and mask detected 
no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation of the oxygen system. A review of 
audio recordings revealed that the pilot™s radio transmissions did not have the muffled sounds 
normally associated with the use of an oxygen mask, suggesting that the pilot may not have 
been wearing the oxygen mask during a portion of the flight. According to Federal Aviation 
Administration guidance, on average, a pilot can operate at 22,000 feet msl for about 5 to 10 
minutes before losing consciousness due to a lack of oxygen (hypoxia); the glider was above 
22,000 feet msl for 13 minutes 36 seconds. Therefore, it is possible that the pilot became 
incapacitated due to hypoxia. 
Additionally, the pilot, who was diabetic and routinely self-tested his blood sugar levels, 
recorded a blood sugar level of 58 mg/ml about 1 hour 40 minutes before the flight; according 
to the U.S. Library of Medicine, a blood sugar level below 70 mg/dl is considered low 
(hypoglycemia).  Although it is likely that the pilot addressed the low blood sugar level by 
eating or taking glucose tablets, his blood sugar level at the time of the accident is unknown.  
Hypoxia and hypoglycemia have similar symptoms including headache, blurred vision, tingling 
or numbness, and unclear thinking, and both conditions can lead to loss of consciousness if 
they are not promptly remedied. There was no record of the pilot being trained to recognize 
hypoxia symptoms, and it is possible that he may have mistaken the symptoms of hypoxia for 
hypoglycemia. It is likely that the pilot became incapacitated and lost control of the glider; 
however, it could not be determined if the pilot's incapacitation was a result of hypoxia, 
hypoglycemia, or a combination of the two conditions.
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 8CEN11FA259
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's incapacitation for undetermined reasons, which resulted in a loss of control.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Impairment/incapacitation - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 8CEN11FA259
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2011, about 1715 mountain daylight time, a Burkhart Grob Flugzeugbau G102 Club 
Astir IIIB glider, N633BG, was substantially damaged upon collision with high voltage 
transmission wires and terrain near Boulder, Colorado. The private glider pilot was fatally 
injured. The glider was registered to Mile High Youth Gliding Association, Inc., and operated 
by Mile High Gliding under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a 
personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated 
without a flight plan. The flight originated from Boulder Municipal Airport (BDU), Boulder 
Colorado, at 1628.
The pilot of the tow plane reported that the glider released from the tow plane at 13,900 feet 
mean sea level. The tow plane pilot characterized the air conditions as bumpy with updrafts of 
1,000 feet per minute in several areas.
Several eyewitnesses reported the glider in a spiral turn towards the ground. All witnesses 
reported seeing a steep bank angle. One witness observed the glider level off momentarily, then 
pitch nose up and climb, and then pitch nose down and descend.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 46, held a private glider pilot certificate issued on September 24, 2010. A review 
of the pilot's logbook revealed the pilot had logged 104.4 hours total time, with a majority of 
the flight time logged in the accident glider.
The pilot had previously been diagnosed with diabetes and had actively monitored his blood 
sugar level. The pilot™s last recorded blood sugar reading was taken on the day of the accident 
at 1450, with a reading of 58 mg/dl. It is not known what nutrition the pilot may have had prior 
to flight. The pilot had reported his diabetic condition to personnel at Mile High Gliding, which 
required the pilot to fly with glucose tablets in order to help maintain his blood sugar levels. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The single-seat, low wing glider, with composite construction, serial number 5633CD, was 
manufactured in 1985. A review of the maintenance logbook revealed an annual inspection was 
completed on May 1, 2010, at an airframe time of 2,113.4 hours. On March 19, 2011, the glider 
wing spar spigots were inspected in accordance with Airworthiness Directive 2011-01-03 and 
were found free of cracks.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 0630, the National Weather Service (NWS), Boulder, Colorado, released a soaring forecast 
for April 1, 2011. The data was based off a 0600 upper air sounding taken from Denver, 
Colorado. The thermal soaring index was forecasted as ﬁexcellent,ﬂ with an expected 1,122 feet 
per minute climb between the altitudes of 13,800 and 18,100 feet mean sea level (msl). Above 
the thermal layer was the potential for mountain wave turbulence between 18,000 feet and 
20,000 feet msl. An upper air sounding taken at 1800 remained consistent with the 0630 
sounding, with winds at 20,000 feet msl from about 310 degrees at 50 knots. Satellite imagery 
for the Front Range area depicted a series of clouds near the mountain range with 
characteristics of being suspended by mountain wave activity.
Page 4 of 8CEN11FA259
At 1712, the automated surface weather report from BDU reported, winds from 300 at 17 knots, 
gusting to 21 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, and skies clear.
COMMUNICATIONS
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors reviewed audio recordings of the pilot™s 
radio transmissions. The inspectors noted the lack of muffled sounds normally associated with 
the use of the oxygen mask during radio communications from the pilot.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The accident site was located in a sparsely wooded area. The first impact signatures were white 
paint transfers and fiberglass deposits on two parallel high voltage transmission wires, which 
were strung approximately 75 feet above ground level (agl). The debris path followed a 075 
degree heading. Directly under the west set of transmission wires was the right aileron. Metal 
rods from both ailerons were found in an area of scorched terrain near the transmission wires. 
Both rods were bent with signatures of a wire strike; in addition, they were thermally damaged 
with evidence of arcing. The main wreckage was located approximately 495 feet east of the 
transmission wires and consisted of: the main fuselage (inverted), 15.5 feet of the left wing, and 
2 feet of the right wing. In addition, the empennage had separated from the fuselage about 4 
feet aft of the centerline tire, was fractured in multiple places, and was distributed throughout 
the debris path. The glider™s flight controls were fractured in multiple places; the fractures 
surface displayed signatures of overload or were indistinguishable due to melting. The A-14 
diluter-demand oxygen regulator separated from the fuselage and was found in the debris 
path. The A-14™s dial indicated an altitude just outside the ﬁnormalﬂ altitude placard setting 
and the dilutor control was found in the ﬁnormalﬂ position (100-percent position not selected). 
The oxygen bottle was located in the cockpit and the tank™s valve was found near the full open 
position. The oxygen bottle, A-14 regulator, and mask were removed from the glider and tested. 
No preimpact anomalies were detected with the oxygen system. Examination of the glider™s 
airframe did not identify any preimpact anomalies.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On April 2, 2011, an autopsy was performed on the pilot by the Boulder County Coroner™s 
medical examiner as authorized by the Boulder County Coroner. The manner of death was 
ruled an accident.
The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, performed 
forensic toxicology on specimens from the pilot. The report noted the following:
Chlorpheniramine detected in Liver
Chlorpheniramine detected in Urine
Dextromethorphan detected in Urine
Dextromethorphan detected in Liver
Dextrorphan detected in Urine
Doxylamine detected in Liver
Doxylamine detected in Urine
Pseudoephedrine detected in Liver
Page 5 of 8CEN11FA259
Information obtained from the U.S. National Library of Medicine listed chlorpheniramine as a 
treatment for the symptoms of allergies, hay fever, and the common cold. Dextromethorphan is 
listed as being used to ﬁtemporarily relive cough caused by the common cold, the flu, or other 
conditions.ﬂ Dextrorphan is listed as a metabolite of dextromethorphan. Doxylamine is listed 
as being used ﬁin combination with decongestants and other medications to relieve sneezing, 
runny nose, and nasal congestion caused by the common cold.ﬂ Pseudophedrine is listed as 
being used to ﬁrelieve nasal congestion caused by colds, allergies, and hay fever.ﬂ
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Volkslogger device
The glider was equipped with a Volkslogger global positions system (GPS) data recorder. Data 
extracted from the device documented the accident flight. The device began recording at 1607 
with data points recorded every three seconds. The data displayed a track consistent with the 
glider being air towed from BDU at 1628 to a point about 3.5 nautical miles west of the airport. 
The glider appeared to maneuver clear of the tow plane at 1642, when the glider maneuvered 
towards Jamestown, Colorado, before it turned back towards Boulder, Colorado. The data 
showed the glider continued to maneuver and revealed that the pilot ascended through 20,000 
msl at 1651:50. The pilot then ascended through 22,000 msl at 1654:20. The pilot continued to 
maneuver the glider between 21,000 and 23,800, before descending at 1707:56 in spiral-like 
turns.
Hypoxia
The FAA Pilot™s Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge (FAA-H-8083-25A), released in 2008, 
warned pilots about the hazards of hypoxia. It identified hypoxic hypoxia as ﬁa result of 
insufficient oxygen available to the body as a whole.ﬂ The handbook included a list of 
symptoms of hypoxia: cyanosis, headache, decreased reaction time, impaired judgment, 
euphoria, visual impairment, drowsiness, lightheaded sensation, tingling in fingers and toes, 
and numbness. These symptoms will vary with each individual. There is no record of the pilot 
having received hypoxia training.
An excerpt from the handbook, outlined the time of useful consciousness: 
Altitude (ft msl)Time of Useful Consciousness
20,00030 minutes or more
22,0005 to 10 minutes
25,0003 to 5 minutes
Hypoglycemia
Prior to flight, the pilot had recorded a blood sugar level of 58 mg/dl. Information obtained 
from the U.S. National Library of Medicine considered that blood sugar below 70 mg/dl as low. 
Among the listed possible symptoms of hypoglycemia were: blurred vision, headache, shaking, 
tingling or numbness, weakness, and unclear thinking. Some of the symptoms of hypoglycemia 
could match those of hypoxia.
Page 6 of 8CEN11FA259
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Sport Pilot None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/23/2010
Flight Time:
104 hours (Total, all aircraft), 70 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 45 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BURKHART GROB 
FLUGZEUGBAU
Registration:
N633BG
Model/Series:
G102 CLUB ASTIR IIIB 
Aircraft Category:
Glider
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
5633CB
Landing Gear Type: 
Tandem
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2010, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
0 
Airframe Total Time:
2113 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
MILE HIGH YOUTH GLIDING 
ASSOCIATION INC
Rated Power:
Operator:
MILE HIGH GLIDING
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8CEN11FA259
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BDU, 5288 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1712 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
326°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
17 knots / 21 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.88 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / -12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Boulder, CO (BDU)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Boulder, CO (BDU)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1628 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
 
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.996111, -105.189444
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jason T Aguilera
Adopted Date:
05/03/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
Mark Schmidt; FAA FSDO; Denver, CO
David Campbell; Mile High Gliding; Boulder, CO
Publish Date:
05/03/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=78740
Page 8 of 8CEN11FA259
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
