Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
West Carrollton, OH
Accident Number:
NYC03FA001
Date & Time:
10/02/2002, 1540 EDT 
Registration:
N72KB
Aircraft:
Beagle Aircraft B.206 Basset
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
Analysis 
The airplane arrived at the departure airport about the middle of April 2002, and remained 
parked until the day of the accident.  On the day of the accident, a mechanic was asked by the 
pilot to help him because he was having trouble starting the airplane.  When the mechanic 
arrived at the airplane, he drained about 2-1/2 gallons of water from the center sump drain 
located under the main fuselage, and the engine subsequently started.  The airplane was then 
fueled with 224.5 gallons of aviation gasoline, and the mechanic added that he did not sump 
the airplane after it was fueled, nor did he observe the pilot perform visual inspection of the 
fuel.  A witness observed the accident airplane as it was departing.  He stated that the 
airplane's engines sounded like they were running good, but did not sound like they were 
developing full power.  As the airplane continued down the runway, it appeared to be traveling 
very slowly, and not gaining sufficient speed for takeoff.  The airplane lifted abruptly into the 
air about 3/4 of the way down the runway, and the landing gear was retracted.  The airplane 
settled towards the ground, clearing the levee located at the departure end of the runway by a 
few feet.  The airplane then began a climb again, reaching a height of about 120 feet, and 
proceeded straight out from the airport.  About 30 seconds later, the airplane banked gently to 
the left, where a faint puff of black smoke was observed coming from an engine.  As the bank 
continued, the airplane descended into a near vertical dive.  The witness observed the top 
portion of the airplane as it was in the vertical dive, before it descended out of sight.  The 
airplane came to rest upright in a residential area about 1 mile southwest of I73, and a post 
crash fire ensued.  The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on March 29, 
2001.  Examination of the left engine propeller assembly, which was imbedded in a dirt crater, 
exhibited rearward bending to all three blades.  No chordwise scratching was observed on any 
of the blades.  Examination of the right engine propeller assembly, which was imbedded in a 
cement sidewalk, exhibited s-bending and chordwise scratches to all three blades.  The pilot 
had applied for, and was granted, a ferry permit to fly the airplane the day of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilots inadequate preflight inspection, his operation of the airplane with an overdue 
Page 2 of 7NYC03FA001
annual inspection, and his failure to maintain airspeed after the failure of an engine which 
resulted in an inadvertent stall/spin.  A factor related to the accident was the contaminated 
fuel.
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. 1 ENGINE - FAILURE,PARTIAL
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,ANNUAL INSPECTION - OVERDUE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) FLUID,FUEL - CONTAMINATION
4. (C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
5. (C) AIRSPEED(VMC) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. STALL/SPIN - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. TERRAIN CONDITION - RESIDENTIAL AREA
Page 3 of 7NYC03FA001
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 2, 2002, about 1540 eastern daylight time, a Beagle Aircraft B.206 Basset, N72KB, 
was destroyed after impacting terrain in West Carrollton, Ohio, after departing from the 
Moraine Airpark (I73), Moraine, Ohio.  The certificated airline transport pilot was fatally 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight 
plan was filed for the ferry flight destined for the Easton Airport (ESN), Easton, Maryland.  The 
flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot had applied for, and 
was granted, a ferry permit to fly the airplane to ESN the day of the accident.
According to the operations manager of a fixed based operator at I73, the accident airplane 
arrived at the airport about the middle of April 2002, and was parked.  The airplane remained 
at the airport until the day of the accident.  The operations manager additionally stated that he 
did not observe the airplane fly at any time while at the airport. 
On the day of the accident, a mechanic was asked by the pilot to help him because he was 
having trouble starting the airplane.  When the mechanic arrived at the airplane, he drained 
about 2-1/2 gallons of water from the center sump drain located under the main fuselage.  
After draining the water, the pilot successfully started the left engine, and subsequently shut it 
down.
The airplane was then fueled at 1300, with 224.5 gallons of 100 low lead aviation gasoline.
The mechanic added that he did not sump the airplane after it was fueled, nor did he observe 
the pilot perform visual inspection of the fuel.
A witness, who was a pilot, observed the accident airplane as it was departing from runway 26, 
a 3,500-foot long asphalt runway.  He stated that the airplane's engines sounded like they were 
running good, but did not sound like they were developing full power.  As the airplane 
continued down the runway, it appeared to be traveling very slowly, and not gaining sufficient 
speed for takeoff.  The airplane lifted abruptly into the air about 3/4 of the way down the 
runway, and the landing gear was retracted.  The airplane settled towards the ground, clearing 
the levee located at the departure end of the runway by a few feet.  The airplane then began a 
climb again, reaching a height of about 120 feet, and proceeded straight out from the airport.  
About 30 seconds later, the airplane banked gently to the left, where a faint puff of black smoke 
was observed coming from an engine.  As the bank continued, the airplane descended into a 
near vertical dive.  The witness observed the top portion of the airplane as it was in the vertical 
dive, before it descended out of sight.  The witness also recalled that the propellers sounded 
like they were synched, and were not making any abnormal noises.
The airplane came to rest upright in a residential area about 1 mile southwest of I73, and a post 
crash fire ensued.  The post crash fire also damaged two residential homes and a parked car.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight, at 39 degrees, 40.39 minutes north 
longitude, 084 degrees, 15.21 minutes west latitude.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate with ratings for airplane multi-engine land.  
Page 4 of 7NYC03FA001
He also held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land.  The 
pilot's most recent application for an FAA first class medical certificate was dated on August 1, 
2001.  The pilot reported a total of 27,560 hours of total flight experience on the application.
The pilot's logbook was not obtained during the investigation.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane's most recent annual inspection was completed on March 29, 2001.
While the airplane was parked at I73, maintenance was performed on the left engine to 
"trouble-shoot and resolve" a problem reported by the pilot.  The pilot informed the mechanics 
that would work on the engine that "his experts" determined the problem was with the engine 
causing oil blow-by from the crankcase.  After completing the maintenance, the mechanics 
determined that the engine was not the problem, it was the previous installation of an STC'd oil 
filter kit by another maintenance facility.  The engine was then test ran, and "all systems 
appeared to function OK."
The airplane's logbooks were not obtained during the investigation.
The total fuel capacity for both wing tanks was 230 gallons.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather reported at the James M. Cox Dayton International Airport, Dayton, Ohio, at 
1554, included winds from 220 degrees at 14 knots; 10 statute miles of visibility; few clouds at 
3,800 feet; temperature of 81 degrees Fahrenheit; a dew point of 64 degrees Fahrenheit; and 
an altimeter setting of 30.06 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The accident site was disturbed prior to the arrival of Safety Board personnel due to emergency 
rescue procedures.  In addition, the area was subject to water and firefighting agents to contain 
the post crash fire.
The first impact area was located in the front yard of one of the residential homes.  It consisted 
of two craters, containing the left and right propeller assemblies, and two 5-inch wide, 3-inch 
deep impressions in the ground.  The impressions were about 15 feet in length, and were 
orientated about a heading of 290 degrees magnetic.  
About 24 feet beyond the edge of the left impression was a 3-foot section of the left outboard 
wingtip.  About 75 feet beyond the right impression was a 3-foot section of the right outboard 
wingtip, which came to rest in a road.
The main wreckage came to rest on a 245-degree magnetic heading, on top of a concrete 
sidewalk, about 32 feet behind the first impact point.  It was comprised of remnants from the 
cockpit, main cabin, empennage, left engine, left inboard wing section, horizontal stabilizer, 
elevator, vertical stabilizer, rudder, right engine, and right inboard wing section.
Impact forces and fire damage destroyed all engine instruments recovered in the wreckage.  No 
intact flight instruments or navigational radios were recovered.
Both flight control yokes displayed impact and fire damage, and had separated from the 
airframe.
Due to impact and fire damage, the throttle levers, propeller control levers, mixture control 
Page 5 of 7NYC03FA001
levers, landing gear selector handle, landing gear position indicators, elevator trim control, 
rudder trim control, aileron trim control, trim indicators, cowl flap switches, and cowl flap 
indicators, were not identified.
The left and right engines and propeller assemblies were examined on October 4, 2002, and no 
mechanical abnormalities were noted.  
The left engine propeller assembly, which was imbedded in a dirt crater, exhibited rearward 
bending to all three blades.  No chordwise scratching was observed on any of the blades.  Red 
dyed oil was observed draining from the hub assembly.  The propeller spinner cap remained 
attached to the assembly, and was crushed upward and inward.
The right engine propeller assembly, which was imbedded in a cement sidewalk crater, 
exhibited s-bending and chordwise scratches to all three blades.  Red dyed oil was observed 
draining from the hub assembly.  The propeller spinner cap remained attached to the 
assembly, and was crushed upward and inward.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Montgomery County, Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, Dayton, Ohio, performed an 
autopsy on the pilot, on October 3, 2002.
The FAA Toxicology and Accident Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma conducted 
toxicological testing on the pilot.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Fuel
An FAA inspector examined fuel sample reports from the airport fuel pump, and the fuel farm 
tank.  No abnormalities were noted with the samples.
Wreckage Release
The airplane wreckage was released on October 4, 2002, to a representative of a recovery 
company.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
65, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/01/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
27560 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7NYC03FA001
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beagle Aircraft
Registration:
N72KB
Model/Series:
B.206 Basset 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
064
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
8
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/29/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7499 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1970 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
GTISO-520-C
Registered Owner:
Karl S. Bernardi
Rated Power:
340 hp
Operator:
Karl S. Bernardi
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DAY, 1009 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
21 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1554 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
340°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3800 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.06 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Moraine, OH (I73)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Easton, MD (ESN)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1538 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Moraine Airpark (I73)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
720 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Unknown
Page 7 of 7NYC03FA001
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
39.676944, -84.256111
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Stephen M Demko
Adopted Date:
04/28/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Corrine Brackett; FAA; Cincinnati, OH
Al Butler; Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
