Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Covington, KY
Incident Number:
NYC01IA072
Date & Time:
01/03/2001, 0832 EST 
Registration:
N933CA
Aircraft:
Bombardier CL-600-2B19
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries:
46 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 121: Air Carrier - Scheduled
Analysis 
During climbout, an airframe vibration developed.  All gauges, readouts, synoptic pages, and 
airplane controls were normal.  The crew contacted their maintenance base and attempted to 
troubleshoot the problem, but could not determine its cause.  The vibration remained 
unchanged until the airplane leveled off at 7,000 feet during an approach.  At that time, the 
crew felt a bump, then the vibration completely ceased.  The airplane landed, and taxied to the 
gate without further incident.  Post-flight inspection revealed that the number 1 exhaust fairing 
was missing, and that the left, aft fuselage had a dent.  The 30 bolts that would have normally 
attached the exhaust nozzle assembly to the exhaust frame were all missing, "without a trace."  
Seven months earlier, the tailpipe was found loose.  Ten bolts were replaced, and the rest were 
re-torqued.  The last inspection on the airplane had been completed about 2 weeks earlier, 105 
hours prior to the incident.   Company personnel had previously found cracked bolts on 
exhaust flanges from other engines.  Laboratory examination of used bolts from another engine 
revealed no anomalies.  Engine shop buildup and shop exit  manuals were subsequently revised 
to make the installation and torquing of exhaust nozzle bolts a required inspection item.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
Missing exhaust nozzle bolts for undetermined reasons.  A factor was inadequate maintenance 
inspection of the affected area.
Page 2 of 6NYC01IA072
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: APPROACH
Findings
1. EXHAUST SYSTEM,EXHAUST CONE/TAILPIPE(JET ENGINE) - SEPARATION
2. (F) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
3. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - MISSING
Page 3 of 6NYC01IA072
Factual Information
On January 3, 2001, at 0832 Eastern Standard Time, a Bombardier CL600-2B19 Regional Jet 
(CRJ), N933CA, operating as Comair flight 5360, sustained minor damage when an engine 
exhaust separated from the airplane, while approaching Cincinnati/Northern Kentucky 
International Airport (CVG), Covington, Kentucky.  The 3-person crew and the 43 passengers 
were not injured.   Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the incident.  The 
flight was operating on an instrument flight rules flight plan, between Minneapolis-St. Paul 
International Airport (MSP), Minneapolis, Minnesota, and Covington.   The scheduled 
passenger flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 121.
According to the captain, when he reported onboard, a mechanic advised him that the number 
1, A system jet overheat loop was not operating normally, and that "he would defer it." 
Startup, taxi, and takeoff "occurred without incident;" however, during the climb, an airframe 
vibration developed.  All gauges, readouts, synoptic pages, and airplane controls were normal.  
The crew contacted Comair maintenance, and attempted to troubleshoot the problem, but 
could not determine its cause.  
The flight attendant reported to the captain that the passengers were either not aware of, or not 
concerned with the vibration.
The flight continued, and the vibration remained unchanged until the airplane leveled off at 
7,000 feet during the approach to Covington.  At that time, the crew felt a bump, and then the 
vibration completely ceased.  Again, all gauges, readouts, synoptic pages, and airplane controls 
were normal.  The airplane landed, and taxied to the gate without further incident. 
Post-flight inspection revealed that the number 1 exhaust fairing was missing, and that the left, 
aft fuselage had a dent in the vicinity of station 800, 9 inches below the vertical stabilizer.
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the engine was removed after 
the incident, and taken to the company's maintenance facilities where an inspection was 
performed.  The exhaust nozzle assembly would have normally been attached to the exhaust 
frame case with 30 bolts.  All 30 bolts were missing, "with no trace."  No visible damage was 
noted to the mating flange, other than what was characterized as "normal wear."
The exhaust frame case had marks on both sides, at approximately the 3 o'clock and 9 o'clock 
positions, about 6 inches forward of the mating flange.  The marks appeared to be aluminum 
deposits.  The exhaust nozzle assembly was never located.
Because Comair maintenance personnel had previously found cracked bolts connecting other 
exhaust flanges, the FAA inspector requested that the Safety Board examine sample bolts with 
over 6,600 hours of service.  The bolts, which were not from the incident airplane, were also 
compared to new bolts.  According to the metallurgist's factual report, there was no evidence of 
cracking or over-aging in the used bolts.   The new bolts were within the tensile strength and 
hardness specifications required, and the hardness and the tensile strength results increased 
from the new bolts to the used bolts.
According to Comair maintenance personnel, on September 9, 1999, the engine was installed 
on the airplane.  On October 18, 1999, the C-sump o-rings were replaced, which required the 
removal of the tailpipe.   There was no mention in the maintenance records of changing the 
bolts.  On May 3, 2000, the tailpipe was found to be loose, and 10 bolts were replaced.  The 
Page 4 of 6NYC01IA072
remaining bolts were re-used and re-torqued.
The airplane was being inspected under an approved inspection program (AAIP).  According to 
the operator's report, the last inspection was performed December 15, 2000, 105.7 hours prior 
to the incident.
 
According to the FAA inspector, subsequent to the incident, Bombardier was considering a bolt 
change.  In addition, there was ongoing discussion about reusing bolts.  In the meantime, 
Comair changed its engine shop buildup and shop exit manuals to make exhaust nozzle bolts a 
required inspection item.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
34, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/22/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/15/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Page 5 of 6NYC01IA072
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bombardier
Registration:
N933CA
Model/Series:
CL-600-2B19 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
7040
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
53
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/15/2000, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
51000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
105 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
16298 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
GE
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
CF34-3A1
Registered Owner:
First Security Bank Utah
Rated Power:
9220 lbs
Operator:
COMAIR INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Flag carrier (121)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
COMR
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CVG, 897 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0851 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 800 ft agl
Visibility
6 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
210°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.39 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-13°C / -14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Minneapolis, MN (MSP)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Covington, KY (CVG)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
43 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
46 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
01/02/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Julio Figeroa; FAA/FSDO; Louisville, KY
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
