Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Doylestown, PA
Accident Number:
ERA10LA104
Date & Time:
01/01/2010, 1108 EST 
Registration:
N4026J
Aircraft:
CESSNA 150G
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The accident flight was the first flight since an overhauled engine was installed. The pilot 
performed an engine run-up before takeoff and noted no discrepancies. During the initial 
climb, between 50 and 75 feet above ground level, the engine experienced a partial loss of 
power. The pilot executed a forced landing into a field; the airplane came to rest upright and 
there were no injuries to the pilot or passenger. Postaccident inspection of the engine revealed 
no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction. The temperature and dew point at the time of 
the accident were favorable for serious carburetor ice at cruise power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A partial loss of engine power due to carburetor icing.
Findings
Environmental issues
Conducive to carburetor icing - Effect on equipment (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA10LA104
Factual Information
On January 1, 2010, about 1108 eastern standard time, a Cessna 150G, N4026J, registered to a 
private individual, experienced a partial loss of engine power during the climb shortly after 
takeoff from Doylestown Airport (DYL), Doylestown, Pennsylvania. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal, local flight from DYL. The airplane was substantially 
damaged and the certificated commercial pilot and one passenger were not injured. The flight 
originated from DYL about 1106.
The pilot stated that the purpose of the flight was for him to fly the airplane following extensive 
engine maintenance. He intended on orbiting the airport for 1 hour, then intended on landing 
and having a mechanic (passenger), visually inspect the engine. A total of approximately 6 
gallons of 100 low lead (100LL) fuel were in each fuel tank as determined by a dipstick and 
confirmed by the fuel quantity gauges. No contaminants were noted in either fuel tank or 
gascolator during his preflight check, and he did not notice any discrepancies during the engine 
run-up before takeoff.
The pilot further stated that after takeoff during climb out when the flight was between 50 and 
75 feel above ground level, he noticed a partial loss of engine power. With trees ahead he 
turned to the right towards an open field and while in a right turn, the right main landing gear 
contacted the ground. The left main landing gear then contacted the ground causing the gear to 
separate. The airplane came to rest upright in a left wing low attitude which resulted in fuel 
leaking from the left fuel cap.
Inspection of the accident site by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed 
the airplane was resting in the middle of a corn field with the left and nose landing gears 
separated. A small fire in the engine compartment had been quickly extinguished. The airplane 
was recovered for further examination.
Inspection of the engine by an FAA airworthiness inspector following recovery of the airplane 
revealed the air induction housing was crushed around the carburetor, but there were no 
obstructions of the air induction system. The air induction filer which had been separated and 
recovered from the accident site was determined to have been properly installed. The throttle, 
mixture, and carburetor heat control cables were connected and properly attached; however, 
impact damage precluded range of motion checks. The accelerator pump of the carburetor 
operationally checked good. The spark plugs were new and exhibited light gray coloration of 
the porcelain insulator. The engine was rotated by hand and spark was noted at all spark plugs, 
and compression was noted in all cylinders. No indication of a failure or malfunction was noted 
to the muffler.
A surface observation weather report taken at DYL at 1054, or approximately 14 minutes before 
the accident indicates in part that the dry bulb and dew point temperatures were 35 and 33 
degrees Fahrenheit respectively, and the relative humidity was 92 percent.
According to FAA Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin (SAIB) CE-09-35, based on the 
recorded temperature and dew point about the time of the accident, the conditions were 
favorable for serious carburetor icing at cruise power setting.
FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 20-113 dated October 22, 1981, titled, ﬁPilot Precautions and 
Procedures to be Taken in Preventing Aircraft Reciprocating Engine Induction System and 
Page 3 of 5ERA10LA104
Fuel System Icing Problemsﬂ states that induction system icing is more likely when the 
temperature is below 70 degrees Fahrenheit and the relative humidity is above 80 percent.
An overhauled engine was installed the day before and test run after installation. The recording 
tachometer time at the time of installation was 6,275.32, while the tachometer at the time of 
the accident was 6,275.41.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Fuel related
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine; Instrument 
Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/30/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/19/2009
Flight Time:
1400 hours (Total, all aircraft), 200 hours (Total, this make and model), 1200 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ERA10LA104
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N4026J
Model/Series:
150G 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
15065326
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/06/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
4 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6275 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
FRATTONE CLIFFORD T
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
FRATTONE CLIFFORD T
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DYL, 394 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1054 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 6500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.91 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Moderate - Mist; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Doylestown, PA (DYL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Doylestown, PA (DYL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1106 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Doylestown Airport (DYL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
05
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
3004 ft / 60 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Page 5 of 5ERA10LA104
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.333056, -75.122222 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
05/06/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
William Rush; FAA/FSDO; Allentown, PA
William H Collier; FAA/FSDO; Allentown, PA
Publish Date:
05/06/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75217
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
