The pilot stated that he originally planned a direct flight at 11,500 feet, but had to descend to 
1,500 feet to avoid weather for 10 to 15 minutes, then he climbed back to 11,500 feet. He said 
this accounted for his arrival in the vicinity of the destination airport with a low fuel level. 
When he contacted the control tower at the destination airport, he declared 'minimum fuel' but 
did not declare an emergency. There were approximately 20 other airplanes on the frequency. 
The pilot was cleared straight-in to the landing runway; however, the engine lost power, and 
the airplane was landed about three-quarters of a mile short of the intended runway. The pilot 
said that in order to avoid other aircraft during the approach, he slowed his airplane by 
lowering the flaps, which he said prevented him from reaching the runway. During a 
subsequent postaccident examination of the airplane, no mechanical anomaly was found. 
the pilot's inaccurate fuel consumption calculations, and his inadequate in-flight planning and 
decision making.  The pilot's failure to declare an emergency fuel condition (inadequate 
communication) was a related factor. 
 On August 1, 1996, at 1610 central daylight time, a Yak-3UA, N33UA, sustained substantial 
damage during a forced landing following a loss of engine power 3/4 miles south of the Fond 
Du Lac Airport, Fond Du Lac, Wisconsin.  The pilot told responding authorities that he had run 
out of fuel.  The pilot reported no injuries.  The personal 19 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in 
visual meteorological conditions.  No flight plan was on file.  The flight departed Tulsa, 
Oklahoma, at 1345.
The pilot said in a written statement, that he had calculated the fuel burn based on a direct 
flight at 11,500 feet.  He said he encountered weather en route and was forced to descend to 
1,500 feet for 10 to 15 minutes and then climbed again to 11,500 feet.  When he arrived in the 
Fond du Lac area he contacted the air traffic control tower and requested landing instructions.  
According to his statement he declared a fuel emergency.  To this, he said he was cleared to 
land on runway 36; however, was asked to "deviate" to follow a Citation jet on short final.  He 
said that he was unable to "deviate" because he had lost engine power.  He said that in order to 
avoid the possibility of a mid-air collision he slowed his airplane by lowering the flaps which he 
said prevented him from reaching the end of the runway.
Both the local controller and the ground controller working in the Federal Aviation 
Administration, Air Traffic Control Tower, at Fond du Lac, were interviewed and they said that 
the airplane reported 11 miles southwest for a landing with "minimum fuel."  The local 
controller had initially told the pilot to enter a downwind for runway 36, but having heard the 
fuel state, amended that to a straight in approach for runway 36 .  They indicated that the 
airplane reported two miles west and was cleared to land although not in sight, of the local 
controller.  When the airplane was observed it was in a descending left turn and landed short of 
runway 36.  Neither controller heard at anytime a declaration of an emergency by the pilot.  
When asked about the instruction to follow the Citation, the ground controller said that the 
airplane was cautioned about the possibility of wake turbulence and told to follow the Citation.  
He said that when he saw the accident airplane that there existed a one-quarter to one-half 
mile separation from the jet.  He said that although the accident airplane landed short of the 
intended runway, the Citation jet made a go-around maneuver due to its closing on a landing 
airplane on runway 36.  He did not feel that the Citation was at anytime in conflict with the 
accident airplane.  Both controllers said that the frequency was congested and that there were 
about 20 airplanes on the frequency at the time.  They stated that had the pilot called and 
reported an emergency it is problematical whether they would have heard him or not.
The airport manager for Fond du Lac Airport was one of the first individuals to arrive at the 
scene of the accident.  He said he asked the pilot if he was all right and then if there was any 
danger of a fire.  The pilot responded in a way that lead this individual to believe that the 
airplane was out of fuel.  He said that the pilot did not mention any difficulty with air traffic 
control or the airplane, at that time.
The first police officer to arrive at the scene made a report in which he stated that during his 
initial interview with the pilot, the pilot indicated that he thought during his preflight planning 
he would have enough fuel to reach his destination, but that he had indeed run out of gas.  He 
did not mention to this office any mechanical difficulties with the airplane or air traffic control 
problems.
A subsequent examination of the airplane by Federal Aviation Administration, inspectors failed 
to reveal any mechanical difficulties.
