The certificated private pilot said that the purpose of the flight was to show his friend some 
Alaskan scenery, in an area of mountainous, snow-covered terrain.  As the flight progressed, 
the wind increased, and a strong downdraft caused the airplane to descend rapidly.  The pilot 
applied full engine power in an attempt to climb, but the airplane continued to descend, 
rapidly lost airspeed, and subsequently collided with an area of snow-covered terrain.  
 
The pilot's inadequate compensation for wind conditions.  Factors associated with the accident 
are variable winds, and a downdraft.
On July 1, 2001, about 1500 Alaska daylight time, a wheel-equipped Beech H35 airplane, 
N5429D, sustained substantial damage when it struck mountainous terrain, about 20 miles 
southwest of Chitina, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) 
personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The certificated 
private pilot, and the one passenger aboard, were not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight originated at the Cordova 
Municipal Airport, Cordova, Alaska, about 1420.
During a telephone conversation with the NTSB investigator-in-charge on July 2, the pilot 
related that he and a friend were flying from Cordova, at 6,000 feet mean sea level, en route to 
a private airstrip located near Palmer, Alaska.  He added that the purpose of the flight was to 
show his friend some Alaskan scenery.  He said he thought the winds were fairly calm as he 
approached an area of mountainous, snow-covered terrain.  While in level, cruise flight, he said 
the wind increased, and a strong downdraft caused the airplane to descend rapidly.  He said he 
applied full engine power in an attempt to climb, but the airplane continued to descend, 
rapidly lost airspeed, and subsequently collided with an area of snow-covered terrain.  The 
pilot noted that the airplane was damaged so severely that it may not be repairable.  The pilot 
stated that there was no preaccident mechanical problems with the airplane.
 
