The two seat experimental amateur-built airplane was destroyed when it impacted trees 
located near the southwest perimeter fence about 900 feet west of the approach end of runway 
5.  The aircraft wreckage pattern was oriented to the southwest.  A witness reported that the 
airplane "ran like new" when it departed.  Witnesses near the airport reported seeing the 
airplane flying low, heading north, and then making a wide right turn to the southwest before 
impacting the trees.  One witness said the engine sputtered twice before impacting the trees.  
Another witness said he heard the engine quit and saw the propeller stop.  He reported the 
engine started again and the airplane turned back toward the airport before crashing into the 
trees.  The pilot had a total of 100 flight hours.  A witness reported the pilot had purchased the 
airplane within the last year and had flown it about 2 hours, but not at all within the last 3 or 4 
months.  The airplane did not have a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) registered "N" 
number painted on the airplane.  No data plate or serial number was found on the airplane.  
According to FAA records, an Airworthiness Certificate was never issued for the accident 
airplane.  A witness reported he had flown the airplane and that it had a severe yaw problem 
and he was afraid to fly in it again.  He reported the pilot fabricated and installed "stab fins" on 
the tip of each horizontal stabilizer, and a large trim tab on the rudder.  The witness also stated 
the pilot removed the doors to the airplane because he had been told it would help eliminate 
the yaw problem.  The witness reported the accident flight was the first flight the pilot had 
taken with the doors removed.  An examination of the airplane revealed no preexisting 
anomalies.
the unsuitable terrain encountered during the forced landing.  Additional factors were the 
pilot's lack of experience in the type of airplane, the loss of engine power for undetermined 
reasons, and the trees.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 2, 2001, at 1859 central daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Houston 
Challenger II, N902GH, was destroyed when it impacted trees located near the southwest 
perimeter fence of the Sedalia Airport (DMO), Sedalia, Missouri.  The private pilot was fatally 
injured.  The experimental airplane had departed from the pilot's private airstrip about 1854.  
The intended destination was DMO.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed. 
A witness, who was a friend of the pilot, reported that he and the pilot had been doing minor 
repairs and maintenance on the airplane prior to the flight.  He reported the pilot decided to fly 
the airplane to DMO, but he advised against it because of the high wind speeds.  The witness 
reported that the airplane "ran like new" when it departed for DMO. 
Witnesses who were located near the airport reported seeing the airplane flying low, heading 
north, and then making a wide right turn to the southwest before impacting the trees.  One 
witness said the engine sputtered twice before impacting the trees.  Another witness said he 
heard the engine quit and saw the propeller stop.  He reported the engine started again and the 
airplane turned back toward the airport before crashing into the trees.  
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot was a private pilot with a single engine land rating.  He held a Third Class Medical 
Certificate that was issued on September 25, 2000.  The pilot reported his total flight time was 
100 hours during his last medical examination.  A witness reported the pilot had purchased the 
airplane within the last year and had flown it about 2 hours, but not at all within the last 3 or 4 
months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a single engine experimental amateur-built Challenger II.  The airplane 
seated two and had a maximum gross weight of 800 pounds.  The engine was a 52 horsepower 
Rotax 503 engine.  The pilot had purchased the airplane within the previous year.  There were 
no maintenance records available and the flight hours on the airplane and engine are 
unknown.
The two seat experimental airplane did not have a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
registered "N" number painted on the airplane.  No data plate or serial number was found on 
the airplane.  According to FAA records, an Airworthiness Certificate was never issued for the 
accident airplane.
A witness reported he had flown the airplane and that it had a severe yaw problem and he was 
afraid to fly in it again.  He reported the pilot fabricated and installed "stab fins" on the tip of 
each horizontal stabilizer, and a large trim tab on the rudder.  The witness also stated the pilot 
removed the doors to the airplane because he had been told it would help eliminate the yaw 
problem.  The witness reported the accident flight was the first flight the pilot had taken with 
the doors removed.   
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
At 1853, the observed weather at DMO was: winds 120 degrees at 7 knots, sky clear, visibility 
10 sm, temperature 28 degrees C, dew point 23 degrees C, altimeter 30.10. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted trees on the southwest corner of the DMO airport, and was about 900 
feet west of the approach end of runway 5.  The aircraft wreckage pattern was oriented to the 
southwest.  The airplane impacted the tress approximately 20-25 feet above the ground and it 
remained lodged in the tree branches.  Aircraft parts were found 50 feet in front of the airplane 
wreckage.  
An examination of the airplane revealed flight control continuity.  The engine inspection 
revealed the two stroke Rotax engine exhibited continuity and cylinder compression.  Fuel was 
found in the carburetors.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot at the Heckart Gillespie Funeral Home, Sedalia, 
Missouri.  
A Forensic Toxicology Fatal Accident Report was prepared by the FAA Civil Aeromedical 
Institute.  The results were negative.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA was a party to the investigation.
