During cruise flight, the pilot heard a loud "pop" and noticed the landing GEAR UP light was 
no longer illuminated and would not illuminate when he pushed the PUSH TO TEST button.  
When he tested the GEAR DOWN light, it illuminated.  He slowed the airplane and cycled the 
landing gear, but to no avail.  He then checked and reset the landing gear circuit breaker.  He 
cycled the landing gear both electrically and manually. He was able to lock the nose landing 
gear by pulling a 2-g maneuver, but the main landing gear remained retracted.  The pilot then 
landed with the nose gear extended and the main gears retracted.  He was able to maintain a 
wings level attitude until the aircraft came to a stop approximately 250 feet down the runway. 
The aircraft then leaned onto its right stabilizer, crushing some spars and ribs. Post-accident 
examination revealed the hydraulic nose landing gear UP hose had failed.
failure of the nose landing gear hydraulic UP hose, which resulted in a wheels-up landing..
On July 1, 2001, at 1125 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 177RG, N2129Q, owned and 
operated by the pilot, was substantially damaged during a wheels-up landing at the 
Broomfield-Jefferson County (Jeffco) Airport, Broomfield, Colorado. The private pilot and his 
passenger were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan 
had been filed for the personal flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91. The flight 
originated from Erie, Colorado, approximately 0830.
In his accident report, the pilot said approximately 30 minutes into the flight, he heard a loud 
"pop" or "bang" from the front of the aircraft. The aircraft's airspeed then dropped from a 
cruise speed of 155 mph to approximately 135 mph.  The pilot then noticed the landing GEAR 
UP light was no longer illuminated.  The GEAR UP light did not illuminate when he pushed the 
PUSH TO TEST button.  When he tested the GEAR DOWN light, it illuminated.  He slowed the 
airplane and cycled the landing gear, but to no avail.  He then checked and reset the landing 
gear circuit breaker.  He cycled the landing gear both electrically and manually.  He then 
contacted Denver Flight Service Station for assistance and was directed to the Broomfield-
Jefferson County (Jeffco) Airport for an emergency gear up landing.  The pilot made a low pass 
and control tower personnel confirmed the landing gear was partially extended.  He then 
proceeded to the Stanley Lake area, near Jeffco, to attempt to lower the landing gear.  He said 
he made a dive with a 2-G pull-up. The maneuver successfully locked the nose landing gear, 
but the main landing gear remained retracted.  The pilot returned to Jeffco and made another 
low pass for control tower personnel to confirm the position of the landing gear. He then 
landed with the nose gear extended and the main gears retracted.  He said he was able to 
maintain a wings level attitude until the aircraft came to a stop approximately 250 feet down 
runway 29 Left.  The aircraft then leaned onto its right stabilizer.  The right stabilizer received 
damage to its tip, and the spars and ribs were bent. There was also damage to a tie down bolt 
and mounting plate.
Postaccident examination revealed the nose landing gear hydraulic UP hose had separated at 
the fitting, allowing the hydraulic fluid supply to be depleted. Airworthiness Directive (A.D.) 
97-01-13, applicable to the Cessna 177RG, effective February 3, 1997, requires the replacing of 
any "Cessna P/N S51-10 [hose] that has a diagonal or spiral pattern external reinforcement 
wrap with a Cessna P/N S51-10 hose that has a criss-cross pattern external wrap. . .in 
accordance with the ACCOMPLISHMENT INSTRUCTIONS of Service Bulletin (SB) SEB96-15, 
dated October 18, 1996." According to the service bulletin, "some S51-10 type hoses shipped . . . 
between March 28, 1995, and June 28, 1996, may have been improperly manufactured. 
Installed hoses that were improperly manufactured may deteriorate and eventually result in 
delamination on the inner tube from the external wrap (and) may result in a hydraulic system . 
. . malfunction . . . "
A review of the aircraft's maintenance records revealed only two entries pertaining to the 
hydraulic hoses. The first, dated January 9, 1991, noted, "Tach 2611 . . . Serviced hydraulic 
power pack - see AD list in #1 book, replace 1 nose gear retract cyl(inder) hose - checked OK." 
The second, dated February 1, 1992, read, "Tach 2644 . . . Replace hydraulic hose P/N 2178-4-
0134A to nose gear (re)tract cylinders . . . "  Since these maintenance entries predated SEB96-
15 and AD 97-01-13, the replacement hoses were not taken from the lot suspected of having 
been improperly manufactured. However, according to the "Airworthiness Directive 
Compliance Record," AD 97-01-13 had been complied with during the annual inspections of 
January 2, 1999, and February 4, 2000.
While repairs were being made to the airplane, it was noted that the mechanics were referring 
to Cessna SEB92-8, dated April 17, 1992. The service bulletin stated that "certain S2178-4 
series (blue) hydraulic hose assemblies should be replaced." No reason was given. Replacement 
hoses were designated S2888-4 series (black). The failed nose landing gear hydraulic UP hose 
was a blue- colored hose. According to the Cessna Aircraft Company, both SEB92-8 and 
SEB96-15 are still in effect, and the latter has not superceded the former.
