The crew of the arriving cargo flight flew over the airport to inspect the runway conditions, and 
subsequently elected to use runway 20, a 4,200 feet long, 90 feet wide, gravel runway.  The 
crew noted that the runway surface had a number of frost-heaves that had developed during 
the past winter.  During the initial landing touchdown, the airplane "skipped" as the main 
wheels touched on the crest of one of the frost-heaves.  The airplane became airborne, floated 
slightly, touched again about 750 feet beyond the approach end of the runway.  During the 
second landing flare, the main landing gear wheels touched on the downhill side of a second 
frost-heave, which allowed the tail of the airplane to contact the gravel runway.  The captain 
characterized the second touchdown as within acceptable limits, but with a slightly nose high 
attitude.  A postflight inspection by the crew discovered a 4 feet by 2 feet puncture on the belly 
of the airplane, just forward of the main cargo door.      
 
The flight crew's improper recovery from a bounced landing.  Factors associated with the 
accident were the selection of an unsuitable landing area, and a rough/uneven landing surface.
On July 2, 2001, about 0850 Alaska daylight time, a Lockheed L-382G airplane, N401LC, 
sustained substantial damage during landing at the Lake Minchumina Airport, Lake 
Minchumina, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as an instrument (IFR) cross-country 
cargo flight under Title 14 CFR Part 121, when the accident occurred. The airplane was 
registered to, and operated by Lynden Air Cargo LLC.  The crew of the airplane, consisting of 
the captain, first officer, flight engineer, and a load master, were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and an IFR flight plan was filed.  The flight originated at 
the Ted Stevens International Airport, Anchorage, Alaska, about 0800.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on July 2,  the director of operations for the operator reported the airport has a 
gravel runway that is oriented on a 020/200 degree heading.  He added that the captain flew 
over the airport to inspect the runway conditions, and subsequently elected to use runway 20.  
He said that the runway is 4,200 feet long, 90 feet wide, and that the gravel runway had a 
number of frost-heaves that have developed during the past winter.  The director of operations 
said that the captain was making an approach to runway 20, and on initial touchdown the 
airplane "skipped" as the main wheels touched down on the crest of one of the frost-heaves.  
He said that the airplane became airborne, floated slightly, and then touched down about 750 
feet beyond the approach end of the runway.  During the second landing flare, the main 
landing gear wheels touched on the downhill side of a second frost-heave, which allowed the 
tail of the airplane to contact the gravel runway.  The captain characterized the second 
touchdown as within acceptable limits, but with a slightly nose high attitude.  After touchdown, 
the captain lowered the nose of the airplane, brought the engines into reverse, and completed 
the landing.  After landing rollout, the airplane was taxied to parking.  A postflight inspection 
by the crew discovered a 4 feet by 2 feet puncture on the belly of the airplane, just forward of 
the main cargo door.      
 
