Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
KING SALMON, AK
Accident Number:
ANC01LA136
Date & Time:
09/02/2001, 1430 AKD 
Registration:
N177BM
Aircraft:
Cessna 185F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The commercial certificated pilot was back-taxiing on a runway in preparation for takeoff, and 
then began a 180 degree turn on the runway.  During the turn, the pilot said he heard a 
scraping sound, the airplane wobbled and shimmied, and the right brake was not functioning.  
The right main landing gear strut collapsed near the axle attach point, and the right main 
wheel and tire rolled away from the airplane.  The right wingtip and the propeller struck the 
ground, and the right gear strut was torn loose from its upper attach point.  A postexamination 
of the right wheel and strut by the owner revealed the axle assembly separated from the lower 
end of the landing gear strut.  There are four hex head bolts utilized to secure the axle to the 
landing gear strut.  Each are inserted through the axle assembly and gear leg, and have a nut 
threaded and then torqued onto the bolt shaft.  All four of the bolts were bent.  Two of the nuts 
were stripped off their respective bolt shafts.  The remaining two bolts were broken about mid-
shaft.  The owner of the airplane reported that about five days before the accident, new brake 
assemblies were installed on the airplane. The original bolts were re-used for the installation.  
One of the broken bolts was submitted to the National Transportations Safety Board's 
Materials Laboratory for examination.  According to an NTSB materials engineer, the bolt was 
bent about 35 degrees, it had necking deformation adjacent to the fracture, and displayed 
features consistent with an overstress fracture in bending.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
An overload failure of the main axle attaching bolts, and subsequent separation of the axle 
from the landing gear strut.
Page 2 of 6ANC01LA136
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: TAXI - TO TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - OVERLOAD
2. (C) LANDING GEAR,AXLE - SEPARATION
----------
Occurrence #2: MAIN GEAR COLLAPSED
Phase of Operation: TAXI - TO TAKEOFF
Findings
3. LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR ATTACHMENT - OVERLOAD
Page 3 of 6ANC01LA136
Factual Information
On September 2, 2001, about 1430 Alaska daylight time, a tundra tire-equipped Cessna 185F 
airplane, N177BM, sustained substantial damage while taxiing for takeoff at the King Salmon 
Airport, King Salmon, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) 
cross-country personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the accident occurred.  The 
airplane was operated by Bill Martin, Fish Alaska Inc., King Salmon.  The commercial 
certificated pilot, and the sole passenger, were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed.  VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on September 7th, the pilot reported that he was preparing to 
depart and was back-taxiing on runway 11 at King Salmon.  He then began a 180 degree turn to 
depart on runway 29.  During the turn, the pilot said he heard a scraping sound, the airplane 
wobbled and shimmied, and the right brake was not functioning.  The right main landing gear 
strut collapsed near the axle attach point, and the right main wheel and tire rolled away from 
the airplane.  The right wingtip and the propeller struck the ground, and the right gear strut 
was torn loose from its upper attach point.
A postexamination of the right wheel and strut by the owner revealed the axle assembly 
separated from the lower end of the landing gear strut.  There are four hex head bolts utilized 
to secure the axle to the landing gear strut.  Each are inserted through the axle assembly and 
gear leg, and have a nut threaded and then torqued onto the bolt shaft.  All four of the bolts 
were bent.  Two of the nuts were stripped off their respective bolt shafts.  The remaining two 
bolts were broken about mid-shaft.
The owner of the airplane reported that about five days before the accident, new brake 
assemblies were installed on the airplane.  The original bolts were re-used for the installation.
One of the broken bolts was submitted to the National Transportations Safety Board's 
Materials Laboratory for examination.  According to an NTSB materials engineer, the bolt was 
bent about 35 degrees, it had necking deformation adjacent to the fracture, and displayed 
features consistent with an overstress fracture in bending.
Page 4 of 6ANC01LA136
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
63, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/21/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
12000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2500 hours (Total, this make and model), 70 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N177BM
Model/Series:
185F 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18504157
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520
Registered Owner:
BILL MARTIN FISH ALASKA 
INC.
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
BILL MARTIN FISH ALASKA 
INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
B61C
Page 5 of 6ANC01LA136
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PAKN, 57 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1452 ADT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 2500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 3600 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
270°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.54 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
KING SALMON, AK (PAKN)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
YANTARNI, AK 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1430 ADT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
KING SALMON (PAKN)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
57 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
11
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
8500 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
58.676944, -156.649167
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
SCOTT ERICKSON
Adopted Date:
06/18/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
JAY BURTON; FAA-AL-ANC FSDO 03; ANCHORAGE, AK
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ANC01LA136
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
