Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Monroe, VA
Accident Number:
ERA12LA380
Date & Time:
06/02/2012, 1310 EDT 
Registration:
N443EP
Aircraft:
PITTMAN EDDIE G CGS HAWK 
ARROW II
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel exhaustion
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot, who was unfamiliar with the make and model airplane, was flying the airplane to its 
new owner in another state. Although the pilot said he was under no time pressure, he declined 
the previous owner™s offer of instruction in how to use the airplane™s onboard engine 
information system (EIS). (The previous owner reported that the pilot seemed to be in a hurry 
to depart.) If used properly, the EIS displays fuel-related information, including endurance, 
fuel quantity, and fuel flow rate. Had the pilot accepted the offer, he would have learned how to 
navigate among the EIS screens to obtain pertinent information during the accident flight. 
During preflight planning, the pilot used a fuel burn rate that was for cruise flight at 4,400 rpm 
but did not take into account increased fuel consumption during takeoff, climb, and cruise 
flight at higher power settings. The gross weight values provided by the builder (1,150 pounds) 
and the designer (990 pounds) differed; however, the pilot did not perform any preflight 
weight and balance calculations. Postaccident calculations indicated that the airplane was 
about 69 pounds over its design gross weight and 0.63 inch forward of the forward center of 
gravity limit when he started the engine. Thus, the pilot™s preflight planning was inadequate.
The pilot departed with full fuel tanks, and during the climb to his planned cruise altitude of 
9,500 feet mean sea level, the engine rpm was reportedly set at 4,600 rpm. He stated that to 
maintain level flight during cruise he had to use full aft elevator trim, maintain slight aft 
pressure on the control yoke, and use an engine power setting about 200 rpm more than the  
optimal endurance cruise power setting of 4,400 rpm, likely due to the high gross weight and 
forward center of gravity. About 2 hours 55 minutes into the flight, the engine lost total power. 
Unable to reach a nearby airport, the pilot performed a forced landing in a field. The airplane 
impacted upsloping terrain just below the crest of a hill. The pilot stated that with the flaps 
lowered to 30 degrees and full aft elevator trim and aft elevator input he could not bring the 
airplane™s nose up to more than horizontal. Postaccident testing of the elevator control cable 
tension revealed no discrepancies that would have precluded normal operation; therefore, the 
airplane™s low airspeed and forward center of gravity resulted in reduced elevator effectiveness.
Postaccident examination of the airplane revealed that the fuel tanks were not compromised 
Page 2 of 7ERA12LA380
during the accident and that there was no usable fuel in the tanks. No discrepancy with the 
engine or engine systems was reported or observed. When power was subsequently applied to 
the airplane™s onboard EIS, it showed a fuel endurance of 0.00 hours.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s improper preflight planning and inflight fuel management, which resulted in the 
total loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion. Contributing to the accident was the pilot™s 
unfamiliarity with the airplane™s systems.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Personnel issues
Planning/preparation - Pilot (Cause)
Knowledge of equipment - Pilot (Factor)
Environmental issues
Mountainous/hilly terrain - Not specified
Page 3 of 7ERA12LA380
Factual Information
On June 2, 2012, about 1310 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur built CGS Hawk 
Arrow II, N443EP, registered to and operated by a private individual, was landed hard during a 
forced landing in a field near Monroe, Virginia. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 
personal flight from Lancaster County-Mc Whirter Field Airport (LKR), Lancaster, South 
Carolina, to New Market Airport (8W2), New Market, Virginia. The airplane sustained 
substantial damage, and the commercial pilot, the sole occupant, sustained minor injuries. The 
flight originated from LKR about 1010.
The airplane was recently sold, and the accident pilot was flying the airplane to its new owner 
in Pennsylvania. He had not previously flown the accident make and model airplane before the 
accident flight. The previous owner filled the fuel tanks on May 31st, resulting in a total fuel 
capacity of 22 gallons (21 gallons in the main tanks and 1 gallon in the header tank); however, 
he could not recall if he reset the on-board engine information system (EIS). Typically, he 
would reset the EIS to reflect the fuel load either after fueling or as part of his preflight check. 
The pilot repositioning the airplane to the new owner was advised by the previous owner that 
the fuel consumption rate in cruise flight at 4,400 rpm was approximately 4.0 gallons-per-hour 
(gph), but was also advised the fuel consumption increased with increase in engine rpm. Based 
on this information for fuel planning, the pilot took the basic fuel burn for cruise flight at 4,400 
rpm, or 4.0 gph, and divided that rate by the total gallons on-board (22) resulting in a 
theoretical endurance of 5.5 hours. His first planned fuel stop was at 8W2 which was about a 
3.5 hour flight; leaving about 2 hours of reserve fuel.
Before departure, the previous owner offered to show the accident pilot the function/operation 
of the EIS which included information pertaining to fuel including endurance, fuel totalizer, 
and fuel flow, but he declined the offer. The accident pilot later stated in the 
ﬁRecommendationﬂ section of the National Transportation Safety Board Pilot/Operator 
Aircraft Accident/Incident Report that the EIS was not labeled as to what indication was being 
displayed, and, ﬁfuel data should be displayed as part of the main display, or a sight gauge 
should be installed.ﬂ He also confirmed that before departure he did not visually inspect the 
fuel tanks nor did he perform weight and balance calculations.
The flight departed, and the pilot reported that he reduced power to 4,600 rpm when the flight 
was about 500 feet above ground level, then climbed at that power setting to 5,500 feet mean 
sea level (msl), which took about 10 minutes. While flying at that altitude he reduced power to 
4,500 rpm, then after clearing Class B airspace, increased engine rpm to 4,600 and climbed to 
9,500 feet. The climb to 9,500 feet lasted about 15 minutes. The pilot stated to the Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector-in-charge that during cruise flight to maintain level 
flight, he had to apply full aft elevator trim, slight aft pressure on the elevator flight control 
stick, and increase engine rpm by 200 from the intended cruise setting of 4,400 rpm.
About 2 hours 55 minutes into the flight while flying about 18 miles north of Lynchburg, 
Virginia, the engine began ﬁsputtering.ﬂ He attempted to proceed to Lynchburg, but the glide 
ratio was less than anticipated. He contacted Lynchburg Regional Airport air traffic control 
tower and advised the controller that the engine had quit and he would be executing a forced 
landing.
The pilot further stated that he maneuvered the airplane towards an open field while 
Page 4 of 7ERA12LA380
descending between 60 and 65 miles-per-hour, added 30 degrees of flaps, and with full aft 
elevator trim inputted, flared to land on top of a hill; however, the airplane™s nose-up pitch did 
not increase beyond horizontal with aft elevator control input. The airplane impacted 
upsloping terrain about 5 to 7 feet below the hilltop crest. Additionally, in the 
ﬁRecommendationﬂ section of the National Transportation Safety Board Pilot/Operator 
Aircraft Accident/Incident Report, he indicated that, ﬁA warning in cockpit should be placed to 
indicate that a solo pilot cannot exceed 180 pounds with full fuel tanks as this will cause an 
excessively forward CG situation. The only warning is that solo flight, pilot is to use the front 
seat and not the rear.ﬂ
Postaccident examination of the airplane and accident site by a Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) inspector revealed the airplane traveled about 40 feet after touchdown 
before coming to rest. Structural damage was noted to the bottom fuselage area. Examination 
of the four fuel tanks revealed no evidence of breach or rupture, and no residual fuel was noted. 
Approximately 2 cc™s of fuel were drained from the fuel system low point. Inspection of the 
engine revealed internal continuity with good cylinder compression.
Postaccident weight and balance calculations were performed using the aircraft empty weight 
(653 pounds), the lowest weight of the pilot per his interview (220 pounds), the weights of a 
full header and fuel tanks (6 pounds and 126 pounds) respectively, plus additional pilot 
reported weights of his backpack (30 pounds), 2 gallons of oil (14 pounds), a laptop computer 
(5 pounds), and miscellaneous documents (5 pounds), all of which were secured in the rear 
seat. The weight at the time of engine start was calculated to be 1,059 pounds, and the center of 
gravity (C.G.) was calculated to be 87.79 inches aft of datum. Taking into account all fuel 
consumed; the weight at the time of the accident was calculated to be 927 pounds and the C.G. 
was calculated to be 88.71 inches aft of datum.
Documents provided postaccident by the previous owner indicate the gross weight limit is 
1,150 pounds and the C.G. range is 88.42 to 92.34 inches aft of datum; however, the current 
owner of airplane design (CGS Aviation) reports the design gross weight of the accident 
airplane (experimental amateur-built) is 990 pounds.
Following recovery of the airplane, the new owner turned on the aircraft™s battery and 
positioned the EIS to page 0, which reflects information pertaining to fuel consisting of 
endurance, fuel quantity (totalizer based on fuel used), and fuel flow rate. The EIS reflected the 
endurance to be ﬁ0:00ﬂ, the fuel totalizer to be ﬁ7.7ﬂ, and the fuel flow rate to be ﬁ0.0.ﬂ A 
picture of the screen was taken and provided to NTSB and FAA; it is contained in the NTSB 
public docket for this case. The owner also post accident checked the elevator flight control 
cable tension and reported no discrepancies.
A fuel flow chart depicting fuel consumption at various rpm settings reflect that for engine 
maximum red-line (5,500 rpm), the engine consumes 7.8 gph, and at the pilot-reported rpm 
setting for climb and cruise (4,600), the engine consumes approximately 5.4 gph. A copy of the 
chart is contained in the NTSB public docket for this case.
Page 5 of 7ERA12LA380
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Fuel exhaustion (Defining event)
Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Hard landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/28/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/03/2011
Flight Time:
258 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3 hours (Total, this make and model), 151 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 27 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 22 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PITTMAN EDDIE G
Registration:
N443EP
Model/Series:
CGS HAWK ARROW II 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental Light Sport
Serial Number:
H-AII-297-F30-TRI
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/02/2011, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
HIRTH
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
F30
Registered Owner:
John Rasmus
Rated Power:
80 hp
Operator:
John Rasmus
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ERA12LA380
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LYH, 938 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1254 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
166°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 6000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Variable
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.88 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
19°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Lancaster, SC (LKR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
New Market, VA (8W2)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1010 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
37.537500, -79.267778 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
06/12/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Manuel P Carvalho; FAA/FSDO; Richmond, VA
Publish Date:
06/12/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=83852
Page 7 of 7ERA12LA380
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
