Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Rockledge, FL
Accident Number:
MIA08LA023
Date & Time:
12/01/2007, 1254 EST 
Registration:
N79GP
Aircraft:
PORTER GLEN AVENTURA II
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Following maintenance to the amateur-built airplane, including the manufacture and 
installation of shoulder harness cables and a condition inspection, the airplane was test flown 
by the facility general manager on two separate flights lasting a total of one hour. The only 
discrepancies reported by the general manager related to the airplane's brakes and noise in the 
headset. While the pilot has no independent recollection of the accident flight, a pilot-rated 
witness who was outside on the airport reported that his attention was drawn to the accident 
airplane when he heard a normal sounding engine run-up being performed. He watched the 
airplane take off, becoming airborne at the midpoint of the runway. The initial takeoff climb 
appeared normal, then approximately 1.5 seconds later, at an estimated 75 feet above ground 
level (agl), the left wing dropped or "bobbled." The airplane rolled to the right, then climbed to 
100 to 150 feet agl. The right wing raised, the nose pitched up 15 degrees, which was more than 
a normal pitch attitude, and then the airplane "shuddered" and stalled to the left. The airplane 
impacted terrain in a left-wing-low attitude. During the impact sequence, the pilot's shoulder 
harness cable failed prematurely due to improper manufacturing, contributing to his serious 
head injuries. No evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction was identified for either the 
flight controls or engine.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the pilot to maintain airspeed during climbout, resulting in an aerodynamic stall 
and uncontrolled descent. Contributing to the severity of the pilot's injuries was the inadequate 
manufacture of the shoulder harness restraint cables.
Page 2 of 9MIA08LA023
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
4. MISC EQPT/FURNISHINGS,SHOULDER HARNESS - FAILURE,TOTAL
5. (F) MATERIAL INADEQUATE,IMPROPER - KIT MANUFACTURER
Page 3 of 9MIA08LA023
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 1, 2007, about 1254 eastern standard time, an amateur-built Porter Glen 
Aventura II, N79GP, registered to and operated by a private individual, experienced an in-
flight loss of control and collided with terrain shortly after takeoff from Rockledge Airport 
(21FA), Rockledge, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight 
plan was filed for the personal local flight conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR) Part 91. The airplane was substantially damaged and the commercial-
certificated pilot, the sole occupant, sustained serious injuries. The flight was originating at the 
time of the accident.
The pilot reported that he has no independent recollection of the accident flight. A pilot-rated 
witness who was outside on the airport reported his attention was drawn to the accident 
airplane when he heard a normal sounding engine run-up being performed. He watched the 
airplane takeoff from runway 36, and reported that the airplane became airborne at the 
midpoint of the runway. The initial takeoff climb appeared normal, then approximately 1.5 
seconds later while flying at an estimated 75 feet above ground level (agl), the left wing 
dropped, or "bobbled." The airplane rolled to the right, then climbed to 100 to 150 feet agl. The 
right wing raised, the nose pitched up 15 degrees, which was more than a normal pitch attitude, 
and then the airplane "shuddered," and stalled to the left. At that time he heard the engine rpm 
increase, which in his 4,000 hours in the accident make of airplane was consistent with 
cavitation of the propeller. The airplane impacted in a left wing low attitude, and once on-
scene, he noted the airplane was inverted, and fuel was leaking from a fuel line at the top of the 
engine. Further damage was done to the right wing in an effort to rescue the pilot. The witness 
further stated that the engine sounded "perfect" from the application of takeoff power to the 
point where the airplane stalled.
The pilot's wife who also witnessed the accident reported that approximately 200 feet agl into 
the takeoff climb, the left wing dropped and the airplane turned and impacted the ground nose 
first.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 77, holds an airline transport pilot certificate with an airplane multi-engine land 
rating. He also holds a commercial pilot certificate with airplane single engine land and sea 
ratings, issued July 24, 1999. He holds a second class medical certificate issued November 6, 
2007, with a limitation to wear corrective lenses. In a National Transportation Safety Board 
Form 6120.1 submitted by the pilot, he annotated that his last flight review in accordance with 
(IAW) 14 CFR Part 61.56 was on July 25, 2007, and that he possessed 22,000 total flight hours, 
with 3 hours in the accident airplane make and model in the previous 90 days.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The amateur-built airplane was manufactured in 2000, as model Aventura II, and was 
designated serial number AP2A0079. It was powered by a Rotax 582 65-horsepower engine 
and equipped with a 3-bladed Warp Drive square tip propeller. The exterior of the airplane was 
marked with "N306TC"; however, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records indicate the 
accident pilot/owner requested a change to "N79GP."
Page 4 of 9MIA08LA023
The pilot purchased the airplane in Mississippi on August 10, 2007, and transported it the next 
day by trailer to the kit manufacturer's factory for extensive work and a condition inspection. 
The airplane's maintenance records were reportedly left with the facility when the airplane was 
taken there. At the time the airplane was brought to the facility, the airplane was not equipped 
with shoulder harnesses; it was only equipped with automotive lapbelts. The lapbelts were 
replaced and shoulder harnesses were installed during the time the airplane was at the kit 
manufacturer's facility.
According to the general manager of the facility that worked on the airplane, the maintenance 
records could not be located; however, he reported the condition inspection was signed off as 
being completed on either November 29, or the morning of November 30, 2007. After the 
condition inspection was signed off, the maintenance department released the airplane for a 
maintenance test flight.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A surface observation weather report taken at Patrick Air Force Base (COF), Cocoa Beach, 
Florida, at 1255, or approximately 1 minute before the accident indicates the wind was from 
040 degrees at 9 knots, the visibility was 7 statute miles, broken clouds existed at 2,700 feet. 
The temperature and dew point were 25 and 21 Celsius respectively, and the altimeter setting 
was 30.22 inches of mercury. The accident site was located approximately 7 nautical miles and 
304 degrees from COF.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
21FA is a private airport with one runway designated 18/36, which is 2,010 feet in length and 
45 feet wide.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane crashed in a residential area located approximately .27 nautical mile north-
northwest from the approach end of runway 36.
Examination of the accident site by FAA personnel revealed the empennage was nearly vertical 
and displaced to the right. The nose and right wing were contacting the ground. A slight 
amount of fuel leakage was noted; the remaining fuel amount in the 18 gallon fuel tank was 
calculated to be approximately 3 gallons. During rescue of the pilot, the right wing was further 
damaged.
Examination of the airplane following recovery by Safety Board personnel revealed both wings 
were separated, and the hull was fragmented to the location of the flightcrew seats. Flight 
control continuity was confirmed for roll, pitch, and yaw. The elevator trim cable was 
connected at the trim tab and continuous to the cockpit control. The solid steel wire of the 
elevator trim cable was bent near the attach point at the trim tab. Safety Board review of 
pictures taken immediately before takeoff revealed the elevator trim tab was positioned slight 
tab trailing edge down. Examination of the pilot's restraint system revealed the webbing of 
both shoulder harnesses and the webbing of one side of the lapbelt were cut during the rescue 
process. A cable that secured the pilot's shoulder harness to structure was separated from a 
thimble at the shoulder harness end of the cable. The shoulder harness cable assembly was 
retained for further examination. The engine was removed from the airframe, placed on a test 
stand, and found to operate normally.
Examination of the cockpit revealed the master and both ignition switches were in the on 
Page 5 of 9MIA08LA023
position. The primer was fully in, and the throttle was full forward.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The pilot sustained serious injuries to his head, with little bruising around his shoulders. He 
also suffered a broken wrist. There were no broken bones in his legs.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The airplane was test flown by the kit manufacturer's facility general manager the day before 
the accident following sign off of the condition inspection. A total of two separate flights lasting 
a total flight time of approximately 1.0 hour were performed. The general manager reported to 
the Safety Board a discrepancy with the brakes and a sound in the headset from the strobes 
were noted. No discrepancies were noted with the engine or flight controls.
Following the flights by the general manager, he briefed the accident pilot about the flight 
controls, instruments, and was given a cockpit familiarization. After the ground instruction, the 
airplane was then flown by the accident pilot and the general manager who performed the first 
takeoff. After takeoff, the accident pilot took the controls and performed slow flight, power-off 
stalls, and checked the landing gear and flaps. The accident pilot returned for landing and 
performed a full-stop taxi back landing for a subsequent departure. After departure, he 
manipulated the throttle control and performed slow flight. The flight returned and an 
uneventful landing was performed. A discrepancy related to high coolant temperature was 
noted and the airplane was taxied to the maintenance hangar. Maintenance personnel 
informed the accident pilot that the coolant temperature was not at red line, moved the red line 
limit, and instructed him to maintain 5 mph faster in the traffic pattern in an effort to reduce 
coolant temperature.
Following instruction by maintenance personnel, the accident pilot and general manager 
departed and remained in the traffic pattern where two full-stop taxi back landings were 
performed. The accident pilot added 5 mph while flying in the traffic pattern and no 
discrepancies were noted. Following the last flight, the accident pilot was advised by the 
general manager that he should fly more the following morning. The accident pilot agreed to fly 
solo to get more experience. The general manager reported the airplane had an estimated 1/2 
tank remaining following the last landing on November 30, 2007.
Examination of the shoulder harness cables was performed by the Safety Board's Materials 
Laboratory. The results of the examination revealed the cables were comprised of 1/8 inch 
diameter corrosion resistant steel cable with 7 strands of 19 wires each. The sleeve, thimble, 
and attach plate for the pilot's shoulder harness cable were separated from the cable at the 
location near the shoulder harness attach point. Two strands of the pilot's shoulder harness 
cable were fractured at a point along the length between the attach point for the airplane and 
the attach point for the shoulder harness attach. Two additional strands of the cable were 
fractured at the midpoint of the thimble adjacent to the shoulder harness attach point. The 
attachment plate remained secured to the thimble of the pilot's shoulder harness cable. The 
cable also exhibited a 90 degree bend near the middle of the thimble near the shoulder harness 
attach point. The area of the cable associated with the middle point of the lower thimble 
exhibited wire thinning associated with sliding contact. Corresponding sliding contact marks 
were also noted on the thimble surface. Examination of the pilot's sleeve revealed sliding marks 
in the interior of the sleeve consistent with sliding contact with the wires of the cable.
Additional examination of the shoulder harness cables by the Safety Board's Materials 
Page 6 of 9MIA08LA023
Laboratory revealed all three sleeves had two crimps each. The supplier of the cable and sleeves 
(Loos and Company, Inc.) indicated that for the cable diameter and type of sleeve (copper 
duplex oval sleeves P/N SL2-4P), three crimps are required. That company reported on their 
web site that during manufacture of cables using their sleeves, specified tools from registered 
trademark company Locoloc should be used. The cable and sleeve manufacturer also reports 
that the copper duplex oval sleeves are capable of supporting a greater load than the rated 
breaking strength of the cable to which they are attached when properly applied with the 
specified tools, and performance is only assured by using the proper swager and sleeve 
combination. The after swaging diameter of all crimps were measured and found to be within a 
range of .363 to .368 inch. According to the sleeve manufacturer, the after swage diameter of a 
properly swaged sleeve is .345 inch.
During manufacture of the cables by the kit manufacturer, two tools both manufactured by the 
National Telephone Supply Company were used. One tool was a hand tool and the other tool 
was a bench tool.
Testing of the intact co-pilot's shoulder harness cable was performed by the Safety Board's 
Materials Laboratory. The results of tension testing which occurred over a four-minute period 
revealed the peak load achieved was 1,213 pounds. By design the minimum strength of the 
cable is specified as 1,760 pounds. Examination of the cable after tension testing revealed it 
was not fractured but the loose end of the cable was displaced from the sleeve. The thimble 
exhibited sliding contact marks similar to the sliding marks noted on the pilot's side, and the 
sleeve remained attached to the cable and could not be easily removed by hand. Wires on two 
of the seven strands near the thimble were disturbed and one of the wires was fractured.
Postaccident examination of the kit builder's facility to inspect manufactured cables used for 
shoulder harnesses, tail brace wires, and rudder cables was performed by an FAA 
airworthiness inspector. The inspection revealed that the inspected cables appeared to be 
correctly swaged. A technician of the kit builder was tasked to swage a sleeve to a cable and the 
task was correctly performed with the correct tools including a go-no-go gauge. The proper 
procedures were followed. A representative of the kit manufacturer reported to the FAA 
inspector that about 1 year prior they had a couple of unsatisfactory employees which were 
terminated, and they could not determine when or by whom a particular cable assembly was 
manufactured.
Page 7 of 9MIA08LA023
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
77, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/06/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/25/2007
Flight Time:
22000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PORTER GLEN
Registration:
N79GP
Model/Series:
AVENTURA II 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
AP2A0079
Landing Gear Type: 
Amphibian
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/29/2008, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
1 Hours
Engines:
1 
Airframe Total Time:
142.2 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
CLARK THOMAS P
Rated Power:
Operator:
CLARK THOMAS P
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 8 of 9MIA08LA023
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
COF, 8 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1255 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
130°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 2700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
40°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.22 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
25°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Rockledge, FL (21FA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (21FA)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1254 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Rockledge Airport (21FA)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
27 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2010 ft / 45 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
28.300556, -80.721389 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
03/05/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
William E Miller; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL
Eric Tucker; Rotax; Nassau,
Publish Date:
03/05/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 9 of 9MIA08LA023
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
