Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Arcola, TX
Accident Number:
CEN16FA094
Date & Time:
02/01/2016, 1015 CST 
Registration:
N323BR
Aircraft:
COSTRUZIONI AERONAUTICHE 
TECNA P92 ECHO SUPER
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The flight instructor and a student pilot, who had flown about 5 flight hours with the 
instructor, were conducting an instructional flight in the light sport airplane. The student pilot 
reported that he was conducting the takeoff with the instructor assisting, and about 200 ft. 
above ground level, the airplane began to drift off the runway centerline. The student said that 
he attempted to correct, but it felt like the airplane was losing engine power and the nose was 
dropping. He added that he was pulling back on the controls and that the instructor was also 
pulling back, in an attempt to recover. A witness reported seeing the airplane climbing after 
takeoff in a nose high attitude when the left wing dropped, and the airplane entered a 
descending left turn. The airplane then impacted two parked airplanes on a ramp adjacent to a 
parallel taxiway. A postcrash fire consumed the majority of the airplane. Due to the fire 
damage, only a limited examination could be conducted; however, no preimpact abnormities 
were noted with the engine and airframe. The circumstances of the accident are consistent with 
a power-on departure stall.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The student pilot's loss of control after exceeding the airplane's critical angle-of-attack, which 
lead to a power-on, aerodynamic departure stall. Contributing to the accident was the flight 
instructor's inadequate oversight of the student pilot.
Page 2 of 8CEN16FA094
Findings
Aircraft
Angle of attack - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Student pilot (Cause)
Delayed action - Instructor/check pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 8CEN16FA094
Factual Information
History of Flight
Takeoff
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
On February 1, 2016, about 1015 central standard time, a Tecnam P92 light sport airplane, 
N323BR, impacted terrain near Arcola, Texas. The flight instructor was fatally injured; the 
student pilot was seriously injured; and the airplane was destroyed. The airplane was 
registered to and operated by Houston Light Sport Aviation, LLC, under the provisions of 
14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91
 as an instructional flight. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and the airplane was not on a flight plan. The local flight was originating 
from the Houston Southwest Airport (AXH), Houston, Texas, at the time of the accident.
A witness reported that the airplane departed on runway 9, and when it was about midfield, the 
airplane was in a nose-high attitude. The airplane's left wing dropped, and the airplane entered 
a descending left turn.
The airplane then collided with two airplanes that were parked by a hangar adjacent to a 
parallel taxiway. The accident airplane came to rest on one of the parked airplanes, and a post-
crash fire consumed the majority of the accident airplane and one of the parked airplanes.
The student pilot was interviewed while he was recovering in the hospital. He stated that he 
and the instructor completed some ground school training. The plan was then to conduct 
traffic pattern work including downwind and base legs. Before taxiing out, they saw an airplane 
depart from runway 27; however, they noted that, based on the current wind condition, the 
runway in use should have been runway 9. The student pilot added that he was conducting the 
takeoff with the instructor assisting. He applied full power, and, about 200 ft above ground 
level, the airplane started to drift left. He attempted to correct the drift to stay on the runway 
centerline. According to the student pilot, it felt like the engine was losing power, and the nose 
was dropping. He stated that he was pulling back on the controls and that the instructor was 
also pulling back. At that point, he knew they were going to crash, and there was nothing they 
could do to prevent it.
Page 4 of 8CEN16FA094
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
68, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/27/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
6233 hours (Total, all aircraft), 6 hours (Total, this make and model), 5373 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
None
Age:
20, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
None 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
5.1 hours (Total, all aircraft), 5.1 hours (Total, this make and model)
The flight instructor held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine 
land, airplane multi-engine land, and instrument airplane. Additionally, he held a ground 
instructor certificate and a flight instructor certificate with airplane single- and multi-engine 
and instrument airplane ratings. The flight instructor was issued a special issuance first class 
medical certificate on July 27, 2015. At the time of the exam, the instructor reported he had 
6,161.1 total flight hours and 30.5 hours in the previous six months. A review of flight club 
records revealed that he had 6 flight hours in the Tecnam P92.
The student pilot had four previous flights with the flight instructor and did not hold a student 
pilot certificate. A review of club records revealed that the student had approximately 5.1 total 
flight hours.
Page 5 of 8CEN16FA094
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
COSTRUZIONI AERONAUTICHE 
TECNA
Registration:
N323BR
Model/Series:
P92 ECHO SUPER 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2006
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Special Light-Sport
Serial Number:
986
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/22/2015, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2385.5 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Rotax
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
912
Registered Owner:
Houston LightSport Aviation, 
LLC
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
Houston LightSport Aviation, 
LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
The accident airplane was a Tecnam P92, a high-wing, single-engine, light sport airplane, with 
fixed landing gear. It was powered by a 100-horsepower, 4-cylinder, reciprocating Rotax 912 
engine, and a fixed pitch propeller. The airplane's airworthiness certificate is in the Special, 
Light Sport (S-LSA) category. The fuselage was a semi-monocoque construction with a mixture 
of thin aluminum covered tube structure. A review of the airplane's maintenance records 
revealed that the last condition inspection was completed October 22, 2015, at an airplane and 
engine total time of 2,385.57 hours.
Page 6 of 8CEN16FA094
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KAXH
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1015 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 1000 ft agl
Visibility
7 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.88 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Houston, TX 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Houston, TX 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CST
Type of Airspace: 
At 1015, the automated weather observation facility (AWOS) located at AXH recorded, wind 
120 at 6 knots, 7 miles visibility, scattered clouds at 1,500 ft with a ceiling at 2,000 ft, 
temperature of 68 F, dew point 64 F, and an altimeter setting of 29.88 inches of mercury.
Airport Information
Airport:
Houston Southwest (KAXH)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
70 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
09
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5002 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
The Houston Southwest Airport (AXH) is a public-use, non-towered airport, located 15 miles 
southwest of Houston, Texas. Pilots use ommon raffic dvisory requency (CTAF) for 
communications. The airport has a single asphalt runway; runway 9/27, measuring 5,002 ft. 
long by 100 ft. wide. The airport is at an elevation of 68.9 ft mean sea level and has an AWOS 
station located on the field.
Page 7 of 8CEN16FA094
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal, 1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
29.506944, -95.477500
The on-site examination of the wreckage revealed the airplane impacted a parked Cessna 172, 
and came to rest on a Gulfstream American AA5A airplane. A survey of the area did not reveal 
any ground scars between the runway and the ramp area where the airplane impacted the 
Cessna. A postcrash fire consumed much of the AA5A, the accident airplane, and limited the 
examination of the accident airplane.
The wreckage came to rest facing the runway. The right wing had extensive thermal damage 
with the inboard section of the wing and flap consumed by the fire. The left wing was 
consumed by the fire and its remnants were indistinguishable from the remnants of the AA5A. 
The main cabin was consumed by fire with only a tubular type frame remaining; the 
empennage had thermal damage but was largely intact. The engine compartment and forward 
fuselage were mostly consumed by fire. The propeller and nose cone were thermally damaged, 
and only a piece of the two-bladed propeller was located outside the fire damage area.
Aileron continuity was established at each of the wing bellcranks; however, sections of the 
push-pull tubing were consumed by the fire. Additionally, the control cable connection points 
were separated; each fastener was either consumed or melted by the fire. The elevator push-
pull tube was consumed forward of the empennage. Rudder control continuity was established 
to the cockpit rudder pedals. The flap actuator position was compared to an exemplar actuator 
on a similar airplane; the actuator position corresponded to a flap retracted position.
The firewall and part of the instrument panel were consumed by the fire. The engine also 
received extensive fire damage. The engine intake/carburetors and fuel pump were in place but 
were partly consumed by the fire. Fire damage prevented the engine from being rotated by 
hand. The engine's propeller speed reduction unit (PSRU) was dissembled; a visual inspection 
revealed no discrepancies with the internal gears. The top sparkplugs were removed and 
exhibited light colored combustion deposits and the electrodes exhibited normal signatures.
No preimpact abnormalities were noted during the airframe or engine examinations.
Medical And Pathological Information
Page 8 of 8CEN16FA094
The Galveston County Medical Examiner's Office, Texas City, Texas, conducted an autopsy on 
the flight instructor. The cause of death was determined to be "blunt force trauma and thermal 
injury".
The FAA Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, conducted 
toxicological testing on the flight instructor. The specimens were not tested for cyanide. The 
tests were negative for ethanol and carbon monoxide. The tests were positive for lipizide in 
urine and blood, and alicylate in urine.
Glipizide is a prescription medication typically used to treat type 2 diabetes. 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Craig Hatch
Adopted Date:
04/25/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Glenn Longnion; FAA FSDO; Houston, TX
Publish Date:
04/25/2017
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92663
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
