Page 1 of 13
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
NORTH BEND, OR
Accident Number:
SEA95FA111
Date & Time:
06/01/1995, 1554 PDT 
Registration:
N6877S
Aircraft:
AERO COMMANDER 680
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
3 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
APPROXIMATELY TWO MINUTES AFTER TAKEOFF, WITNESSES SAW THE AIRPLANE 
PULL UP SHARPLY INTO A STEEP CLIMB FROM UNDERNEATH AN 800-FOOT CEILING. 
THE AIRPLANE WENT INTO AN UNCONTROLLED, NEARLY VERTICAL DIVE AND 
IMPACTED INTO A RIVER. THE PILOT DID NOT HOLD MULTI-ENGINE OR 
INSTRUMENT RATINGS. INDIVIDUALS WHO KNEW THE PILOT, INCLUDING AN 
INSTRUCTOR WHO HAD FLOWN WITH HIM, STATED THAT THEY HAD DOUBTED THE 
PILOT'S COMPETENCE BUT THAT THE PILOT HAD BEEN CONFIDENT OF HIS OWN 
FLYING ABILITY. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
THE PILOT INITIATING FLIGHT INTO WEATHER CONDITIONS BEYOND WHAT HE WAS 
CAPABLE OF HANDLING. THE PILOT'S OVERCONFIDENCE IN HIS PERSONAL ABILITY 
AND THE LOW CEILING WERE FACTORS IN THE ACCIDENT. 
Page 2 of 13SEA95FA111
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
2. (C) FLIGHT INTO ADVERSE WEATHER - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) OVERCONFIDENCE IN PERSONAL ABILITY - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - UNCONTROLLED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. LACK OF CERTIFICATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
6. TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER
Page 3 of 13SEA95FA111
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 1, 1995, approximately 1554 PDT, an Aero Commander 680, N6877S, was destroyed 
in an inflight collision with water adjacent to the North Bend, OR municipal airport.  The 
commercial pilot/co-owner, whose pilot certificate carried only an airplane single-engine land 
category and class rating, and his two passengers were fatally injured.  The flight was a local 14 
CFR 91 flight out of North Bend.  Instrument meteorological conditions existed but no flight 
plan had been filed.
The crew of a U.S. Coast Guard helicopter which had just landed at North Bend, CG6552, saw 
the airplane take off on runway 31.  The pilot-in-command of CG6552 stated that he became 
concerned about this since the 800-foot ceiling was below minimum weather requirements for 
normal visual flight rules (VFR) and he had not heard the pilot of this airplane call for or 
receive an air traffic control (ATC) clearance to operate in North Bend's Class E surface area 
airspace under either special visual flight rules (SVFR) or instrument flight rules (IFR).  He 
radioed a warning to the crew of another Coast Guard helicopter, CG6529, which was inbound 
to North Bend from the west on a SVFR clearance, to watch out for the airplane.  The pilot-in-
command of CG6552 stated that from the Coast Guard wash rack parking spot on the airport, 
he saw the airplane continue straight ahead after takeoff and enter the clouds in a wings-level 
climb.
Several members of the crew of CG6529, the airborne Coast Guard helicopter inbound to North 
Bend from the west, witnessed the water impact.  They stated that they initially spotted the 
airplane as it passed between 400 and 1300 feet off to the right of their helicopter, about 100 
feet higher than the helicopter and in a steep climb.  Some crew members stated that the 
airplane went into the clouds in this climb.  Ten to twenty seconds later, they spotted the 
airplane again, this time in a near vertical dive.  They described the airplane's flight path in the 
dive as going from directly over their helicopter, downward and outward along the helicopter's 
3-o'clock line and into the Coos River in a near vertical attitude.  CG6529 was approximately 
over the settling ponds immediately across the Coos River from, and to the west of, North Bend 
airport at the time of the initial sighting.  The co-pilot, who was flying the helicopter, stated 
that CG6529 was eastbound at approximately 100 to 110 knots and 500 feet altitude at the time 
of the event.
A weather observer at the North Bend airport also witnessed portions of the accident sequence 
including the water impact.  He stated that at approximately 1545 PDT, the pilot of N6877S 
called him on the North Bend UNICOM frequency for a radio check and then taxied N6877S to 
runway 31.  He said that he then heard the pilot of N6877S call on UNICOM that he was taking 
runway 31, and saw the airplane take off from runway 31.  A certified copy of the North Bend 
airport flight contact record was annotated "COM 6877S 1545 T/O R/W 31 (MISHAP)".  At this 
time he went off shift from weather observation duties and went out to the edge of Runway 4 to 
perform bird control and foreign object removal from the runway.  From a vantage point 
approximately 2000 feet east of the impact point, he said his attention was drawn to the 
aircraft by high-pitched engine noise.  He stated that looking up, he saw the airplane in a near 
vertical dive, impacting the water in this attitude with a slight roll rate to the right.
Another individual witnessed approximately 40 to 50 seconds of the flight immediately before 
water impact from his front yard, about 1/2 mile southeast of the impact point.  This witness 
Page 4 of 13SEA95FA111
stated that he initially saw the airplane climbing to the west, then suddenly make a steep-
banked turn of almost 360 degrees.  He reported that the turn descended back to the runway at 
which point the airplane followed a takeoff ground track.  The airplane then disappeared 
behind trees.  The witness said the airplane then reappeared in an almost vertical climb, then 
pivoted around its left wing and entered a near vertical dive.  The witness then heard the water 
impact, but did not see it since the impact point was obstructed from view by terrain.  He 
stated that the engines sounded very smooth and powerful with no sounds of missing or 
backfiring throughout the sequence, characterizing them as going "full bore" at the time of 
impact.  This witness stated that the airplane never entered the clouds.
Two individuals witnessed portions of the event from the vicinity of a lumber chip dock on the 
opposite river bank northwest of the airport.  One reported that after takeoff, the airplane 
stopped climbing and made a "flat turn" to the west over his position, then made a banked 90-
degree turn to the south.  This witness stated that the airplane then disappeared into the clouds 
in level flight and that he observed no more of the sequence.  He reported that the airplane 
made a "very loud engine noise" with an "odd 'heavy throb' sound".  The other witness made 
the following statement:
     ...I saw a twin engined [aircraft] take off from the airport      heading in a Northwesterly 
direction.  This aircraft       attracted my attention because it was extremely loud....      The plane 
disappeared into the overcast....
     In a very short time, 2-3 minutes, my attention was directed      to the Coast Guard 
[helicopter] flying in an easterly       direction, or up the Bay, and at this time I saw the plane      
come out of the overcast and it appeared to me that it was       going to collide with the chopper 
but it passed to its rear.      To me it appeared that it came within about 100 feet of the      
chopper.  At this time it seemed to have about 200 ft.      elevation.  It suddenly pulled up 
[sharply], almost vertical      and disappeared into the overcast.
     In just a very short time, possibly seconds, it plunged out       of the overcast in an almost 
vertical flight and crashed       into the Bay about 25 to 30 yards from the shore line into      
shallow water.  There was one big splash - then nothing.      Something was sticking out of the 
water, but I [couldn't]      tell what portion of the plane it was.  Prior to the crash      I saw no 
smoke or fire and I believe the landing gear was      still retracted.
     I can't say for sure how the engines were operating, if they      were on full power or not.  
There was no apparent rotation       by the plane, as if in a spin.  It was headed in a south-      
westerly direction when it crashed.
     There were buildings, etc. directly in front of the aircraft      when it pulled up into the 
overcast just prior to the       crash....
This witness supplied a sketch with his written statement indicating that the airplane turned 
left after takeoff, continuing around approximately 270 degrees to an easterly heading over the 
water.  He also indicated the path of the Coast Guard helicopter on his statement, which 
showed that as seen by him, the airplane passed behind and to the right of the helicopter on an 
approximately parallel ground track just before the accident.
The Coast Guard took a statement from a witness which read as follows:
     At approximately 1550...I witnessed a twin engine plane come      from an Easterly direction 
sloping down to approximately 100      feet from the parking lot at the BLM boat ramp on the 
Page 5 of 13SEA95FA111
North      Bend Spit.  He then pulled up into the air, made a wide loop      and came nearly 
vertical into the water of Coos Bay.  His       engines seemed to be nearly full throttle during the 
entire      time....
The Coast Guard provided a tape recording of the North Bend Coast Guard Air Station 
operations center radio traffic at the time of the accident.  On this tape, approximately two 
minutes elapsed between the radioed warning from the pilot of CG6552 that an aircraft had 
just taken off from runway 31, and a call from CG6529's crew that they had just witnessed an 
aircraft crash.  A transcript of this recording supplied by the Coast Guard showed that 
CG6552's radio warning of an aircraft taking off was broadcast between 1552 and 1553 PDT, 
and that CG6552's crew queried CG6529's crew as to whether the aircraft was on land or in the 
water at 1555 PDT.
The quality assurance section of the automated flight service station (AFSS) at McMinnville, 
OR, which controls the North Bend Class E surface area airspace, reported that they had no 
record of providing any type of service, to include weather briefing, flight plan filing, issuance 
of ATC clearance, or inflight radio contact, to N6877S.  
The airplane impacted in the Coos River, approximately 100 yards offshore from the airport 
side and abeam a point 1500 feet northeast of the approach end of North Bend runway 4.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight at 43 degrees 25.14 minutes North and 124 
degrees 15.43 minutes West.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
According to FAA records, the pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with an airplane single-
engine land category and class rating, issued in 1969.  He did not hold multi-engine or 
instrument ratings.  The pilot's FAA medical records indicated that he had approximately 1,450 
hours total pilot time.  The most recent FAA medical certificate on file for the pilot was a 
second class medical certificate issued on October 13, 1992.
Investigators recovered the front cover of the pilot's logbook from the aircraft wreckage.  This 
front cover had old temporary airman certificates, including the temporary commercial pilot 
certificate, and old medical certificates taped onto the inside portion.  The remainder of the 
pilot's logbook was not found.
Two individuals who knew the pilot personally submitted written statements which indicated 
that although they believed the pilot and his wife were very friendly and likeable people, they 
had serious doubts about the pilot's flying proficiency.  The assistant manager of the North 
Bend airport, in a statement dated June 5, 1995, said the following:
     ...[The pilot and his wife] would fly [their airplane] very      seldom....I doubt if they flew the 
aircraft more than 10      times in the last 30 months that it has been based at      North 
Bend...each flight was a "happening".  [The pilot]      aborted takeoff 3 times on one occasion 
and returned to the      ramp much to our relief.  Often they would taxi out, make a      run up 
and return to the ramp, again to our relief.  I was      shown by [the pilot's wife] the hand 
written procedures that      she would [read] to [him] during the flight, speeds, RPM,      
manifold pressures and such.  We were [always] fearful for      them on each flight.  My 
standing orders to the weather       observation crew was to watch them very closely.
     All the while [the pilot] and [his wife] were very confident      in [his] ability to fly.  On a 
couple of occasions [he] was      asked about any recent proficiency training that he had      
Page 6 of 13SEA95FA111
received, to which he answered that he had none because that      is where most of the accidents 
happen....
A certificated flight instructor who stated that he had flown with the pilot submitted an account 
of his efforts to provide the pilot with a multi-engine checkout in the Aero Commander.  This 
instructor stated that he has about 6,000 hours total flight time including 2,000 hours of 
multi-engine instructional experience in light twin-engine aircraft.  He stated that he gave 9 
instructional flights to the pilot in May 1993, after the pilot had become dissatisfied with a 
previous instructor experienced in the Aero Commander.  In his letter, he made, among others, 
the following remarks concerning the training flights and his opinions of the pilot's flying 
proficiency which resulted:
"The bulk of the training was remedial in nature, designed to improve [the pilot's] basic flying 
skills to meet FAA Practical Test Standards (PTS)."
"...his flying, navigation, and communication skills were below acceptable [practical test] 
standards.  Also, his checklist [usage]/discipline, general airmanship, and situational 
awareness were substandard."
"...we practiced slow flight/minimum controllable airspeed, steep turns, and stalls.  In all 
maneuvers, he exhibited a surprising lack of knowledge of how to properly complete the 
maneuver....My impression was that I was working with a pre-solo student, not an experienced 
pilot with 1000+ hours, and many hours of previous instruction in the AC-680...I shifted to a 
'remedial, proficiency/airmanship building' syllabus, instead of a more aggressive multi-engine 
curriculum...."
"...After our last flight together, I had a somewhat frank discussion with [the pilot] 
recommending a course of instruction to overcome his flying deficiencies.  I suggested  1) 
general flying/cross country proficiency in a single engine aircraft  2) a course of multi-engine 
instruction to earn the FAA rating in a less complex twin..., and then 3) transition training in 
the AC- 680....I don't think he took my critique seriously.  I believe [he] thought I was being 
overly critical and he thought his flying ability was OK."
"My bottom line was 'I would not sign [him] off to fly a Cessna 150 solo, let alone an Aero 
Commander.'...[He] was not competent to fly as pilot-in-command of an AC-680.  [He] needed 
a significant amount of additional instruction...because of deficiencies in airmanship, 
situational awareness, navigation, communication, etc....he would be unable to competently 
pass an FAA evaluation in accordance with the PTS...."
No evidence of additional training accomplished after May 1993 was found.  The pilot had no 
history of accidents, incidents, or enforcement actions against his certificate within the past 5 
years, according to FAA records.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The aircraft, an Aero Commander 680, was manufactured in December 1956.  It was equipped 
with two Lycoming GSO-480-B1A6 pressure- carbureted, supercharged, 6-cylinder 
horizontally opposed reciprocating engines rated at 340 b.h.p. each, and 3-bladed Hartzell full-
feathering, constant-speed propellers geared down at a ratio of 120:77.  According to 
information on file with Twin Commander Aircraft Corporation, it had been owned by the pilot 
and his wife since May 1992.  
The airplane's last annual inspection was on March 18, 1995, according to the aircraft logbook, 
Page 7 of 13SEA95FA111
which was recovered from the wreckage.  An FAA query on the record of the mechanic who 
signed off this inspection revealed that the mechanic's FAA inspection authorization (IA) had 
expired 2 years previously.  Investigators were unable to contact this mechanic.  The previous 
annual inspection occurred on August 9, 1993.  The aircraft logbook dated back to 1967 and 
indicated that the airframe total time was 4,784.1 hours at the March 18, 1995 annual 
inspection. 
Along with the aircraft logbook, investigators recovered 2 pages of a left engine logbook, 
consisting of one page dated August 28, 1974 and one page annotated "left prop log" containing 
entries from December 6, 1988 to January 15, 1995; and a complete right engine logbook 
dating back to August 28, 1974, from the wreckage. The last entry in the partial left engine 
logbook was "NOTE:  See new left engine log book [dated] 3/18/95."  This logbook was not 
recovered.  All three logbooks recovered contained entries of maintenance work signed by the 
pilot/owner, annotated "A & P 2032332."  The FAA coordinator to the investigation performed 
an FAA record query of this certificate number.  This query revealed that the certificate number 
used by the pilot/owner to sign off the aircraft and engine logbook entries corresponded to a 
pilot certificate held by another individual.  The FAA had no record that the pilot/owner was 
certified as an A & P mechanic.
According to the response logs of the North Bend Fire Department, the airplane experienced a 
left engine failure at approximately 1534 PDT on June 1, 1994, one year before the accident.  
The North Bend deputy fire chief, who saw the airplane after landing during this incident, 
reported that the engine failure involved a complete separation of one cylinder, exposing a 
piston, as well as structural damage to the left wing.  Several people at the airport, including 
the assistant airport manager in his written statement, expressed their belief that the pilot had 
repaired the engine damage himself.  A fixed base operator (FBO) at Bandon, OR provided a 
receipt for aircraft hardware sales dated November 21, 1994, and a work order for engine 
cylinder, valve and valve seat service to the owner dated October 21, 1994. The FBO stated in a 
telephone conversation with the investigator that the pilot/owner had rented hangar space 
from him for approximately one month from September to October 1994, that the owner had 
had his engine off of his airplane and had been working on it, and that the owner had bought 
parts from somewhere else (the FBO stated he did not know which company.)  None of the 
recovered logbooks contained any documentation of major repairs to the airframe or engines 
following the reported engine failure.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
North Bend airport employs a staff of National Weather Service qualified weather observers.  It 
records and transmits weather observations at regular intervals and maintains a weather log.  
The assistant airport manager submitted a certified copy of the airport weather log for the day 
of the accident.  The 1553 PDT weather observation was:  ceiling 800 feet overcast, visibility 10 
miles, temperature 55 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 49 degrees Fahrenheit, wind from 330 
degrees magnetic at 18 knots, altimeter setting 29.93 inches Hg.
Pilots can obtain weather information either through weather observers on North Bend's 
UNICOM frequency, or via radio or telephone from an AWOS-3 Automated Weather 
Observation System at the airport.  Additionally, a radio frequency is available at North Bend 
for communication with McMinnville AFSS.
AERODROME AND GROUND FACILITIES
Page 8 of 13SEA95FA111
According to the Klamath Falls sectional aeronautical chart in effect from April 27 to October 
12, 1995, North Bend airport is surrounded by Class E airspace extending from the surface to, 
but not including, 18,000 feet above mean sea level for a radius of 5 statute miles around North 
Bend airport, with further extensions to the southwest, east, and northeast.  Control of this 
airspace area is exercised by McMinnville AFSS.
WRECKAGE
The airplane impacted water approximately 6 to 7 feet deep during an ebb tide.  The Coast 
Guard photographed the wreckage from a helicopter shortly after the accident.  A fuel slick on 
the water coming from the airplane and spreading downstream (southwest) was evident in 
these photographs.
The airplane wreckage was examined at the accident site on June 2, 1995.  The wreckage was 
located on a sandbar in a tidal area and was only accessible for on-site examination for 
approximately one hour at morning low tide.  Wreckage was discovered in four major sections 
consisting of main wreckage, nacelle section, and two wing sections.  All major structural 
components, both engines and all six propeller blades were located at the site.  Several smaller 
and lighter pieces had been washed downstream with an ebb tide including the wing sections 
which were approximately 100 feet southwest of the main wreckage.  There was no baggage 
anywhere in the wreckage.
The main wreckage consisted of the empennage along with a section of wing root and engine 
nacelle.  A large pool of water, approximately 30 feet long, 6 feet wide and 2 feet deep, with its 
long axis oriented approximately east-west, was in the sand about 50 feet northwest of the 
main wreckage.  No aircraft parts were seen in this pool. The large pool, two nacelle/main 
landing gear sections, both engines, and the main wreckage were all in a line running 
approximately northwest to southeast.  A smaller pool, approximately 6 feet in diameter and 6 
inches deep, was about 10 feet southwest of the main wreckage.  
Both engines had separated from their mounts.  Each engine had a  crack running completely 
around the girth of the crankcase immediately forward of the lifting eye.  One engine, marked 
Engine A for identification, was adjacent to the main wreckage.  This engine's gearbox was 
separated.  Its supercharger remained attached.  The other engine, marked Engine B for 
identification, was located on the sandbar about 20 feet north of the main wreckage.  This 
engine's supercharger was separated and adjacent to the engine but the gearbox, propeller hub, 
and one propeller blade (marked Blade 1 for identification) remained attached.  Two T. W. 
Smith overhaul stickers were observed on Engine B.  Blade 1 was bent in an "S" bend in its 
outer half and torsionally twisted. 
Two propeller blades (marked Blades 3 and 4 for identification) attached to a propeller hub 
and gearbox were located underneath the nacelle section, between Engine B and the main 
wreckage.  Blade 3 was bent back 60 degrees at a point 1 foot out from the blade shank.  The 
leading edge tip of Blade 3 was curled forward. Just inboard of this tip curl, Blade 3's leading 
edge had a 4- inch-long shiny flat spot.  Blade 4 was torsionally twisted about 60 degrees and 
had chordwise scratching on its rear surface.  
Three propeller blades (marked Blades 2, 5, and 6 for identification) were lying loose, all within 
50 feet of the main wreckage.   Blade 2 was bent back 25 degrees at a point one-third of the way 
out from its shank and was torsionally twisted 90 degrees.  The blade clamp had separated 
from Blade 2; the clamp was in two separate halves.  Blade 5 was curled back about 60 degrees 
Page 9 of 13SEA95FA111
about 1 foot from the blade tip and was torsionally twisted.  Blade 6 was bent back 14 degrees 
at mid-length.  It was torsionally twisted and exhibited leading edge gouging along the outer 
two-thirds of the blade.  The blade clamps on Blades 5 and 6 remained attached to their blades.    
A section of instrument panel and several loose instruments were located in the vicinity of the 
left wing section.  These included tachometers, cylinder head temperature gauges, fuel quantity 
gauges, magnetic compass, directional gyro, gear and flap position indicators, and two 
altimeters including one placarded "NO IFR".  Sections of both control yokes and all four 
rudder pedals were also located southwest of the main wreckage.  The yoke sections and pedals 
were all lying loose on the sandbar individually.
There was no evidence of fire in any of the wreckage.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed by Dr. Gerald Bassett, Coos County Medical Examiner, at the Bay 
Area Hospital, Coos Bay, OR, on June 16, 1995.
Toxicology tests on the pilot performed by the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology under 
contract to the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute revealed no evidence of pilot impairment or 
incapacitation.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
CG6529 crewmembers stated that after witnessing the accident, the pilot-in-command of 
CG6529 immediately took the controls of the helicopter, maneuvered it into position over the 
accident site, and deployed a rescue swimmer to look for survivors.  CG6529 then returned to 
shore, took aboard another rescue swimmer, and deployed him to the site.  Boats from the City 
of North Bend arrived on scene shortly thereafter.  Rescuers found all aircraft occupants dead 
at the scene.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The aircraft wreckage was examined in further detail at Specialty Aircraft, Inc., Redmond, OR, 
on June 16, 1995.  Representatives from the NTSB, FAA and Twin Commander Aircraft 
Corporation participated in this examination.  During this examination, investigators 
established control cable continuity from the elevators and rudder to a point approximately 10 
feet forward of the aft end of the fuselage, where the control cables had been cut to enable 
recovery of the empennage from the river.  All flight control surfaces and flaps were located.  
Additional instruments and controls were located including the engine controls, manifold 
pressure gauges, and instrument panel clock.  A section of the right side of the cabin was found 
with an accordion crush on its forward edge.  The angle between the fuselage stripe on this 
section and the accordion crush was measured at 59 degrees.
A teardown of the engines was conducted under the supervision of the NTSB investigator-in-
charge at the Lycoming plant in Williamsport, PA between August 9 and August 14, 1995.  
Neither engine had a data plate; the gearbox and gearbox cover were missing from Engine A 
and the data plate was missing from Engine B's gearbox cover.  Engine A had serial number L-
723-33A stamped into its case.  This did not match the serial numbers of either engine in the 
recovered logbooks (L-2014-33 for the left engine and L-1210-33 for the right engine.)  A check 
of Lycoming's manufacture records indicated that L-723-33A was manufactured in 1956 as an 
O-480-1, the military version of the civilian model GSO-480-B1A6.  This engine had been 
returned to Lycoming in 1959, remanufactured, and shipped back to the U.S. military.  It had 
Page 10 of 13SEA95FA111
not been returned to Lycoming since the 1959 remanufacture.  Engine B had serial number L-
2222-33 stamped into the case.  This number matched the number on a T.W. Smith overhaul 
warranty certificate, dated July 31, 1974, filed loose inside the right engine logbook.  The T.W. 
Smith overhaul stickers on Engine B's case also matched a T.W. Smith overhaul sticker on the 
cover of the right engine logbook.  The right engine logbook indicated that the right engine had 
been installed on the aircraft on August 28, 1974, and that the right engine had 965.1 hours 
since major overhaul at the March 18, 1995 annual inspection.  Both engines exhibited external 
salt-water corrosion and contained water and sand.
Disassembly of Engine B revealed that it was one tooth (7.5 degrees) out of time.  The engine 
oil sump was broken off.  The crankshaft rotated freely after the cylinders and pistons were 
removed.  No internal engine components were broken, and all bearings were intact.  There 
was a counterweight rotational score mark inside the case on the forward side of cylinders 
number 3 and 4.  The corresponding crankshaft counterweight was undamaged. Both 
magnetos produced a spark on all 6 cylinders when tested.  The oil pump was internally intact 
and contained oil.  No metal was noted in the oil system.  The vacuum pump contained water 
and silt internally but no internal component damage.  The propeller gearbox broke free and 
turned freely approximately 1.6 turns on the engine side per turn of the propeller shaft after 
cleaning.  The supercharger was packed with sand and turned freely after being cleaned out.  
The supercharger drive shaft was fractured on a plane 90 degrees to the shaft axis at the 
approximate point of supercharger separation.  The supercharger drive shaft spline section was 
removed and sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, DC for further 
examination of the fracture surface.  The Materials Laboratory reported that this fracture was a 
torsional overstress fracture.
Disassembly of Engine A revealed that the crankshaft was bent approximately 0.031 inches at 
the forward end, where the propeller gearbox had separated from the engine.  The crankshaft 
would not rotate until all cylinders and pistons and the left half of the crankcase were removed.  
No internal engine components were broken, and all bearings were intact.  Both magnetos 
produced a spark on all 6 cylinders when tested.  The engine oil sump contained sand, water, 
and oil.  The oil pump was internally intact and contained oil.  There was no oil filter installed 
in the oil system.  The vacuum pump contained water and silt and was corroded internally but 
had no internal component damage.  The generator and propeller governor both broke free and 
rotated.  The propeller shaft was bent approximately 2.5 degrees and the shaft at the aft end of 
the propeller gearbox was bent about 5 degrees in the same direction as the propeller shaft.  
The propeller gearbox would not rotate.  The accessory gear train rotated normally when the 
accessory gearbox cover was removed.
Both carburetors had separated from their engines.  One carburetor, serial number 863328, 
had its throttle plate in the wide open position and had one fuel nozzle blocked with sand.  The 
other carburetor, serial number 862574, matched the number on a carburetor overhaul tag, 
dated July 16, 1987, which was annotated "Rt Engine" and filed loose inside the right engine 
logbook, as well as a right engine logbook entry dated December 6, 1988 stating that carburetor 
serial number 862574 had been installed on the right engine.  The throttle plate on this 
carburetor was 3/16" from the wide open stop and all four fuel nozzles were unobstructed.  
Neither carburetor throat contained any obstructions.  The throttle linkages on both 
carburetors were corroded and would not move.
In its report of the engine teardown, Textron Lycoming summarized its findings as follows:
Page 11 of 13SEA95FA111
     The engine disassembly of engine serial number L-2222-33 did      not reveal any pre-crash 
discrepancies or anomalies that       would indicate this engine was not capable of running and       
producing power prior to the accident.  However, the amount      of power produced at a given 
manifold pressure would have      been [affected] by the internal engine timing being one       
tooth out.
     The engine disassembly of engine serial number L-723-33A did      not reveal any pre-crash 
discrepancies or anomalies that      would indicate this engine was not capable of running and      
producing power prior to the accident.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The aircraft wreckage was released to Mr. Joseph Casella, personal representative of the 
owner's estate, on August 14, 1995.  At the time of release, the aircraft wreckage was in storage 
at Specialty Aircraft, Inc., Redmond, OR.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
67, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Expired
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/13/1992
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1450 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
AERO COMMANDER
Registration:
N6877S
Model/Series:
680 680
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
680-462-132
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/18/1995, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
7000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4785 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
GSO-480-B1A6
Registered Owner:
CASELLA, FRANK AND ANGIE
Rated Power:
340 hp
Operator:
CASELLA, FRANK AND ANGIE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 12 of 13SEA95FA111
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OTH, 14 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
130°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 800 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
18 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
330°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (OTH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1552 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
NORTH BEND MUNICIPAL (OTH)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
14 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
GREGG        NESEMEIER
Adopted Date:
01/29/1996
Additional Participating Persons:
DAVID D JOURDAN; HILLSBORO, OR
ROGER J ADERMAN; ARLINGTON, WA
GREGORY A ERIKSON; WAYNE, IL
JAMES F BROWN; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 13 of 13SEA95FA111
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
