National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Greenville, SC
Accident Number: ATL02LA029
Date & Time: 01/02/2002, 2120 EST
Registration: N262FE
Aircraft: Boeing 727-200
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 121: Air Carrier - Non-scheduled
 Analysis According to the Captain, during the first phase of pushback, everything appeared normal.
The first and second officers were completing the engine start check and the airplane was being pushed back from the gate when the airplane came to a stop.
The tug operator stated that during pushback, the airplane nose wheel hit a patch of ice.
As he applies brakes to stop the tug,  the airplane began to slide.
Unable to stop the movement, the tug driver jumped from the tug to avoid getting caught between the tug and airplane.
The tug came to rest lodged under the fuselage of the airplane creating a 10-inch by 14-inch hole in the underside of the fuselage breaking two stringers.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The tug driver's failure to maintain control of the airplane during pushback resulting in the tug colliding with the airplane.
A factor was ice on the ramp.
Findings Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: TAXI - PUSHBACK/TOW Findings 1.
(C) OBJECT - VEHICLE 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - ICY 3.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - DRIVER OF VEHICLE Factual Information On January 2, 2002, at 2120 eastern standard time, a Boeing 727-200, N262FE, owned and operated by Federal Express, collided with an airport tug during pushback for takeoff at the Greenville-Spartanburg Airport in Greenville, South Carolina.
The domestic cargo flight was operated under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 121 with an IFR flight plan.
Instrument weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airline transport pilot and first and second officers were not injured nor was the tug driver, however the airplane received substantial damage.
According to the Captain, during the first phase of pushback, everything appeared normal.
The first and second officers were completing the engine start check and the airplane was being pushed back from the gate when the airplane came to a stop.
The tug operator stated that during pushback, the airplane nose wheel hit a patch of ice.
As he applied brakes to stop the tug, the airplane began to slide.
Unable to stop the movement, the tug driver jumped from the tug to avoid getting caught between the tug and airplane.
The tug came to rest lodged under the fuselage of the airplane creating a 10-inch by 14-inch hole in the underside of the fuselage.
The examination of the airframe revealed that two stringers on the bottom side were damaged.
.
Witnesses stated that after deicing the airplane, the tug operator began to pushback the airplane.
The parking area was clear of ice but the ramp was slick.
The tug operator parked the airplane on the taxi line at a 90-degree angle from the tug and engaged the brakes.
According to the operator, "due to the ice on the ramp, the momentum of the tug caused the tug to slide into the airplane."
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport Age: 48, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
