National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Butte, MT
Accident Number: SEA02TA022
Date & Time: 01/03/2002, 1450 MST
Registration: N8393F
Aircraft: Hughes 369D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Public Aircraft
 Analysis While returning from a flight at about 600-800 feet above ground level, the engine lost power.
The pilot autorotated the helicopter to a median between a highway.
During the event, the tailboom was severed.
Post accident inspection of the engine and subsequent engine test cell run did not find evidence of a mechanical failure or malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
The commercial pilot-in-command executed an autorotation to a forced landing on the median of Interstate Highway 90 (I-90) about 5 miles west of Butte.
The pilot and one mission crewmember (a wildlife biologist)  were not injured, but the helicopter was substantially damaged when its tail boom separated during the forced landing.
Instrument meteorological conditions (ceiling 1,200 feet overcast, visibility 3/4 statute mile in light snow and mist) were reported at Butte at 1453.
A company flight plan was in effect for the flight.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that the wildlife survey flight lasted about 1 hour and 30 minutes.
The flight was returning to Butte, when the engine "failed."
The pilot autorotated the helicopter to the medium of the interstate in a tail low attitude.
The helicopter spun around 180 degrees after landing which during the event, the tail boom was severed.
The pilot reported that there were no unusual indications that preceded the engine out; the engine anti- ice was on for the entire flight; the fuel ice filter was installed and operational; the intake filter "clogged" warning light was operational and the cabin heat was on medium setting.
The pilot also stated that when the engine failed, he recalled that the engine out light and the auto re- ignition light illuminated.
The helicopter was in cruise flight at about 100 knots and about 600 to 800 feet above ground level.
The pilot reported at the time, that the visibility was one-and-a-half to two miles visibility with light snow falling.
Investigators from the FAA, Boeing Helicopters (current holder of the Hughes 369D type certificate), Rolls-Royce USA (formerly Allison Engines), and the Montana State Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks examined the helicopter at the facilities of the Montana State Department of Fish, Wildlife, and Parks on January 8, 2002.
These investigators determined that an adequate quantity of fuel was aboard the helicopter at the time of the accident.
The engine was transported to Rolls-Royce, Indianapolis, Indiana, for examination and test run.
On February 12, 2002, in the presence of a Federal Aviation Administration Inspector.
The inspector reported that after the engine was removed from the crate, it was visually examined for damage.
The inspector reported no discrepancies or damage was evident.
The engine was then prepared for a test cell run.
The engine was then started and warmed up.
After warm-up, the engine was put through a normal acceptance test run and all parameters were checked and recorded.
The inspector reported that, "At the high and mid cruise horsepower (HP) settings, the engine was slightly below the HP that Rolls-Royce would accept for a NEW engine."
No other discrepancies were noted.
(See attached Rolls-Royce engine report).
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land; Single-engine Sea Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): Helicopter Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane; Helicopter Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 3500 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Turbo Shaft Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Allison ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: 250-C20B Registered Owner: Montana State Dept.
of Fish Wildlife & Parks Rated Power: 420 hp Operator: Montana State Dept.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
