National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lake Leelanau, MI
Accident Number: CHI02LA057
Date & Time: 01/03/2002, 1600 EST
Registration: N302AC
Aircraft: Aeronca 11AC
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane flipped over as its ski equipped landing gear dug into a snow covered runway during touchdown.
The pilot reported that there were no mechanical problems with the airplane and that the accident could have been prevented by being more cautious when landing on unfrozen earth and wet snow.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The improper planning/decision in runway selection.
The soft runway condition and wet snow were contributing factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - SNOW 2.
(C) PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot reported no injuries.
The local flight originated from Krieger's Farm Strip at 1430.
The pilot reported that the ski equipped airplane flipped over when its right ski dug into the dirt upon touchdown on the 8-inch soft snow covered runway.
He added that there were no mechanical problems with the airplane.
The pilot reported that the accident could have been prevented by "[being] more cautious when on skis and earth is not frozen and snow is not hard because of warm temperatures."
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 64, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
