Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Baker, CA
Accident Number:
WPR09LA177
Date & Time:
04/02/2009, 1630 PDT 
Registration:
N222G
Aircraft:
CESSNA 337G
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot was in cruise flight when both engines began to sputter and lose power. He attempted 
a restart of each engine but was unsuccessful. He estimated that the wind was out of the 
southeast at 40 knots and he wanted to turn into the wind for the landing, but could only get to 
a gravel road, which had a crosswind. He lowered the landing gear at the last instant in an 
attempt to cushion the landing, and kept the left wing low into the wind. The left wing 
contacted a gravel berm along the left side of the road, and the airplane spun around on the 
road. The landing gear fractured and separated and the airplane came to rest with the right 
wing on the ground. Recovery personnel drained 27 gallons of fuel from the left tank and 1.5 
gallons from the right tank; the fuel selector valves were positioned for normal cruise flight. 
During a followup examination of the airplane no anomalies were noted. Fuel supplies were 
plumbed into the aircraft fuel system at both the left and right wing fuel tanks and both 
engines were started and run at various power settings. The investigation could not determine 
the reason for the power loss.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings
Environmental issues
Rough terrain - Contributed to outcome
Crosswind - Not specified
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5WPR09LA177
Factual Information
On April 2, 2009, about 1630 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 337G, N222G, encountered 
uneven terrain during a forced landing near Baker, California.  The pilot/owner was operating 
the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.  The 
certificated airline transport pilot and one passenger sustained minor injuries; the airplane 
sustained substantial damage to the airframe and wings.  The cross-country personal flight 
departed Corona, California, at 1545, with a planned destination of Henderson, Nevada.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot reported that he was in cruise flight when both engines began to sputter and lose 
power. He attempted a restart, but was unsuccessful. He stated that the airplane was losing 
altitude rapidly. He headed toward Interstate 15 thinking that he would be found quicker. He 
estimated that the wind was out of the southeast at 40 knots. He wanted to turn into the wind 
for the landing, but could only get to a gravel road, which had a crosswind. He lowered the 
landing gear at the last instant in an attempt to cushion the landing, and kept the left wing low 
into the wind. The left wing contacted a gravel berm along the left side of the road, and the 
airplane spun around on the road. The landing gear fractured and separated; the airplane came 
to rest with the right wing on the ground.
Recovery personnel reported that they drained 27 gallons of fuel from the left tank, and 1.5 
gallons from the right tank.
The Safety Board investigator-in-charge (IIC) examined the airplane and engines.
The IIC removed the top spark plugs from the front engine. All spark plugs were clean and oval 
shaped with no mechanical deformation.  The spark plug electrodes were gray in color, which 
corresponded to normal operation according to the Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug AV-27 
Chart.
The IIC manually rotated the crankshaft with the propeller.  The crankshaft rotated freely, and 
the valves moved approximately the same amount of lift in firing order.  The gears in the 
accessory case turned freely, and he obtained thumb compression on all cylinders in firing 
order. He connected the spark plugs to the respective ignition harness leads, rotated the 
propeller, and produced spark at all plug electrodes.
The IIC removed the top spark plugs from the rear engine. All spark plugs were clean and oval 
shaped with no mechanical deformation.  The spark plug electrodes were gray, which 
corresponded to normal operation according to the Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug AV-27 
Chart.
The IIC manually rotated the crankshaft with the propeller.  The crankshaft rotated freely, and 
the valves moved approximately the same amount of lift in firing order.  The gears in the 
accessory case turned freely, and he obtained thumb compression on all cylinders in firing 
order. He connected the spark plugs to the respective ignition harness leads, rotated the 
propeller, and produced spark at all plug electrodes.
Recovery personnel plumbed a fuel supply to the left wing inlet line, and installed a propeller 
that was not certified for this airplane. The front engine was started without difficulty; there 
were no fuel flow indications due to impact damage. After the engine temperature stabilized, 
they applied full throttle and obtained 26 inches of manifold pressure and a maximum of 1,400 
Page 3 of 5WPR09LA177
engine revolutions per minute (rpm). Initially black smoke came from the exhaust, but then it 
cleared. Movement of the mixture control had no effect until the last inch of travel toward the 
idle cutoff position. The engine idled smoothly at 700 rpm, and was shut off smoothly with the 
mixture control.
Recovery personnel plumbed a fuel supply to the right wing inlet line. The rear engine was 
started without difficulty; there were no fuel flow indications due to impact damage. After the 
engine temperature stabilized, they applied full throttle and the manifold pressure went to the 
top of the green arc. The engine rpm increased and was climbing through 2,500 rpm. They did 
not go higher as the rear propeller was deformed, and the engine started to vibrate. They set 
the rpm at 1,800 and completed a magneto check; the rpm dropped 100 rpm on the left 
magneto and 50 rpm on the right magneto. Aft movement of the mixture control smoothed out 
engine operation. The engine idled smoothly at 750 rpm, and was shut off smoothly by the 
mixture control with a 50-rpm rise.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Commercial
Age:
71, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/17/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
03/17/2009
Flight Time:
19000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3000 hours (Total, this make and model), 15000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5WPR09LA177
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N222G
Model/Series:
337G 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
33701783
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/17/2008, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4630 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
30 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1698 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Teledyne Continental 
Motors
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-G
Registered Owner:
Roger L Levander
Rated Power:
210 hp
Operator:
Roger L Levander
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KDAG, 1927 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
40 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1651 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
220°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
28 knots / 36 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27°C / -7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Corona, CA (AJO)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Henderson, NV (HND)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
1545 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
35.250000, -116.083333 (est)
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Howard D Plagens
Adopted Date:
04/22/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Ron Allen; FAA Riverside FSDO; Riverside, CA
Publish Date:
04/22/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
