Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Key West, FL
Accident Number:
ERA15LA090
Date & Time:
01/03/2015, 1015 EST 
Registration:
N2534X
Aircraft:
CESSNA P206
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
4 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
The pilot reported that the airplane was about 300 ft above the ground and on final approach 
when the engine "quit suddenly with no surging or other warning signs." He selected the 
auxiliary fuel pump to the high position and switched fuel tanks. The pilot stated that the 
engine "came back to life momentarily and then quit again." The airplane was unable to reach 
the runway, and the pilot made a forced landing in a lagoon about 1/4 mile short of the runway, 
during which the right wing sustained structural damage. 
Examination of the fuel system revealed that the right fuel tank was full and that the left fuel 
tank had 15 gallons of fuel remaining. Evidence of fuel was also noted in the lines from the fuel 
tanks to the fuel manifold valve. Internal engine continuity was confirmed, and compression 
and suction were observed on all of the cylinders. The spark plug electrodes were normal in 
appearance. The engine-driven fuel pump and magnetos were tested, and no evidence of a 
preexisting malfunction was found. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be 
determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined during postaccident 
examinations and testing.
Page 2 of 6ERA15LA090
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6ERA15LA090
Factual Information
On January 3, 2015, about 1015 eastern standard time (EST), a Cessna P206, N2534X, was 
force landed in a lagoon following a total loss of engine power during an approach to Key West 
International Airport (EYW), Key West, Florida. The airline transport pilot and three 
passengers received minor injuries and two passengers were not injured. The airplane was 
substantially damaged. The airplane was operated by Exec Air Inc. under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Day, visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no 
flight plan was filed. The flight originated at Naples, Florida (APF) about 0920.
The pilot reported the following. About 300 feet above the ground, on final approach to runway 
9, the engine "quit suddenly with no surging or other warning signs." He selected the auxiliary 
fuel pump to the high position and switched fuel tanks. The engine "came back to life 
momentarily and then quit again." Unable to make the runway, the airplane landed short in a 
lagoon, about one quarter mile from the runway. The airplane came to rest in about 3 feet of 
salt water. The pilot reported that he departed APF with about 78 gallons of fuel on board. 
An inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration responded to the accident site and 
examined the wreckage. The right wing exhibited structural damage from impact forces. The 
fuel selector was in the "off" position; however, he reported that the selector handle was moved 
to off from the "right tank" position by recovery personnel. The wing tanks were also de-fueled 
prior to his arrival. About 15 gallons of fuel were recovered from the left tank and about 40 
gallons of fuel were recovered from the right tank. The nose gear was crushed upward, into the 
underside of the engine. There was no fuel or oil observed on the exterior surfaces of the 
airplane. A fueling record was recovered that indicated 42.2 gallons of fuel was purchased at 
APF prior to the flight.
Fuel was observed in the lines between the electric boost pump and the engine-driven fuel 
pump, in the line from the engine-driven pump to the fuel metering valve, and there was fuel in 
the line entering the fuel manifold valve and inside the valve. The engine-driven fuel pump 
appeared normal and the drive shaft was intact. The top six spark plugs were removed and 
were normal in appearance. The engine was turned by hand; internal continuity was 
established and compression and suction was confirmed an all six cylinders. The magnetos 
were tuned by hand; the impulse couplings appeared to operate normally. No spark was 
observed on the ignition leads when the magnetos were turned. The magnetos and ignition 
harnesses were retained by the FAA inspector for additional examination and testing.
On April 9, 2015, the magnetos, ignition harnesses, and engine driven fuel pump were 
examined at the Continental Motors facility at Mobile, Alabama under the direction of the 
NTSB. 
The fuel pump (part # 638154-1; serial # 1752) did not exhibit external damage. The spline on 
the fuel pump was intact and the unit rotated when actuated by hand. The fuel pump was 
installed on a test stand and ran at rpms between 700 and 3,200 for several minutes. The unit 
functioned as designed and the recorded pressure was high.
Page 4 of 6ERA15LA090
The left magneto (Slick model # 6210; serial # 90080047) did not exhibit external damage. 
The left magneto was installed on a test bench and ran at different rpms for several minutes. A 
blue spark was observed on each lead at varying rpms. The right magneto (Slick model # 6210; 
serial #91040206) did not exhibit external damage. The right magneto was installed on a test 
bench and ran at different rpms for several minutes. A blue spark was observed on each lead at 
varying rpms.
Two passengers reported to an FAA inspector that the airplane was "chartered" by a third 
passenger for the round trip flight to EYW. A credit card receipt for $1,180.80 was provided to 
investigators, on the third passenger's credit card and charged by the operator, Exec Air. Exec 
Air holds an FAA Airline Certificate for On Demand Airplane operations. The certificate only 
has 1 approved aircraft, a Cessna 182. The Cessna 206 used in the accident flight is not 
approved on the certificate. The owner of Exec Air reported after the accident that the charge to 
the passenger's credit card was for anticipated expenses incurred during the personal flight. 
The FAA is pursuing certificate action against the operator and pilot for conducting an 
unauthorized charter flight. At the time of this writing, that action was still pending.
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern final
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
47
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
04/26/2014
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/30/2014
Flight Time:
8540 hours (Total, all aircraft), 24 hours (Total, this make and model), 8281 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 171 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 32 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA15LA090
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N2534X
Model/Series:
P206 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1964
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
P206-0034
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/15/2014, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3296 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
28 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4427 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
C91A installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO 520 SERIES
Registered Owner:
TWO AERO SEVEN INC
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
Exec Air Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Execair
Operator Designator Code:
E69A
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
EYW, 3 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
270째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
120째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30.22 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
27째C / 22째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Naples, FL (APF)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Key West, FL (EYW)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
0920 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Key West Intl (EYW)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
3 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
09
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4801 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Full Stop
Page 6 of 6ERA15LA090
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
3 Minor, 2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 Minor, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
24.556111, -81.771944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Ralph E Hicks
Adopted Date:
10/19/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Don Casto; FAA/FSDO 19; Miramar, FL
John Kent; Continental Motors Inc.; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
10/24/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=90569
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
