The pilot turned the airplane onto the final approach leg of the traffic pattern and shortly 
thereafter the engine experienced a total loss of power. After unsuccessfully attempting to 
restart the engine, the pilot elected to perform a forced landing to a field near the airport. 
During the forced landing, the airplane impacted the ground, collapsing the main landing gear; 
the wingtips contacted the ground and the nose and fuselage incurred substantial damage. A 
postaccident examination revealed that there was half a gallon of fuel in the right tank, and no 
fuel was present in the left tank. There was no evidence of additional fuel at accident site. 
During an engine run test, the engine started on the initial attempt and operated up to full 
power. The examination disclosed no evidence of a mechanical malfunction.
The pilot™s improper fuel management, which resulted in a loss of engine power due to fuel 
exhaustion.
On June 1, 2010, at about 1932 eastern daylight time, a Cessna 172H, N1435F, owned by F and 
J Aviation Corporation and operated by a private individual, incurred substantial damaged 
during a forced landing into a field in Dania Beach, Florida, following a loss of engine power 
while on final approach for runway 9 right at the Ft. Lauderdale/Hollywood International 
Airport (FLL). The private pilot and passenger sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, personal flight.
 
The responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector stated that the pilot and 
passenger said they had started their cross country flight from New Orleans at about 0920 that 
morning. They stopped in Panama City, Florida and at the Williston Municipal Airport (X60), 
Williston, Florida, where the airplane was fueled prior to the flight to FLL. They departed X60 
at 1608. The route of flight from X60 was south along the west coast of Florida until they 
reached the Naples, Florida area before turning east toward FLL. The pilot stated that the 
airplane experienced a total loss of engine power when the airplane was about ¾ of a mile 
from the approach end of runway 9 right at FLL. After an unsuccessful attempt to restart the 
engine, the pilot made a 360 degree turn and elected to land in a field near the airport. A 
witness located within the FLL property stated that ﬁthe aircraft seemed to have lost speed but 
the approach altitude seemed appropriateﬂ for landing before the crash. He observed the 
airplane in a nose up attitude in a right turn before it disappeared behind a line of trees. 
The airplane came to rest upright with substantial damage to its fuselage, windshield, and nose 
section. The wingtips were bent upward and the nose gear collapsed and separated from the 
airplane. The main landing gear was bent aft and the lower section of the engine cowling was 
crushed. The engine™s inlet airbox, carburetor, exhaust pipe and muffler were damaged on 
impact.
A wreckage examination was conducted by the FAA. Both wing tanks were intact and fuel caps 
secured. The fuel selector lever was found in the both tank position. One half gallon of aviation 
fuel was drained from the right wing tank and no fuel was found in the left wing tank.  There 
was no evidence of fuel leakage from the airplane in flight or at the accident site after the 
accident. The Type Certificate Data Sheet (TCDS) for the accident model Cessna 172 states that 
the airplane holds 39 gallons of fuel, with 36 gallons usable. 
A post accident engine run was conducted with National Transportation Safety Board and FAA 
oversight. The engine started on the initial attempt and operated up to full power with no 
evidence of failure or malfunction.
