The pilot/builder was in the process of conducting the experimental airplane's 40-hour Phase 1 
test flights. He departed his home airport and landed at an airport about 30 miles away 
without incident. Shortly after takeoff, the engine experienced a momentary sudden reduction 
in rpm. The pilot elected to return to his home airport and while en route the engine 
experienced additional sudden and intermittent power reductions. The pilot was able to restore 
power either by applying full throttle or the application of carburetor heat. With the airplane 
approximately 2.5 miles from his home airport, the engine rpm decreased again and the pilot 
applied carburetor heat without any affect. The engine ceased producing power completely and 
the pilot elected to attempt to lose altitude and perform a forced landing to the runway. The 
pilot overshot the runway and the airplane touched down in the grass past the runway surface 
and nosed over. A postaccident examination of the airplane and engine did not reveal any 
mechanical malfunctions that would have resulted in a loss of engine power. Removal of 
several of the engine's spark plugs revealed that they were dark in coloration, consistent with a 
rich mixture. A weather observation taken at the airport, about the time of the accident 
included, wind from 210 degrees at 10 knots, gusting to 19 knots, a temperature 30 degrees 
Celsius (C), and a dew point of 20 degrees C. Review of a carburetor icing envelope chart 
revealed that the reported temperature and dew point at the time of the accident was within 
the "serious icing" at glide power area of the chart.
The pilot's failure to obtain the proper touchdown point during a forced landing in gusting 
wind. Contributing to the accident was a total loss of engine power, likely due to carburetor ice.
On June 1, 2010, about 1255 eastern daylight time, an experimental, amateur-built Vans RV-
9A, N858JK, was substantially damaged during a forced landing, after experiencing a loss of 
engine power while on approach to the Hanover County Municipal Airport (OFP), Ashland, 
Virginia. The certificated private pilot sustained minor injuries. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the personal flight conducted under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The pilot/builder reported that he was in the process of conducting the airplane's 40-hour 
Phase 1 test flights. He departed OFP and landed at the Tappahannock-Essex County Airport 
(XSA), Tappahannock, Virginia, without incident. Shortly after takeoff from XSA, the airplane 
experienced a momentary sudden reduction in rpm, and the pilot elected to fly to OFP. While 
en route, the engine experienced additional sudden intermittent power reductions from 2,350 
to 2,100 rpm. The pilot was able to restore power either by applying full throttle or the 
application of carburetor heat. The airplane was at an altitude of 1,300 feet, approximately 2.5 
miles south of OFP, when the engine rpm decreased again. The pilot applied carburetor heat 
without any affect, and the engine subsequently ceased producing power completely. The pilot 
attempted to lose altitude and perform a forced landing on runway 34, a 5,402-foot-long, 100-
foot-wide, asphalt runway; however, the airplane overshot the runway, touched down in the 
grass north of the runway and nosed over.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the vertical stabilizer and fuselage. 
The airplane was equipped with an ECI O-320 series engine, which had been operated for 
about 22 hours since new. Examination of the airplane and engine by a Federal Aviation 
Administration inspector (FAA), with assistance from representatives of the engine 
manufacturer did not reveal any mechanical malfunctions which would have resulted in a loss 
of engine power. It was noted that the spark plugs removed from the engine were dark, 
consistent with a rich mixture. 
The pilot reported 261 hours of total flight experience, which included approximately 30 hours 
in the same make and model as the accident airplane. 
A weather observation taken at OFP, about the time of the accident reported, wind from 210 
degrees at 10 knots, gusting to 19 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; scattered clouds at 3,400 
feet, temperature 30 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 20 degrees C; altimeter 29.93 inches of 
mercury.
Review of an FAA carburetor icing envelope chart revealed that the reported temperature and 
dew point at the time of the accident was within the "serious icing (glide power)" area of the 
chart.
