Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Telluride, CO
Accident Number:
CEN09LA116
Date & Time:
01/03/2009, 1659 MST 
Registration:
N279AJ
Aircraft:
LEARJET 45XR
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of visual reference
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
The airplane and two-person crew departed on a positioning flight. The pilot-in-command was 
not flying the airplane and sat in the right seat. The second-in-command was the pilot flying 
and sat in the left seat. The accident occurred on the second attempt to land at the destination 
airport on a snow-covered runway. While descending for the airport, the pilot not flying the 
airplane called the runway in sight. After assessing that they were too high the pilot not flying 
convinced the pilot flying to circle the airplane down to land on the runway. Circling at speeds 
greater than allowed by the approach categories, the crew performed a 360-degree turn to align 
themselves with the runway. The pilot flying did not have the runway in sight, and was verbally 
assisted by the pilot not flying. Both pilots stated that they were aligned with the center of the 
runway. During the flare to touchdown the pilot flying reported an unexpected gust of wind 
from the left requiring a correction. The airplane touched down about 20 feet off and to the 
right of the runway edge. Substantial damage was sustained to the airplane's wing and 
fuselage.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of both pilots to positively identify the runway prior to landing.
Page 2 of 8CEN09LA116
Findings
Personnel issues
Monitoring environment - Pilot (Cause)
Monitoring environment - Copilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 8CEN09LA116
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 3, 2009, at 1659 mountain standard time (MST) a Learjet 45XR, N279AJ, 
sustained substantial damage during an off-runway landing at Telluride Regional Airport 
(KTEX), Telluride, Colorado. The airplane was owned by LJ279, LLC, Missoula, Montana, and 
operated by Aero Jet Services, Scottsdale, Arizona. The airline transport pilot in the left seat 
was not injured and the airline transport pilot in the right sear received minor injuries. 
Intermittent visual meteorological conditions were present at the time of the accident and an 
instrument rules flight plan was filed for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
positioning flight. The cross-country flight originated at the Scottsdale Airport (KSDL), 
Scottsdale, Arizona, at 1503.
In a statement provided by the Pilot-In-Command (PIC), who was seated in the right seat, 
upon arrival at KTEX the weather was reported to be below minimums; the crew elected to 
hold over the CONES VOR and wait to see if weather conditions would improve. The crew was 
given instructions, by air traffic control, to hold as published and to expect further clearance 
(EFC) at 1630. When the weather improved to a visibility of 4 miles and a ceiling of 2,300 feet, 
the PIC requested a descent and approach to KTEX. The crew was unable to complete the first 
landing attempt and called for a missed approach back to the VOR. The pilot then requested a 
second attempt to land stating that "if we did not land, we would like to be sequenced to into 
KMTJ" (Montrose Regional Airport Montrose, Colorado), their alternate airport. 
On the second approach, both crew members stated that they had acquired the runway 
environment; however, they were still too high for a visual approach. The crew elected to do a 
360-degree, right, descending turn, in order to be in a better position for landing. On 
completion of the turn, they again affirmed the runway environment and alignment with the 
extended centerline of the runway. The airplane touched down and after full thrust reversers 
were deployed, the nose gear collapsed. The airplane began to slide in snow and came to a stop 
in an upright position. 
In a statement provided by the pilot flying, at 4 nautical miles both pilots had the runway in 
sight. They were not in a position to make a normal descent to the runway so the PIC suggested 
a 360-degree turn. The pilot added that at the completion of the turn, she was aligned with the 
extended centerline. Additionally, the precision approach path indicator (PAPI) was to the left 
and the right side runway edge identifier lights were to the right of the intended flight path. 
During the round out, the pilot shifted her view to the end of the runway. Between the round-
out to touchdown, the PIC was telling the pilot to get it down on the runway but at the same 
time she was correcting for an unexpected gust of wind from the left. She applied a correction 
to maintain runway centerline. As the main landing gear contacted the ground, the pilot felt 
that the landing was normal. When the nose gear entered the snow the pilot felt the airplane 
"roll." No unusual airplane and engine performance was mentioned in the pilot's report.
An on-scene investigation was conducted by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector. The initial examination of the area indicated that the airplane had touched down 
Page 4 of 8CEN09LA116
about 20-feet to the right, and off, the runway. Additionally, the airplane's wings were torn 
from the fuselage. The tail section had separated just aft of the engines. No pre-impact 
anomalies with the airframe and engines were detected during the investigation. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Both pilots held Airline Transport Pilot certificates with type ratings in the Learjet 45. The 
pilot-in-command, who was seated in the right seat, was the pilot not flying (PNF). The 
second-in-command, who was seated in the left seat, was the pilot flying (PF).
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The cockpit voice recorder (CVR) was sent to Washington, DC, for download. The automated 
weather observations for KTEX were recorded on the AWOS. Below are three AWOS reports 
during the last 30 minutes of recording.
Observation 2330 Zulu (1630 local) was broadcasted prior to the crew beginning the first 
attempted approach. The observation reported winds from 260 at 4 knots, visibility 4 miles 
with light snow, scattered clouds at 300 feet, and an overcast ceiling at 1,700 feet. 
Prior to going missed approach on the first landing attempt, observation 2338 Zulu (1638) 
reporting winds from 250 at 5 knots, visibility 2.5 miles with light snow, scattered clouds at 
400 feet, a broken ceiling at 1,300 feet, and an overcast ceiling at 1,800 feet.
While conducting the second approach and prior to landing at KTEX, a partial AWOS excerpt 
reported a visibility of 4 miles with light snow, scattered clouds at 200 feet, a broken ceiling at 
1,500 feet, and an overcast ceiling at 2,100 feet. 
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Telluride Airport is a non-towered airport located at an elevation of 9,072 feet mean sea level. 
Runway 9/27 is a grooved, asphalt runway that is 6,870 feet long and 100 feet wide. 
According to an excerpt from the CVR, the common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) reported 
to the pilots that Telluride had "an inch and half of snow or so on the runway. We have not 
plowed it, we were waiting until tomorrow. We're scattered at 300, overcast at 1,700 and heavy 
snow."
A review of the Localizer/DME approach chart to runway 9 revealed that the approach is valid 
for category A and B aircraft; aircraft with reference landing speeds (Vref) lower than 121 
knots. The circling and straight-in minimum descent altitudes are both 11,100 feet mean sea 
level. The weather required for both the circling and straight-in approaches were listed as 
2,100 feet ceiling and 2 miles visibility. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATON
A review of the manufacturer's recommended operating procedures manual revealed that the 
Lear 45 is normally a category C aircraft for approaches.
Page 5 of 8CEN09LA116
Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) information
The last thirty minutes of the flight was transcribed and provided in the public docket. 
Approximately 2 minutes from touchdown, the PNF states that he had the runway in sight. He 
asks the PF if she would like to try to circle the airplane down to land. The PF starts by saying 
"I don't..." but is cut off by the PNF saying "circle this way." The PF says "uuhhh...," followed by 
the PNF replying, "try it." Forty-four seconds prior to touchdown the PNF asks, "...see the lead-
in light, ah, the blinker?" The PF responds "No, I don't see anything yet." The PNF states 
"There's the runway." The PF replies, "Oh
History of Flight
Landing
Loss of visual reference (Defining event)
Landing-flare/touchdown
Landing gear collapse
Loss of control on ground
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
42, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/05/2008
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/22/2008
Flight Time:
4800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1038 hours (Total, this make and model), 4330 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 55 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 25 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 8CEN09LA116
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
36, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/11/2008
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/23/2008
Flight Time:
3520 hours (Total, all aircraft), 831 hours (Total, this make and model), 3015 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 81 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 27 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
LEARJET
Registration:
N279AJ
Model/Series:
45XR 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
45-279
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
8
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/10/2008, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
21500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
2338 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Honeywell
ELT:
C126 installed, activated, did 
not aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TFE31-20BR-1B
Registered Owner:
LJ279 LLC
Rated Power:
3500 lbs
Operator:
Aero Jet Services
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Aerojet, Inc
Operator Designator Code:
J7EA
Page 7 of 8CEN09LA116
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KTEX, 9078 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1638 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 400 ft agl
Visibility
2 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 1300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
250°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.85 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-6°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Light - Showers - Snow
Departure Point: 
Scottsdale, AZ (KDSL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Telluride, CO (KTEX)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1503 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Telluride Regional Airport (KTEX)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
9078 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Snow
Runway Used:
09
IFR Approach:
Circling; LDA
Runway Length/Width:
6870 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.870278, -107.908611 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
William H Gamble
Adopted Date:
04/22/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Lyndsay Carlson; Federal Avaiation Administration; Salt Lake City, UT
Lonnie Roberts; Aero Jet Services; Scottsfale, AZ
Rex Williams; Bombardier; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
06/01/2017
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8CEN09LA116
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
