Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Hebron, IL
Incident Number:
CEN12IA050
Date & Time:
11/01/2011, 1730 CDT 
Registration:
N30CY
Aircraft:
NUSBAUM VAQUERO
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot experienced a medical event in-flight and landed his airplane in a field. The airplane 
sustained no damage. The pilot's son arrived where the airplane landed and saw the pilot lying 
back in the airplane™s seat; the pilot did not appear to be breathing. First responders revived 
and subsequently transported the pilot to a local hospital. The pilot died about two days later 
and the cause of death was determined to be a myocardial infarction. The pilot had previous 
heart conditions, including bypass surgery. The pilot last applied for a medical certificate about 
ten years prior to the incident flight. On the application for his last medical certificate, the pilot 
indicated his previously reported ﬁheart or vascular troubleﬂ on prior medical applications and 
his use of Coumadin, an anticoagulant medication. The airplane the pilot was flying required 
the pilot to have a current medical certificate to operate it. The investigation could not 
determine the exact extent of and time that the pilot experienced the medical event that he had 
to be revived from when the airplane landed.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The pilot™s operation of the airplane with known medical conditions and his subsequent heart 
attack in flight.
Findings
Personnel issues
Qualification/certification - Pilot
Predisposing condition - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Impairment/incapacitation - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN12IA050
Factual Information
On November 1, 2011, about 1730 central daylight time, N30CY, an experimental amateur-built 
Nusbaum Vaquero airplane, operated and piloted by a private pilot, sustained no damage when 
the pilot performed a forced landing on an open field near Hebron, Illinois, because the pilot 
had experienced a medical event in-flight. The personal flight was operating under 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
incident. No flight plan was on file. The local flight originated from Hebron, Illinois, at time 
unknown.
According to a McHenry County Sheriff™s Incident/Offense Report, the pilot™s son reported that 
he had been monitoring his father™s flight. The pilot™s son stated that he saw the airplane land 
and he went to the field where the airplane had landed. He saw the pilot lying back in the 
airplane™s seat and the pilot did not appear to be breathing. First responders made their way to 
the open farm field and two personnel performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation on the pilot. 
An automated external defibrillator (AED) was applied to the pilot and the AED advised a 
shock needed to be administered, which it administered. The pilot was subsequently 
transported to a local hospital. According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, 
the pilot held a private pilot certificate. FAA medical records showed that the pilot reported 
that he had accumulated 4,000 hours of total fight time on the application for his last third-
class medical dated May 11, 2001. On that application, the pilot indicated he previously 
reported that he had ﬁheart or vascular troubleﬂ on prior medical applications and that, he was 
using Coumadin. The generic name for Coumadin is Warfarin. The FAA Forensic Toxicology's 
WebDrugs website description of Warfarin indicated it is an anticoagulant medication.
N30CY was a high wing, two-place, tailwheel airplane. According to FAA airworthiness 
records, the pilot provided airplane weight and balance calculations, dated November 5, 2001, 
which indicated that the airplane™s the gross weight with two occupants would be 1,492 
pounds.
According to a McHenry County Department of Health Certificate of Death, the pilot died on 
November 3, 2011. The cause of death was attributed to a myocardial infarction. An autopsy 
was not performed. Samples for toxicological examination were not taken nor sent to the FAA 
Civil Aerospace Medical Institute and a Final Forensic Toxicology Accident Report was not 
produced. The pilot™s son indicated that the pilot had previous heart conditions to include by-
pass surgery. He was sent requests to confirm the details involved in the incident and to date 
has not responded to the requests.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Page 3 of 5CEN12IA050
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
65, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 None
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/11/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
4000 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
NUSBAUM
Registration:
N30CY
Model/Series:
VAQUERO 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
0004
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1492 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
AMA/EXPR
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
UNKNOWN ENG
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN12IA050
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BUU
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1735 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
180°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.98 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hebron, IL 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Hebron, IL 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
42.421667, -88.391389 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Edward F Malinowski
Adopted Date:
01/15/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Sandra Boerman; Federal Aviation Administration; West Chicago, IL
Publish Date:
01/15/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=82226
Page 5 of 5CEN12IA050
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
