A propeller blade separated while the airplane was cruising at 9,500 feet mean sea level.  The 
pilot then experienced a severe vibration and he shutoff the engine.  During the ensuing forced 
landing, the airplane impacted objects short of the runway and came to rest inverted.  A 
subsequent examination of the wood propeller revealed that it had separated at glue joints and 
delaminated.  The pilot had torqued the propeller's attachment bolts to the 18-foot-pound 
value placarded on the propeller.  The previous owner of the airplane had recommended 
torquing the bolts to 15-foot-pounds.  A hair-line crack was found emanating from one of the 
propeller's attachment bolt holes.  The FAA coordinator reported that the attachment bolt 
torquing sequence for the experimental airplane's propeller was not specified by the 
manufacturer.
the in-flight delamination and separation of a propeller blade for undetermined reasons.
On August 1, 2005, about 1730 Pacific daylight time, a privately owned and operated Malechek, 
Q-200, N870BM, experienced the in-flight separation of the outer portion of one propeller 
blade during cruise flight.   The pilot received directions to the nearest airport from a Federal 
Aviation Administration (FAA) air traffic controller (ATC).  During the forced landing, the 
experimental airplane collided with objects while on final approach to runway 14 at the Delano 
Municipal Airport, Delano, California.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time, 
and no flight plan had been filed.  The airplane was destroyed.  The private pilot was seriously 
injured, and the passenger sustained minor injuries.  The flight was performed under the 
provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The personal flight originated from Modesto, California, about 
1630. 
The pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that, while en route 
to his intended Ramona, California, destination, and cruising at 9,500 feet mean sea level, he 
had suddenly experienced a severe vibration and believed one propeller had separated from the 
engine.  Thereafter, he shutoff the airplane's engine.  Ground-based witnesses reported that the 
airplane approached the Delano Municipal Airport from the north, and it was heading straight 
for the runway.  The pilot made a forced landing and the airplane touched down short of the 
runway.   It collided with a pole and a chain link fence, broke apart, and came to rest upside 
down approximately 1,000 feet prior to reaching the approach end of the runway.  There was 
no fire.
According to the pilot, 1/2 of the blade's span had broken off.  A local FAA certificated airframe 
and powerplant mechanic recovered some of the airplane's propeller blade.  The mechanic 
noted that the 2-bladed Aymar-DeMuth 60 X 72 wood propeller (S/N 04371) had experienced 
a separation at the glue joints.  The propeller delaminated.    
In the pilot's completed "Aircraft Accident Report," he indicated his procedures for torquing 
the propeller blade's attachment bolts.  The owner reported that rather than torquing the bolts 
to the recommended 15-foot-pound value, he torqued the bolts to 18-foot-pounds, according to 
a placard on the propeller.
The FAA coordinator reported observing evidence of a hair-line crack emanating from one of 
the propeller's attachment bolt holes.  The FAA coordinator reported to the Safety Board 
investigator that the attachment bolt torquing sequence was not specified by the manufacturer.
