A free balloon sustained substantial damage during a forced landing when it impacted power 
lines after an in-flight fire.  The pilot reported that during the preflight checks of the balloon he 
connected the two liquid propane lines and the pilot light vapor line properly.  The pilot 
reported the balloon lifted off the field and that the burner was functioning normally.  When 
the balloon was about 700 feet above ground level (agl), the pilot observed flames "coming 
from both the pilot light hose and the tank hose (right side of aircraft and the side where two 
tanks are manifolded together)."  He attempted to put out the fire with his gloved hand, but 
was unsuccessful.  He then shut off the tanks at the tank valves on the right side of the balloon, 
but the fire continued.  He reported that an emergency landing was imminent so he shut off the 
third tank on the left side of the balloon.  Then he rechecked to make sure the manifold valves 
were shut off.  The bottom of the balloon's basket hit the power lines.  The balloon continued to 
descend until the basket impacted the ground.  The basket tipped over when it hit the ground, 
and the pilot and passenger exited the basket.  The pilot used the on-board fire extinguisher to 
put out the fire that was still burning at the hose-burner connection.  The pilot reported that 
once the balloon was removed from the power lines, he retrieved the envelope and basket.  He 
disconnected the fuel lines and the pilot light line while the ground crew put the envelope 
away.  During the inspection of the balloon, the burner and basket were reassembled.  The pilot 
reconnected the fuel lines and the pilot light line.  During the burner operational check there 
were no propane leaks and the burner functioned.  Pictures of the propane bottle provided by 
the fire department appeared to show frost on the pilot light valve. 
 
        
Page 2 of 5CHI05CA209
The in-flight fire due to the loose fuel line connection as a result of the pilot's inadequate 
preflight.  A factor was the power lines.
