Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
JONES, LA
Accident Number:
FTW96FA368
Date & Time:
09/01/1996, 2105 CDT 
Registration:
N8380G
Aircraft:
Cessna 150F
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Before flight, the non-instrument rated pilot received a weather briefing and was advised that 
'VFR was not recommended' due to IFR conditions along the route. The airplane was observed 
to takeoff on runway 34, then it disappeared into the fog. At about 2105, residents in the 
vicinity of the accident site (about 18 miles from the departure point) heard 'the steady engine 
sound of a low flying airplane followed by the sound of impact.'  A search was initiated, and the 
airplane was found where it had impacted the ground in an estimated 25 degree descent. 
Ground visibility at the site was reported to be 'less than 50 feet in heavy wet fog.'  Examination 
of the aircraft and engine at the accident site did not disclose any mechanical problems or 
evidence of preimpact malfunction. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
VFR flight into instrument meteorological conditions (VMC), and failure of the pilot (PIC) to 
maintain control of the airplane after becoming spatially disorientation.  Factors relating to the 
accident were: darkness, the adverse weather condition (fog and obscuration), and the pilot's 
lack of instrument experience. 
Page 2 of 7FTW96FA368
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
2. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - FOG
3. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - OBSCURATION
4. (C) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
5. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (C) SPATIAL DISORIENTATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. (F) LACK OF TOTAL INSTRUMENT TIME - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 3 of 7FTW96FA368
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 1996, at 2105 central daylight time, a Cessna 150F airplane, N8380G, was 
destroyed upon impact with terrain following a loss of control while maneuvering near Jones, 
Louisiana.  The non-instrument rated commercial pilot and his passenger were fatally injured.  
The airplane, owned and operated by a private individual, was being operated under Title 14 
CFR Part 91.  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  A 
weather briefing was received and a flight plan was not filed for the personal flight.  The flight 
originated from the Morehouse Memorial Airport in Bastrop, Louisiana, at approximately 
2055. 
According to relatives and personnel at the Bastrop airport, the airplane arrived from the 
Greenville Municipal Airport, in Greenville, Mississippi, at approximately 1635 to attend a 
family function nearby.  The pilot called the FSS for a weather briefing before leaving the home 
of his relatives prior to being driven back to the airport.  An employee of the airport advised the 
pilot about the prevailing marginal weather conditions, but the pilot elected to fly home to 
Greenville, as planned.  
The airplane was observed departing on runway 34 and disappearing into the fog on their 
proposed 62 nautical mile night cross country flight.  At 2105, residents in the vicinity of the 
accident site reported "the steady engine sound of a low flying airplane followed by the sound 
of impact."  They made a 911 call and initiated a search to locate the airplane with flashlights 
and the headlights of their vehicles.  Ground visibility at the site was reported as "less than 50 
feet in heavy wet fog." 
Ten minutes after midnight, a relative of one of the occupants called from Greenville to report 
that the airplane had not arrived.  Law enforcement agencies intensified the search and the 
wreckage was located in a cotton field at approximately 0300.  The accident site was 18 
nautical miles from the airport of departure, approximately 2 miles north of the direct route of 
flight to Greenville.  There were no reported eyewitnesses to the accident.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The non-instrument rated commercial pilot took his first flight lesson on September 8, 1995, 
earning his commercial pilot certificate on January 24, 1996.  He had recently completed an 
agricultural application course in which he was provided with 40 hours of ground school and 
45 hours of dual flight instruction in 4 different aircraft.  He was employed by McReady Flying 
Services of Bonita, Louisiana, as an aerial application pilot. 
The non-rated 29 year old passenger, who was seated in the right seat, was the pilot's oldest 
brother.  Personnel at the airport that talked to him the afternoon of the accident and relatives 
of the brother both stated that he had expressed an interest in taking flying lessons and 
eventually become an agricultural pilot; however, he had not taken any flying lessons as of the 
time of the accident.
Two pilot logbooks were found in a pilot's flight bag in the airplane.  One of the logbooks 
belonged to the pilot, while the second logbook, which did not have any entries other than a 
name and address, belonged to the airplane's owner.  The logbooks were copied by the IIC and 
returned to the owner.
Page 4 of 7FTW96FA368
A review of the pilot's logbook revealed that the pilot had accumulated a total of 53 hours of 
night time, of which 15.2 hours of were within the preceding 90 days.  The logbook also 
revealed that he had accumulated a total of 10.5 hours of simulated instrument time, with no 
time logged in the last 90 days.  A copy of the pilot's logbook is enclosed. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The 1966 model airplane was purchased by the current owner in May 1996.  The airplane was 
not equipped with an ATC transponder nor shoulder harnesses for the occupants.  The owner 
of the airplane stated that the aircraft and engine logbooks were kept in a pouch in the back of 
the airplane; however, they could not be located at the accident site.  The logbooks were later 
located under the airplane by the wreckage recovery crew.
The airplane was not serviced or refueled during their stop at Bastrop.  According to the engine 
logbook, the last maintenance recorded on the engine was on May 8, 1996, when the right 
magneto was removed due to "weak firing."   The magneto was removed, disassembled, 
inspected and repaired.
An estimate of the weight of the airplane at the time of the accident places the airplane within 
its weight and balance limits.  A review of the airframe and engine records by the investigator-
in-charge, did not reveal any anomalies or uncorrected maintenance defects prior to the flight.  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The pilot received a weather briefing from the DeRidder Automated Flight Service Station at 
1955.  The pilot was advised that no flight precautions existed along the route of flight; 
however, he was told that "VFR was not recommended" due to IFR conditions in the Monroe 
area.  
According to personnel at the Bastrop airport, at the time of the airplane's departure, a 600 
foot ragged ceiling (overcast) prevailed with visibility reported as 1.5 miles in fog.  Weather 
reports for the area are enclosed.  Recorded radar data was requested from Memphis Center, 
but none was available. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The 3 foot tall cotton plants found short of the airplane's initial point of impact were closely 
examined and documented.  Slash marks, broken branches, and gouges were found on the 
cotton plants at a point 30 inches above the ground.  The imprint of the nose landing gear tire 
was found on the soft ground 5.50 feet from the base of the first disturbed cotton plant.  
Dimensioning of the  affected plants and ground imprint revealed an impact angle of 
approximately 25 degrees.
Ground scars, gouges and imprints along the wreckage path were found on a measured 
magnetic heading of 010 degrees.  The fuselage came to a stop approximately 54 feet from the 
initial point of impact in the inverted position on a measured heading of 210 degrees.  A 
fiberglass wing tip fairing and a fragment of green lens, identified as the wing tip navigation 
light for the right wing, was located at the initial point of impact.  
The carburetor heat box, components of the engine air intake and exhaust systems, and the 
bottom of the engine lower cowling were found in a 30 inch wide, by 14 inch deep crater at the 
initial point of impact.
The propeller assembly was found just forward of the initial impact crater and had separated 
Page 5 of 7FTW96FA368
from the engine at the propeller flange.  One blade was twisted and curled rearward at about 
the midway point, exhibiting heavy rubbing on the cambered side, with leading edge scratches.  
The opposite blade was gently curved aft.    
Fuel, with the appearance and smell of 100LL aviation fuel, was found on the left fuel cell.  The 
right fuel cell was compromised.  A 2-cell military style gooseneck flashlight was found in the 
wreckage.  The function switch was found in the "on" position.  
The powerplant was found separated from the airframe.  All of the engine components driven 
by the accessory section of the engine were found separated from the engine.  The vacuum 
pump, engine starter, and the magnetic compass were not recovered with the wreckage.  The 
magnetic compass and the starter were later recovered by family members.  The crankshaft 
was rotated and continuity was confirmed to all the cylinders.  See enclosed engine 
manufacturer's report for details of the examination. 
Continuity was established to all flight controls.  The flap actuator was examined and found in 
the retracted position and the elevator trim was found in the neutral position. 
The accident site was located 18 nautical miles from the point of departure.  Examination of the 
aircraft and engine at the accident site did not disclose any mechanical problems or evidence of 
pre-impact malfunction.  
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An Autopsy and toxicological tests were ordered and performed.  The autopsies were 
performed by Dr. Steven T. Hayne, M.D., Deputy Coroner for the Rankin County Morgue, in 
Pearl, Mississippi, on September 2, 1996, as requested by the Mr. Terry Williams, Deputy 
Coroner for Morehouse Parish, Louisiana.  Toxicological findings were negative.  
ADDITIONAL DATA
The wreckage was released to the owner's representative at the accident site upon completion 
of the field portion of the investigation.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
24, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/14/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
680 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7FTW96FA368
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N8380G
Model/Series:
150F 150F
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
15062480
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/10/1996, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
39 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4880 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-200-A
Registered Owner:
JOHN EDWARD HAYS SR.
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
JOHN EDWARD HAYS SR.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
0 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Obscured / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
40°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
BASTROP, LA (2F8)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
GREENVILLE, MS (GLH)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
2055 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 7 of 7
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
HECTOR     R CASANOVA
Adopted Date:
04/29/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
LAUREL W JOHNSON; BATON ROUGE, LA
JOHN T KENT; MOBILE, AL
LEAH D RIDDLE; WICHITA, KS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
