Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Laurel, MS
Accident Number:
ERA17LA005
Date & Time:
10/01/2016, 1020 CDT 
Registration:
N499TG
Aircraft:
PIPER PA28
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The student pilot departed with full fuel tanks and flew to a nearby airport to practice takeoffs 
and landings. In preparation for his first landing, he checked that the mixture was full-rich and 
that the electric fuel pump and carburetor heat were turned on. The student pilot reduced 
power and extended the flaps; however, he realized that the airplane was too high and chose to 
go around. The student pilot applied full power, retracted the flaps, and turned off the 
carburetor heat. At that point, the engine started running roughly and experienced a total loss 
of power. The student pilot turned the carburetor heat back on, rechecked that the electric fuel 
pump was still on, and switched fuel tanks, but engine power was not restored. The student 
pilot made a forced landing to a field adjacent to the airport. 
Examination of the airplane revealed the carburetor had flooded and was leaking due to a stuck 
float, which prevented engine operation. The carburetor was removed and disassembled. No 
anomalies were noted with the float or needle/seat, and the carburetor was reassembled and 
reinstalled on the engine. The engine was subsequently started, and it ran with no anomalies 
noted. The reason for the stuck carburetor float could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power due to a stuck carburetor float. The reason the carburetor float 
became stuck could not be determined because postaccident examination of the float and 
needle/seat revealed no anomalies.
Page 2 of 6ERA17LA005
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel control/carburetor - Malfunction (Cause)
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 3 of 6ERA17LA005
Factual Information
On October 1, 2016, about 1020 central daylight time, a Piper PA28-140, N499TG, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing after a total loss of engine power while 
executing a go-around at the Hesler-Noble Airport (LUL), Laurel, Mississippi. The student 
pilot, who also the registered owner/operator of the airplane was not injured. No flight plan 
was filed for the flight that originated at the Hattiesburg-Laurel Regional Airport (PIB), 
Hattiesburg-Laurel, Mississippi, about 1000. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
personal flight conducted under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91.
The student pilot stated that he departed with full fuel and flew to LUL to practice takeoffs and 
landings. Before attempting the first landing, he checked that the mixture was full-rich, and the 
electric fuel pump and carburetor heat were turned on. The student pilot reduced power and 
extended the flaps; however, he realized the airplane was too high and elected to go-around. 
The student pilot applied full power, retracted the flaps and turned off the carburetor heat. At 
that point, the engine started running rough and experienced a total loss of power. The student 
pilot turned the carburetor heat back on, re-checked that the electric fuel pump was still on, 
and switched fuel tanks, but engine power was not restored. The student pilot made a forced 
landing to a field adjacent to the airport. During the landing roll, the left main landing gear 
entered a large hole resulting in substantial damage to the left wing and an engine mount. The 
left main landing gear and nose-wheel were also damaged.
Postaccident accident examination of the airplane revealed sufficient fuel in each wing tank. 
Fuel samples taken from each wing and gascolator were absent of water and debris. An attempt 
was made to start the engine on the airframe utilizing the airplane's own fuel system; however, 
when the fuel boost pump was turned on to start the engine, it was not registering any pressure 
and an odor of fuel was noted. Further examination revealed the carburetor had flooded and 
was leaking due to a stuck float. The carburetor was removed and disassembled. No anomalies 
were noted with the needle and seat and there were no signs of the float rubbing or binding. 
The carburetor was reassembled and reinstalled on the engine. When the fuel boost pump was 
turned back on, it registered a pressure of 7 psi. The engine was then started and ran to a 
maximum 1,800 rpm due to the broken engine mount. The magnetos and carburetor heat were 
tested and no anomalies were noted.
The student pilot reported a total of 90 hours, of which, 60 hours were in the Piper PA-28-140. 
His last Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third-class medical was issued on September 
30, 2016.
The student pilot also reported that the engine was manufactured in 1978. At the time of the 
accident, the engine and carburetor had been operated for about 1,520 total hours.
Weather reported at the LUL, at 1035, was calm wind, clear skies, and visibility greater than 10 
miles. The temperature was 68 degrees F and the dew point was 59 degrees F.
Page 4 of 6ERA17LA005
History of Flight
Approach-VFR go-around
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Student Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Student
Age:
67, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
3-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/30/2016
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/29/2016
Flight Time:
90 hours (Total, all aircraft), 60 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N499TG
Model/Series:
PA28 140
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
1974
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-7425318
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/06/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
6366 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-E3D
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ERA17LA005
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LUL, 238 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1035 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
80°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.12 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 15°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Hattiesburg, MS (PIB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Laurel, MS (LUL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1000 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Airport Information
Airport:
Hesler-Noble Field (LUL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
238 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
13
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5513 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing; Go Around
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
31.000000, -89.000000 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Leah D Read
Adopted Date:
03/05/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert F Mahaffey; FAA/FSDO; Jackson, MS
Publish Date:
03/05/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94163
Page 6 of 6ERA17LA005
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
