The private pilot and a passenger were conducting a local flight and performing aerobatics. 
Witnesses observed the pilot conducting "flybys" and "tricks" in the area. One witness reported 
observing the airplane complete "flips and spins" for about 10 minutes before the accident. 
Ground-based video footage depicted the airplane flying over the river at low altitude. The 
airplane pitched up and entered a steep climb. As the airplane reached the top of the climb, it 
yawed to the left and entered a near- vertical descent and gradual left turn. Shortly before 
impacting the river, the gradual left turn reversed abruptly into a right, descending turn. The 
airplane then impacted the river. A post-accident examination of the airframe and engine did 
not reveal any anomalies consistent with a pre-impact failure or malfunction.
According to a friend, the pilot was competent in spins and had received instruction in 
aerobatic maneuvers. However, the lack of a formal logbook training record with respect to 
aerobatics, the investigation could not determine the pilot's level of proficiency in such 
maneuvers.
Toxicological testing on the pilot was positive for cocaine and its metabolites; cocaethylene, a 
metabolite formed when cocaine is ingested with alcohol; and levamisole, a drug commonly 
used to "cut" street cocaine, in urine. Cavity blood was positive for methamphetamine and its 
metabolites. The absence of cocaine in the pilot's blood suggested distant usage. Accordingly, 
the acute effects of the drug had likely dissipated. The level of methamphetamine in the pilot's 
blood sample was low. As a result, the presence of any residual effects of the drug could not be 
determined. Based on the available information, the investigation was unable to determine 
whether the pilot was impaired, if at all, at the time of the accident.
The pilot's loss of control attempting to recover from a low-level aerobatic maneuver. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot's decision to attempt the low-level maneuver which 
significantly reduced any margin for error.
