The commercial pilot and the passenger, his 14-year-old granddaughter who wanted to become 
a pilot, were making a local flight in the airplane. No radar or GPS track information was found 
for the flight. A witness heard the airplane's engine "sputtering" before the airplane impacted 
the ground in a cornfield. A postimpact fire consumed the engine cowling, cockpit, fuselage, 
and the forward portion of the empennage. Damage to the airplane, the crop, and marks on the 
ground indicated that the airplane impacted in a slightly nose-low and left-wing-low attitude 
with no forward airspeed, consistent with a relatively flat spin. The propeller remained 
attached to the engine and was embedded in the soil and positioned horizontally. The propeller 
blades were slightly bent aft and did not exhibit any leading-edge damage, consistent with 
minimal, if any, power being produced by the engine during impact. No mechanical 
malfunctions or anomalies were found with the engine or airframe that would have precluded 
normal operation. However, the examination was limited by the extensive postcrash fire 
damage. 
The circumstances of the accident are consistent with the airplane exceeding its critical angle of 
attack, resulting in an aerodynamic stall and subsequent flat spin into terrain. Given the 
witness report of a "sputtering" engine and the propeller signatures consistent with the engine 
not producing power at impact, it is likely that the engine lost power before impact. However, it 
could not be determined whether the engine lost power before the loss of control or whether 
the pilot intentionally reduced power during the descent.
The14-year-old passenger was seated in the left seat, and the pilot was seated in the right seat. 
Although the family reported that the flight was not instructional, it is possible that the pilot 
allowed the passenger to manipulate the flight controls. Regardless of which occupant was 
manipulating the flight controls, the pilot was the only certificated pilot on board and was 
responsible for the safety of the flight.
Page 2 of 10CEN16FA344
The pilot's failure to maintain airplane control, which resulted in the airplane exceeding its 
critical angle of attack, an aerodynamic stall, and subsequent flat spin into terrain.
