Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
De Leon Springs, FL
Accident Number:
ERA14LA034
Date & Time:
11/01/2013, 1020 EDT 
Registration:
N1927B
Aircraft:
TEAL HARRY H SONERAI II STRETCH
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that, about 40 minutes into the local flight, the engine lost total power. He 
was unable to restart the engine, so he conducted a forced landing. The airplane collided with 
trees and terrain and came to rest inverted. The pilot reported that he began the flight with 9 
gallons of fuel on board and used about 3 gallons during the flight. Although only evidence of 
residual fuel was found in the fuel system, the impact breached the fuel system, and rain was 
present at the wreckage site after the accident. A postaccident examination of the airframe and 
engine revealed no evidence of preexisting mechanical anomalies or failures that would have 
precluded normal operation. The reason for the engine power loss could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of preexisting mechanical 
anomalies or failures that would have precluded normal operation. 
Findings
Not determined
Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA14LA034
Factual Information
On November 1, 2013, about 1020 eastern daylight time, a Teal Sonerai II Stretch, N1927B, was 
substantially damaged following a total loss of engine power and collision with trees near De 
Leon Springs, Florida. The sport pilot received minor injuries. The experimental, amateur-built 
airplane was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91 as a personal flight. Day, visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was 
filed. The flight originated from Deland, Florida (DED), about 0930.
The pilot reported that he had been airborne for about 40 minutes when, at 3,000 feet above 
mean sea level, the engine lost power and stopped running. He attempted to restart the engine 
without success. He attempted a forced landing and the airplane collided with trees and terrain 
before coming rest, inverted. 
An inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) responded to the accident site 
and inspected the wreckage. The airplane came to rest, inverted, positioned against trees in a 
wooded area. Only evidence of residual fuel was found in the fuel system; however, the impact 
with trees breached the fuel system and there was rain at the wreckage site after the accident. 
There was no fire. The fuselage, both wings, and the horizontal stabilizer received structural 
damage. The cockpit canopy was shattered by a tree. The throttle and mixture cables remained 
attached to the carburetor. The mixture control was found in the full forward position and the 
throttle was retarded more than half way. The fuel selector was in the main position. The fuel 
gascolator screen was free of debris. 
After the wreckage was recovered, the FAA inspector performed a detailed examination of the 
engine and related systems. The following observations were noted. The engine case was 
undamaged and was free of oil or fuel leaks. Compression was observed on all cylinders when 
the propeller was rotated manually. The spark plugs were removed and several of the top plugs 
had oil and water residue on the electrodes; otherwise the plugs were normal in appearance. 
Rotation of the engine showed continuity to all engine accessories. The fuel selector, 
carburetor, fuel pressure regulator, and associated hoses showed no evidence of obstructions 
or pre-existing anomalies. The fuel gascolator mount was loose; however, there was no 
evidence of impact damage in that area.
The pilot reported that he began the flight with 9 gallons of fuel on board and he verified that 
amount with a sight gauge. He estimated that he used about 3 gallons of fuel during the flight 
and had 6 gallons on board at the time of the engine power loss. The engine was not equipped 
with carburetor heat and the carburetor was not susceptible to icing due to its design.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 3 of 5ERA14LA034
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Sport Pilot
Age:
83
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Sport Pilot 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
333 hours (Total, all aircraft), 115 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
TEAL HARRY H
Registration:
N1927B
Model/Series:
SONERAI II STRETCH 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
071604-0693
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
02/09/2013, Condition
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1150 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
98 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Volkswagen
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
2180
Registered Owner:
TEAL HARRY H
Rated Power:
100 hp
Operator:
TEAL HARRY H
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5ERA14LA034
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DED, 79 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1015 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
170째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
190째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26째C / 21째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Deland, FL (DED)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Deland, FL (DED)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0930 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
29.148889, 81.299722 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Ralph E Hicks
Adopted Date:
09/29/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Publish Date:
09/29/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=88376
Page 5 of 5ERA14LA034
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
