Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
New Port Richey, FL
Accident Number:
MIA03TA036
Date & Time:
01/02/2003, 1951 EST 
Registration:
N317LC
Aircraft:
Hughes OH-6
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Public Aircraft
Analysis 
The pilot stated that after takeoff while in a left turn climbing through 600 feet at 60 knots 
indicated airspeed, he heard a loss of engine power.  He stopped the turn and noted that the 
engine was at flight idle as indicated by the dual tachometer.  He verified the throttle was full 
open, and maneuvered the helicopter towards an open area.  He bled off main rotor rpm to 
clear obstacles that were ahead, and decelerated at 10 feet above ground level.  The helicopter 
touched down with little forward movement, coming to rest upright with the skids and 
tailboom separated.  The helicopter was found to contain a sufficient quantity of fuel to sustain 
engine operation; no contaminants were reported.  Examination of the engine revealed the fuel 
inlet line "B" nut was found loose by 2 1/2 flats at the fuel inlet nozzle.  The fuel inlet line was 
drained and found to contain approximately 1 teaspoon of fuel while the fuel filter was full of 
fuel.  The engine control rigging was found to be in limits.  An abnormal sound was heard 
during testing of the aircraft fuel shutoff valve.  Operational testing of the valve revealed it was 
operational but rotation of the valve body occurred with rotation of the valve.  The engine was 
removed from the helicopter and transported to the manufacturer's facility.  Prior to the engine 
run, the bleed air valve was found failed in the closed position; the internal spring was found 
unwound.  The engine was operated in the presence of an FAA airworthiness inspector with a 
new bleed valve and the accident bleed valve installed; no appreciable difference was noted 
with respect to starting temperature, acceleration times, or stabilized operation.  A customer 
bleed line that attaches to the scroll was found loose, it was tightened followed by engine 
operation.  The line was loose when checked following the engine run.  No significant findings 
were noted during the engine runs.  Safety concerns prevented operation of the engine with the 
as-found position of the loose "B" nut at the fuel nozzle; however, a valve was installed to divert 
fuel from the fuel nozzle simulating the as-found position of the loose "B" nut.  During the 
engine run, the valve was opened 1/4 and the engine operated normally.  The valve was opened 
to 1/2 then 3/4, the engine continued to operate normally though the fuel flow increased.  The 
valve was then fully opened and the engine flamed out.  Several hours before the accident, a 
mechanic performed a compressor wash.  It was common practice for the mechanic to clean 
the fuel nozzle when he performed a compressor wash.
Probable Cause and Findings
Page 2 of 6MIA03TA036
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inadequate preflight of the helicopter following maintenance he observed, and 
failure of maintenance personnel to tighten the "B" nut at the fuel nozzle following a 
compressor wash resulting in the total loss of engine power.  Also, the pilot's intentional decay 
of main rotor rpm while attempting to clear obstructions and unsuitable terrain encountered 
during the forced landing resulting in a hard landing.
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. FUEL SYSTEM,LINE - LOOSE
2. (C) MAINTENANCE - INADEQUATE - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
3. (C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
Findings
4. AUTOROTATION - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
5. ROTOR RPM - INTENTIONAL - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (C) UNSUITABLE TERRAIN OR TAKEOFF/LANDING/TAXI AREA - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6MIA03TA036
Factual Information
On January 2, 2003, about 1951 eastern standard time, a Hughes OH-6, N317LC, registered to 
and operated by Pasco County Sheriff's Office, landed hard during an autorotative landing 
following a loss of engine power after takeoff from Hidden Lake Airport, New Port Richey, 
Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for 
the public use flight.  The helicopter was substantially damaged and there were no reported 
injuries to the commercial-rated pilot or observer.  The flight originated about 6 minutes 
earlier from the Hidden Lake Airport.
The pilot stated that earlier that day after arriving at work, the mechanic had prepared the 
helicopter for a compressor wash.  He motored the engine while the mechanic pumped the 
engine cleaner into the engine.  He and the mechanic waited 5 minutes, then the engine was 
flushed with clean water.  The mechanic then prepared the helicopter for an engine run-up 
while he was about 10 feet away.  He did observe the mechanic remove a wedge from the bleed 
air valve.  He checked the engine and checked all bleed air, and fuel lines that had been 
disconnected which included the main fuel line, though he did not put his hand on that line.  
Shortly after takeoff, while in a left turn climbing through 600 feet at 60 knots indicated 
airspeed, he heard a loss of engine power.  He stopped the turn and noted that the engine was 
at flight idle as indicated by the dual tachometer.  He verified the throttle was full open, and 
maneuvered the helicopter towards an open area.  He bled off main rotor rpm to clear 
obstacles that were ahead, and decelerated at 10 feet above ground level.  The helicopter 
touched down with little forward movement, coming to rest upright.
The mechanic stated that with respect to compressor cleaning, he removed then cleaned the 
fuel drain valve and fuel nozzle, dried and set them aside for reinstallation later.  He performed 
a compressor wash and following that procedure, reinstalled the fuel nozzle, and reconnected 
the fuel line.  The fuel system was purged of air and the drain valve was then reinstalled.  The 
engine was started and allowed to stabilize while he looked for fuel and oil leaks; none were 
reported.  A leak check was performed on the bleed and fuel lines, no leaks were reported.  The 
engine was then brought up to full power (100 percent) with no discrepancies reported.  The 
engine allowed a 2-minute cool down period, then secured.
The observer stated that he witnessed the mechanic perform a compressor wash which 
included disconnect the fuel line at the fuel nozzle, but he did not observe the mechanic tighten 
the inlet fuel line "B" nut.  The mechanic then had the accident pilot perform a post 
maintenance run-up at full throttle.  During the run-up, he observed the mechanic perform a 
leak check by brushing a solution on several fittings; he did not recall having any leaking 
fittings.  The helicopter was then placed on the flight-line.
Examination of the helicopter revealed the skids and tailboom were separated.  The helicopter 
was found to contain a sufficient quantity of fuel to sustain engine operation; no contaminants 
were reported.  The helicopter was recovered for further examination.
Examination of the engine following recovery revealed the fuel inlet line "B" nut was found 
loose by 2 1/2 flats at the fuel inlet nozzle.  The fuel inlet line was drained and found to contain 
approximately 1 teaspoon of fuel while the fuel filter was full of fuel.  The engine control rigging 
was found to be in limits.  An abnormal sound was heard during testing of the aircraft fuel 
shutoff valve.  Operational testing of the valve revealed it was operational but rotation of the 
valve body occurred with rotation of the valve.  The engine was removed from the helicopter 
Page 4 of 6MIA03TA036
and transported to the manufacturer's facility.
The engine was test run in the presence of an FAA airworthiness inspector.  Prior to the test 
cell run, the bleed air valve was found failed in the closed position; the internal spring was 
found unwound.  The engine was operated with a new bleed valve and the accident bleed valve; 
no appreciable difference was noted with respect to starting temperature, acceleration times, or 
stabilized operation.  A customer bleed line that attaches to the scroll was found loose, it was 
tightened followed by engine operation.  The line was loose when checked following the engine 
run.  Safety concerns prevented operation of the engine with the as-found position of the loose 
"B" nut at the fuel nozzle; however, a valve was installed to divert fuel from the fuel nozzle 
simulating the as-found position of the loose "B" nut.  During the engine run, the valve was 
opened 1/4 and the engine operated normally.  The valve was opened to 1/2 then 3/4, the 
engine continued to operate normally though the fuel flow increased.  The valve was then fully 
opened and the engine flamed out.
The helicopter minus the retained engine was released to Jim P. Greene, the Chief Pilot for 
Pasco County Sheriff's Office, on January 8, 2003.  The retained engine was also released to 
Jim P. Greene on March 1, 2004.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
52, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/04/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/19/2002
Flight Time:
5810 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1015 hours (Total, this make and model), 121 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 38 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6MIA03TA036
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Hughes
Registration:
N317LC
Model/Series:
OH-6 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Serial Number:
68-17310
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/29/2002, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
49.8 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
5649.3 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Allison
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
T63-A-700
Registered Owner:
Pasco County Sheriff's Office
Rated Power:
317 hp
Operator:
Pasco County Sheriff's Office
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KTPA, 26 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
1953 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 3000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 25000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
190°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 17°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
New Port Richey, FL (FA40)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
New Port Richey, FL (FA40)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1945 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
28.274722, -82.632222
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy W Monville
Adopted Date:
04/28/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
James B Minary; FAA Flight Standards District Office; Tampa, FL
Douglas Tate; FAA FSDO; Indianapolis, IN
Robert Ketchum; Rolls-Royce Corporation; Indianapolis, IN
Jim P Greene; Pasco County Sheriff's Office; New Port Richey, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
