After one of a group of five parachutists decided not to jump from the helicopter, he failed to 
deactivate a safety device designed to open his reserve parachute at a preset altitude.  As the 
helicopter descended through approximately 1,000 feet AGL, the reserve opened automatically 
and the parachutist was pulled from the helicopter.  The parachute snagged on the skids of the 
helicopter and did not inflate fully.  The parachutist was injured during his subsequent hard 
landing. 
The inadvertent deployment of the passenger's parachute as a result of his failure to follow 
proper procedures and deactivate the automatic opening device on the parachute. 
 On February 3, 1996, at 1530 central standard time, a Bell 206B, N2184Z, was descending 
near Cushing, Oklahoma, when the reserve parachute of a passenger deployed inside the 
helicopter.  The helicopter was not damaged.  The passenger sustained serious injury and the 
commercial pilot was not injured.  The helicopter was being operated by Corporate 
Helicopters, Inc., under Title 14 CFR Part 91 on a local parachuting flight when the accident 
occurred.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed.
According to statements provided by the pilot and the injured passenger, the helicopter 
departed Cushing Municipal Airport with five parachutists on board and climbed to 3,000 feet 
AGL.  Four of the parachutists exited the aircraft while the fifth remained on board, choosing 
not to jump because he felt his hands were "too cold" to deploy his pilot chute.  The remaining 
parachutist did not deactivate a safety device designed to automatically open his reserve 
parachute at a preset altitude. As the helicopter descended through approximately 1,000 feet 
AGL, the reserve opened automatically and the parachutist was pulled from the helicopter.  
The reserve canopy was ripped when it snagged on the skids of the helicopter and did not 
inflate fully.  The parachutist "impacted the ground" and sustained a broken right femur.
