The pilot reported that as he overflew the Tri-City airport, Tennessee at 9,000 feet, the right 
engine power slowly decreased.  The airplane was in the clouds with an outside air temperature 
of about zero degrees Celsius.  Right engine manifold heat was applied for a few seconds, with 
no noticeable difference in engine performance.  The right magnetos were also checked with no 
obvious malfunctions noted.  A descent for landing was initiated to the Tri-City airport and 
manifold heat was applied and removed several times, with no appreciable effect.  On short 
final approach, when the landing gear was extended, the right main gear did not indicate down.  
There was insufficient time to perform the emergency gear extension procedure.  A go-around 
was initiated, during which the pilot discovered that the left manifold heat control was now 
stuck in the 'ON' position.  The pilot stated that with less than full power available on the left 
engine, and the right propeller unfeathered, the airplane could be climbed to about 200 feet.  
He flew the airplane until terrain clearance was no longer possible, then landed in a field, gear 
up.  The airplane slid into trees and was substantially damaged. 
the pilot's improper use of carburetor heat which resulted in a continuing loss of engine power, 
and the right landing gear's failure to extend during a single engine approach.  A factor was the 
insufficient time available to extend the landing gear via the emergency extension procedure. 
 On February 2, 1996, about 1830 eastern standard time, a Beech C-45G, N204AA, 
collided with trees during a forced landing near Blountville, Tennessee. The airplane was 
operated by Saber Aviation, Inc. under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and instrument 
flight rules (IFR).  Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed. An IFR flight plan was filed 
for the positioning flight.  There were minor injuries to the airline transport pilot, and the 
airplane was substantially damaged.  Origination of the flight was Madison, Indiana, about 
1700 on the same day.
     The pilot reported that as he overflew the Tri-Cities, Tennessee airport, at 9,000 feet, 
the right engine power slowly decreased, with the manifold pressure dropping from 28 inches 
to 25 inches.  The airplane was in the clouds with an outside air temperature of about zero 
degrees Celsius.  Right engine manifold heat was applied for a few seconds, with no noticeable 
difference in engine performance. The right magnetos were also checked with no obvious 
malfunctions noted.  The left engine began to run roughly, manifold heat was applied to the left 
induction system and the roughness of the engine was eliminated.  A descent for landing was 
initiated to the Tri-Cities airport.  During the descent manifold heat was applied and removed 
several times, with no appreciable effect on the right engine.  On short final approach, when 
the landing gear was extended, the right main gear did not indicate down.  A go-around was 
initiated, during which the pilot discovered that the left manifold heat control was now stuck in 
the "ON" position. The pilot stated that with less than full power available on the left engine, 
and the right propeller unfeathered, the airplane could be climbed to about 200 feet.  He flew 
the airplane until terrain clearance was no longer possible, then landed in a field, gear up.  The 
airplane slid into trees and was substantially damaged.
