The aircraft was being used on an animal control flight, and the pilot was executing a low pass 
over a frozen, flat, snow covered lake surface, in pursuit of a coyote. During this maneuver, the 
gunner's weapon jammed, and the pilot diverted his attention to the direction of the weapon's 
muzzle, which was pointed toward a fuel tank. Immediately thereafter, the aircraft's wheels 
drug in the snow covered surface, and the aircraft nosed over. An overcast existed at the time, 
and there was a lack of references available on the smooth, even surface of the lake to enhance 
the pilot's depth perception. 
failure of the pilot to maintain altitude/clearance from the terrain (snow covered, frozen lake).  
Factors relating to the accident were: the pilot's attention being diverted to a perceived safety 
hazard, and lack of visual cues for pilot perception of clearance from the lake surface. 
 On February 1, 1996, approximately 1615 Pacific standard time, a Christen Industries, Inc., A-
1, N2866B, operated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture on an exclusive use lease, was 
substantially damaged during a collision with terrain while maneuvering. The certificated 
commercial pilot sustained minor injuries and the passenger was uninjured. The accident 
occurred on the frozen, snow covered surface of Goose Lake, approximately five miles 
southeast of the Lakeview Airport, Lakeview, Oregon. The flight, which was to be operated for 
the purposes of animal control, was public in nature. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan had been filed. The aircraft had originated from Lakeview 
approximately 1400 hours and was on a local flight.
In an interview, the pilot reported that while executing a low pass in the vicinity of a coyote the 
gunner's weapon jammed. The pilot, concerned as to the direction in which the weapon was 
aimed (towards a fuel tank), shifted his attention to the gun barrel to move it away from critical 
aircraft areas. During this event the aircraft's main gear touched down on the snow covered 
lake surface. Tracks from the wheels indicated a ground roll of approximately 30 feet before 
the aircraft nosed over.
There were no references on the surface of the lake, e.g., fence posts, trees, brush, rocks to 
provide the pilot with depth perception cues. An overcast existed which filtered the late 
afternoon sunlight reducing surface shadow effects, and the sun angle was low at the time of 
the accident.
