Witnesses observed the aircraft departing from runway 14 with a rolling start. They said the 
aircraft rotated at the departure end of the runway and remained in ground effect with an 
excessive, nose high attitude. It then struck the airport perimeter fence, a barrier wall, and 
power lines. Power line wires were dragged through a residentual area, resulting in additional 
damage. The airplane then crashed in a pasture and burned. Investigation revealed the 
airplane had been loaded to a gross weight (GW) of 50,870 lbs. Its maximum GW was limited 
to 48,000 lbs at sea level with the use of antidetonation injection (ADI) fluid and 40,900 lbs 
without ADI. Density altitude at the airport was 6200 feet. For conditions at the airport, 
maximum GW for takeoff with ADI and 15 degrees of flaps was 43,205 lbs; without ADI and 
with 13 degrees of flaps, maximum GW was 38,909 lbs. The airplane flaps were found in the 
retracted position, but there was no performance data for takeoff with the flaps retracted. No 
ADI fluid was found in the line to the right engine, although it was intact; the ADI tank was 
destroyed; the ADI line to the left engine was damaged. The airplane was being flown under 
provision of a ferry permit, which did not provide for the cargo or the two passengers that were 
aboard. The first pilot (PIC) had accrued about 8 hours of flight experience in the make and 
model of airplane. 
inadequate preflight planning and preparation by the first pilot (PIC), his failure to ensure the 
aircraft was properly loaded within limitations, his failure to use proper flaps for takeoff, his 
failure to use ADI assisted takeoff, and his resultant failure to attain sufficient airspeed to 
climb after takeoff.  Factors relating to the accident were: the high density altitude, and the 
PIC's lack of experience in the make and model of airplane. 
 On February 5, 1996, at 0950 hours mountain standard time, a Convair C-131E, N131T, 
collided with wires at the departure end of runway 14 and crashed in a residential area of Saint 
Johns, Arizona.  The airplane was destroyed by impact forces and postimpact fire.  Both pilots 
and two passengers were fatally injured.  The airplane was operated by Business Air 
Connection of the Netherlands Antilles as a ferry flight under 14 CFR Part 91.  The flight 
originated in Saint Johns, and was destined for Brownsville, Texas.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time and a VFR flight plan was filed.
According to witnesses, the pilot executed a rolling takeoff from the 5,323-foot-long runway.  
The airplane used the full length of the runway, and did not climb high enough to clear 
obstacles located below the obstacle free clear zone at the departure end of runway 14.  The 
terrain off the end of the runway slopes down.  Witnesses reported the airplane's altitude along 
the flight path appeared to contour the terrain.
The airplane first struck the top of the airport perimeter fence and a barrier wall for three 
10,000 gallon diesel fuel storage tanks.  The airplane continued to fly at a low altitude and 
struck a tree with the right propeller.  The airplane then struck residential power transmission 
wires with the left propeller.  The wires became entangled in the airplane's landing gear and 
were pulled off their poles and dragged through a residential neighborhood to the accident 
scene.
The airplane eventually struck the ground with the left wing tip and cartwheeled into a horse 
pasture damaging the pasture fence. 
Other Damage
In addition to the damage to the fences, barrier wall, trees, and wires, there was damage to 
residences.  One home was struck by tree branches that penetrated into the interior and 
another home had minor roof damage from the dragged cables.
The damage to the home that was struck by the penetrating tree branches was limited to the 
bathroom and living room window.  The resident of the home said he was sitting in the living 
room at the time.  He told Safety Board investigators that the tree branches had punched a hole 
in the bathroom sink, shattered the toilet tank, and cracked the bathtub.  There was also water 
damage in the bathroom as a result of the toilet being shattered.
Crew Information
First Pilot
The first pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate which was issued on April 4, 1979.  At 
the time of the accident the pilot held 18 different type ratings, none of which were for Convair 
aircraft.
The most recent first-class medical certificate was issued to the pilot on December 21, 1995, 
and contained the limitation that correcting lenses for near vision be worn while exercising the 
privileges of his airman certificate.  The pilot also held an existing non-disqualifying waiver for 
defective color vision.
No personal flight records were found for the pilot and the aeronautical experience listed in 
this report was estimated from a review of the airmen FAA records on file in the Airman and 
Medical Records Center located in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  In addition, information was 
obtained from a review of letters of authorization held by the pilot. 
On February 2, 1996, the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Sacramento Flight 
Standards District Office (FSDO), Sacramento, California, issued the first pilot a Letter of 
Authorization (LOA) to act as pilot-in-command in lieu of a type rating in Convair C-131E (CV-
440), N131T, on a ferry flight from Hollister, California, to Aruba, Netherlands Antilles.  The 
LOA limited operations to day visual flight rules (VFR) with fuel or maintenance stopover 
points.  The LOA specified, " No other person other than the pilot and necessary crew shall be 
carried."  The authorization expired at the completion of the ferry flight, or no later than 
February 17, 1996.
According to the FAA, "Vintage/surplus military aircraft are those aircraft which are operated 
solely under Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 91 and for which the FAA 
does not have sufficient qualified inspector staff to conduct either the initial qualifications or 
proficiency tests required under existing regulations."  FAA Order 8700.1 states circumstances 
may arise that require an aircraft be flown by a pilot who does not hold a type rating for that 
aircraft.  An operations inspector may issue an LOA provided the flight can be accomplished 
safely.  
The order describes to FAA Aviation Safety Inspectors (Operations) the method to determine 
eligibility of pilot to be issued an LOA.  The order indicates regulatory provisions of 14 CFR 
Part 61.58 (Pilot-in-command proficiency check: Operation of aircraft requiring more than one 
required pilot), permits a pilot to serve as pilot-in-command provided no persons or property 
are carried, and the flights are conducted under day VFR conditions.
The FAA operations inspector, who granted the authorization for the first pilot, indicated to the 
Safety Board that he already knew of the first pilot's qualifications.  The operations inspector 
indicated the first pilot was National Designated Pilot Examiner (NDPER) active in vintage 
aircraft, that the first pilot held a Letter of Operational Authority for numerous makes and 
models of high performance piston airplanes, and that the first pilot had been issued three 
previous authorizations to ferry this specific type aircraft.
On August 29, 1995, the first pilot applied for a LOA to ferry the accident airplane from 
Tucson, Arizona, to San Luis Obispo, California.  The first pilot indicated in his application that 
he had two previous letters authorizing him to act as pilot-in-command, and had accumulated 
about 200 hours in various models of twin piston engine Convair aircraft.  The FAA 
subsequently issued the LOA for the ferry flight on August 31, 1995. 
The second pilot on the ferry flight from Tucson indicated the flight was flown without 
incident, except the destination was changed to Hollister, California, because San Luis Obispo 
was not VFR due to low visibility and fog.
On September 26, 1989, the FAA issued the first pilot a LOA to ferry a Convair 240 from 
Oakland, California, to Eagles Nest Airport, Ione, California.
On December 27, 1977, the FAA issued the first pilot a LOA to ferry a Convair 240 from 
Frankfurt, West Germany, to Kingman, Arizona.
Second Pilot
The second pilot held airline transport pilot certificate which was issued on October 20, 1995, 
with a multiengine airplane rating and commercial privileges for single engine airplanes.  
The most recent first-class medical certificate was issued to the second pilot on January 8, 
1996, and contained the limitation that correcting lenses be worn while exercising the 
privileges of his airman certificate.
The second pilot's total aeronautical experience consists of about 1,905 flight hours, of which 
about 487 were accrued in multiengine airplanes.  There were no records found indicating the 
pilot had flown large aircraft over 12,500 pounds.
Aircraft Information
The airplane, a vintage/surplus military Convair C-131E (Civil Designation Convair 440-72), 
military serial number 55-4751(Civil serial number 338), was manufactured on July 20, 1956, 
and was delivered to the United States Air Force (USAF).
The airplane had accumulated a total time in service of 18,715 hours.  Examination of copies of 
the maintenance records filed with the FAA before the accident revealed that the most recent 
annual inspection was accomplished on January 25, 1996, about 4 flight hours before the 
accident.
A minimum flight crew of pilot and copilot is required for all operations.
Aircraft Certification and Registration
The airplane remained in the possession of the USAF until January 13, 1994, at which time the 
USAF Museum Program sold the airplane to the Lan-Dale Company, Reno, Nevada.  The Lan-
Dale Company ferried the airplane from Wright-Patterson AFB, Dayton, Ohio, to Tucson, 
Arizona.
On August 28, 1995, the Lan-Dale Company, sold the airplane to the second pilot, DBA 
Business Air Connection N.V., Curacao.  A revised lease agreement, dated December 4, 1995, 
found in the airplane's wreckage indicated the airplane was to be leased to Air Caribbean N.V. 
Curacao, a Netherlands Antilles Corporation by Business Air Connection.  The agreement was 
to commence after the airplane was delivered to Curacao.  The lease agreement specified the 
aircraft owner/LESSOR shall at its own expense, procure and maintain in full force and effect 
liability insurance.  Another document found in the airplane disclosed the second pilot had 
contacted an insurance broker and received an estimate.  However, there has been no evidence 
found by the Safety Board indicating that the airplane was insured at the time of the accident.
On October 23, 1995, the second pilot sold the airplane to a United States citizen who listed an 
address in Sweethome, Oregon.  The FAA issued a Certificate of Aircraft Registration to the 
U.S. citizen on November 17, 1995.  The citizen applied for a export certificate of airworthiness 
on January 22, 1996, and listed Business Air Freight as the purchaser.  The address listed for 
Business Air Freight was the same as the second pilot's address.  On January 23, 1996, the U.S. 
citizen sold the airplane to Business Air Freight.
On January 25, 1996, the FAA San Jose FSDO issued a Standard Airworthiness Certificate for 
the airplane in the transport category.  On January 26, 1996, the San Jose FSDO issued a 
Special Airworthiness Certificate.  The Special Airworthiness Certificate was designated a 
special flight permit for the purpose of export.
Powerplants
Two Pratt & Whitney Double Wasp R-2800-CB16-103 engines were installed in the airframe.  
The engines are twin row 18 cylinder air cooled radial type with single stage two speed 
electrically controlled integral superchargers, and equipped with a pressure injection 
carburetor and an antidetonation injection system.  The engines are capable of producing 
2,400 horsepower at sea level.
Antidetonation Injection (ADI) System
The ADI system, often referred to as water injection, is provided to permit power increase for a 
limited period of time at takeoff.  The ADI fluid used is a mixture of 50 percent alcohol and 50 
percent water.  The fluid is injected into the cylinders through the carburetor.  The fluid 
evaporates in the cylinders, cooling the incoming charge of fuel and preventing detonation.  
Engines not using ADI are cooled by a rich fuel mixture.  The rich mixture is usually too rich 
for best power.  Use of ADI allows for a best power mixture.  According to the airplane's 
operation manual, use of ADI at takeoff permits development of approximately 350 more 
horsepower from the engines.
The system is supplied from a 22-gallon usable rubberized fabric tank located in the right wing 
to fuselage fairing.  An electrical water pump is installed in the sump of the tank.  The pump is 
energized by a switch in the cockpit.  The pump supplies pressurized ADI fluid to both engines.
Shutoff valves operated by engine oil pressure are mounted on the ADI fluid supply line to each 
engine.  When engine oil pressure drops below 30 psi the shutoff valves close and no ADI fluid 
would flow to the engine.  The ADI fluid then flows to a regulator which allows excessive ADI 
fluid to bypass at low power settings.  A spring loaded ADI fluid inlet check valve in the 
regulator is opened by fuel pressure from the derichment valve on the carburetor. 
If the system is energized a loss of engine oil and fuel pressures would close the shutoff valves 
and the inlet check valve in the regulator, trapping ADI fluid in the supply line between the two 
valves.  ADI supply lines can be identified by the red-gray-red piping color code on the lines.
If the ADI system is not energized or not functioning a "Dry" takeoff may be made.  However, 
the fuel mixture would be enriched to cool the cylinders to prevent detonation and less power 
would be produced.
Flap System
The airplane is equipped with Fowler type flaps that are used for takeoff as well as landing.  
The flaps are hydraulically actuated by two hydraulic motors which drive torque tubes through 
gear boxes.  The system includes a flap synchronizing torque tube.  The flap system moves in 
unison with the maximum extension of 45 degrees.  Full extension requires 16 to 20 seconds.
The flap system is controlled by a spring loaded three position electrical toggle switch located 
on the pilot pedestal.  The flaps may be lowered to any degree as shown on a flap position 
indicator.  The switch is spring loaded to the center position which hydraulically locks the flaps 
in the last selected position, thus preventing them from retracting due to air loads.  The takeoff 
flap setting will normally be 11 or 15 degrees depending upon the airplane's weight and airport 
runway, taking into consideration temperature, winds, and airport elevation.
Aircraft Loading
The Convair 440 aircraft utilizes a Weight and Balance Control System based on aircraft weight 
and index.  The index system simplifies the center of gravity computations by labeling areas 
along the airplane's datum line with an index number.
Weight and balance records found in the airplane indicated the airplane was last weighed at 
the USAF Museum at Wright-Patterson AFB on January 26, 1966.  The DD Form 365C, "Basic 
Weight and Balance Record," indicated the airplane's basic weight was 35,315 pounds, the 
moment was 13,227-inch pounds, and the index 54.1.
The Safety Board reviewed a photograph taken by a local newspaper of the accident airplane 
before it departed on the ferry flight.  The photograph displayed the amount of cargo in the 
airplane, but the Safety Board was unable to index the cargo from the photograph.  The 
information from the photograph was compared to photographs taken at the accident scene 
and a general inventory list was developed.  The weight of the cargo was compiled using the 
actual equipment weights obtained by knowledgeable persons, or as estimated by the 
investigative group.
2 rollaway tool boxes   160 lbs.  6-55 gallon 
drums (2 empty and 4 filled with engine oil)1,740 lbs.  Lumber, burnt 
furniture, medical supplies and equipment   260 lbs.  Firefighting equipment
1,350 lbs.  Portable air compressor
    75 lbs.  Ground power unit    
75 lbs.  Battery charger    63 lbs.  2 
batteries   150 lbs.  Manual fork lift for 
lifting palettes   200 lbs.  Crew and passenger baggage
   280 lbs.  TOTAL
4,353 lbs.
The two pilot weights and the two passenger weights were obtained from airman medical 
records on file with the FAA in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The combined weight of the four 
occupants was determined to be 822 pounds.
Fueling records at the Saint Johns Industrial Air Park established that the airplane was last 
fueled on February 4, 1996, with the addition of 1,538.7 gallons of 100 octane low lead aviation 
fuel.  According to servicing personnel, this filled the wing tanks to their capacity of 1,730 
gallons.  The weight of the fuel onboard was calculated at 6 pounds per gallon or 10,380 
pounds.
The approximate ramp weight of the airplane, excluding lumber and furniture, was calculated 
to be 50,870 pounds, about 2,870 pounds above the airplane maximum certified gross weight 
of 48,000 pounds.
Aircraft Performance
The airplane left Hollister, California, on February 4, 1996, at 1330 hours, loaded in the same 
manner as the accident flight.  The Hollister Airport elevation is 230 feet above sea level and 
the runway is 6,350 feet long.  According to witnesses, the airplane used most of the runway 
and climbed very slowly.
Later in the day, the airplane arrived at the Ernest A. Love Field, Prescott, Arizona.  The 
airplane was serviced with 250 gallons of 100 octane low lead aviation fuel.  According to 
servicing personnel this did not fill the fuel tanks, and fuel quantity upon departure from 
Prescott could not be determined.  Additionally, there was no record of the ADI system being 
serviced with fluid.  
The field elevation at Prescott is 5,042 feet above sea level and the runway length is 7,616 feet 
long.  Witnesses who observed the airplane takeoff from Prescott stated the airplane was slow 
to climb and flew up a valley northeast of the airport.  One witness also indicated the airplane 
did not climb above the horizon before he lost sight of the airplane.
The maximum gross takeoff weight for the airplane at sea level using ADI fluid is 48,000 
pounds, and without using ADI is 40,900 pounds.  The Safety Board obtained takeoff data 
from Renown Aviation, Santa Maria, California.  Renown Aviation maintains computerized 
performance data for the Convair 440 and is able to electronically compute takeoff data 
corrected for field elevation, temperature, gross weight, and runway length.  
According to the data provided, the maximum gross takeoff weight from runway 14 at Saint 
Johns Industrial Airpark at a temperature of 46 degrees Fahrenheit using the ADI system and 
15 degrees of flaps is 43,205 pounds.  The maximum gross takeoff weight under the same 
conditions without using ADI and 13 degrees of flaps is 38,909 pounds.
Meteorological Information
The closest official weather observation station is the Show Low Municipal Airport, Show Low, 
Arizona, which is located 34.6 nautical miles southwest of the accident site.  The elevation of 
the weather observation station is 6,411 feet msl.  At 0750 hours, a record surface observation 
was reporting in part: Sky condition and ceiling, 18,000 foot thin scattered; visibility, 40 
statute miles: temperature, 46 degrees Fahrenheit; dew point, 22 degrees Fahrenheit; winds; 
190 degrees, at 4 knots; and altimeter, 30.40" inHg.  The density altitude at the Saint Johns 
Industrial Airpark was computed to be about 6,200 feet msl.
Airport Information
The Saint Johns Industrial Airpark is owned and operated by the City of Saint Johns, Arizona.  
The published elevation of the airport 5,733 feet msl.  The airport has two intersecting hard 
surfaced runways.  Runway 14 is 5,323 feet long by 75 feet wide. 
Wreckage and Impact Information
The airplane was witnessed striking the ground with the left wing tip while in a left turn.  The 
airplane came to rest in a horse pasture across the street from several residences, and within a 
block of the Apache County Annex Building which houses the local Head Start Day Care 
program.
The airplane's fuselage separated from the wings and came to rest with the cockpit area on top 
of the trailing edge of the right wing.  Both engines were separated from their nacelle mounts 
and both propellers separated from the engines through fractures in the reduction gear boxes.  
All three landing gear were separated from the fuselage.
The fuselage was split aft of the front door at the leading edge of the wing.  The forward cabin 
and the cockpit were destroyed by impact and postimpact fire.  The instrument panel was 
destroyed.  The flap and ADI switches and flap indicator were destroyed. 
Cargo consisting of fire and medical equipment and tools were spread throughout the area of 
the fuselage split.  The cargo was exposed to the postimpact fire and the combustible portions 
were burned, leaving those parts made of metal.  About three rows of seats were removed from 
the right side of the airplane in the area of the cargo door.  The removed seats were found 
stacked in the aft end of the fuselage on top of the last two rows of passenger seating.
The left wing was destroyed.  Five left wing flap tracks, two inboard and three outboard, were 
found with the flap roller bearing carriers near the top of the track.  The right wing was intact 
and the flap roller bearings were found in the same position as the left.  A measurement of the 
right flap extension was taken from a seam at the wing spar and found to be 68 inches. 
Flap measurements made from the same seam as another Convair aircraft were as follows; 
flaps up 67 inches, flaps 11 degrees 76.75 inches, and flaps 15 degrees 80 inches. 
An electrical service transmission cable was found wrapped around the nose gear and left main 
landing gear struts.  The left propeller was embedded in the ground after the accident.  The 
blades exhibited chordwise scoring, "S-bending" and were twisted.  One blade from the left 
propeller was broken at the hub and at midspan.  Both pieces of the broken propeller were 
found within 50 feet of the propeller hub.
The ADI fluid tank was destroyed.  Examination of the ADI lines revealed fluid in the supply 
lines attached to the right wing spar. The left engine ADI lines were damaged by impact.  The 
ADI line on the right engine between the shutoff valve and the inlet check valve was intact.  
There was no ADI fluid found in this line.
Medical and Pathological Information
All occupants sustained fatal injuries in the accident and post mortem examinations were 
conducted by the Apache County Coroner's Office.  Specimens from the occupants were 
retained for toxicological examination by the FAA Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI).  The 
results of the test were negative for alcohol and all screened drug substances.
Additional Information
Wreckage Release
The Safety Board did not retain any wreckage for further examination.  The wreckage was 
recovered at the accident site by Air Transport, Phoenix, Arizona.
