A witness stated that the airplane was observed on a low pass down the runway at about 900 to 
1,000 feet. The pilot then made three barrel rolls and lost altitude on all three rolls. The pilot 
remained in a closed traffic pattern and made a second pass down the runway at about 100 to 
200 feet. The airplane was observed to enter a pull-up and a barrel roll to the left. According to 
information from witness reports, when the airplane was at the 90-degree point, it entered a 
descent and crashed into the ground. Examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of a 
precrash failure or malfunction. The pilot had limited experience performing aerobatic flight, 
and he had only about 6 hours of flight time in this make and model of airplane. A colleague 
observed that when the pilot performed barrel roll maneuvers on previous flights, the airplane 
was 'dishing out and losing . . . altitude on a regular basis.'  The colleague said that he had 
'informed' the pilot that he should obtain some dual instruction. A toxicology test of the pilot's 
blood showed an alcohol level of 0.10%. 
Pilot impairment of judgment and performance due to alcohol, his resultant improper 
planning/decision, and his failure to maintain sufficient altitude above the terrain while 
performing an aerobatic maneuver.  Factors relating to the accident were: the pilot's lack of 
experience in the make and model of airplane, and his lack of experience in the type of 
operation (aerobatic flight). 
 On February 2, 1996, about 1715 eastern standard time, a Yakoblev 52 experimental airplane, 
N77YK, registered to a private owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, crashed 
while maneuvering in the vicinity of Boynton Beach, Florida. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane was destroyed. The private pilot was fatally 
injured. The flight originated from Willis Gliderport, Boynton Beach, Florida, about 30 
minutes before the accident.
     A witness stated neighbors observed the airplane make a low pass down runway 27 at about 
900 to 1,000 feet. The airplane made three barrel rolls and lost altitude on all three rolls. The 
airplane remained in closed traffic and made a second pass down the runway at about 120 
mph, and at about 100 to 200 feet. The airplane was observed to initiate a pull up and did a 
barrel roll to the left. When the airplane was 90 degrees off heading, it was observed to enter a 
vertical nose down descent and collide with the ground.
     On scene examination of the crash site conducted by the FAA revealed the airplane collided 
with the ground in a near vertical nose down attitude. The engine and composite propeller 
blades were buried below the ground. Both the left and right wing were displaced aft and 
sustained compression along the leading edge of both wings. The left and right fuel cells were 
ruptured. The fire department stated fuel was present at the crash site.
     Examination of the airframe, flight controls, engine assembly and accessories revealed no 
evidence of a precrash failure or malfunction. All components necessary for flight were present 
at the crash site. Continuity of the flight control system was confirmed for pitch, roll, and yaw.
     The next of kin could not locate the airplane log books.
     Post-mortem examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. James A. Benz, Palm Beach 
County Medical Examiner's Office, Palm Beach, Florida, on February 2, 1996. The cause of 
death was multiple blunt traumatic injuries. Post-mortem toxicology studies of specimens from 
the pilot was performed by the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Laboratory. These studies were 
positive for alcohol, 0.10 percent (blood) weight /volume, and 0.92 percent (gastric fluid) 
weight /volume. A comprehensive drug screen  by fluorescence polarization immunoassay and 
gas liquid chromatography revealed no drugs were detected.
