During landing, the right main landing gear shock strut cylinder and piston failed which 
caused the axle, wheels, and tires to separate. Metallurgical examination showed that the 
fracture surfaces had been damaged after separation. Two areas on the cylinder fracture face 
were not at an angle to suggest overstress separation, and ratchet marks were present which 
usually separate initiation sights on offset fracture planes. The piston fracture surfaces had 
features typical of overstress separation. The right main landing torque links had failed during 
landing 312 flight hours before this accident. The torque links, shimmy damper, and piston 
were replaced at that time; the cylinder was not replaced. 
the failure of the right main landing gear shock strut cylinder due to preexisting fractures. 
Contributing to the accident was: the failure of the operator to inspect the shock strut cylinder 
for fractures following a previous failure of the torque links, and the absence of specific 
directives and procedures from the aircraft manufacturer to inspect or replace the shock strut 
cylinder following torque link failure. 
 HISTORY OF THE FLIGHT
On February 1, 1996, at 1505 central standard time, a Douglas DC-9-32, N903VJ, 
registered to and operated by ValuJet Airlines, Inc., as a Title 14 CFR Part 121 scheduled 
domestic passenger flight, had the right main landing gear fail during landing at Nashville 
International Airport, Nashville, Tennessee. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time and an instrument flight rules flight plan was filed. The aircraft received substantial 
damage. The airline transport-rated captain, first officer, 3 flight attendants, and 75 passengers 
were not injured. The flight originated from Atlanta, Georgia, the same day, about 1430.
The flightcrew stated this was their third flight leg of the day, all of which were flown in 
this aircraft. The flight from Atlanta to Nashville was uneventful. The first officer was 
performing flying duties. On approach to Nashville they decided the captain would deploy the 
ground spoilers after landing because the automatic ground spoiler system was inoperative. 
The touchdown was normal in the touchdown area of the runway. As the captain deployed the 
ground spoilers they began to feel vibration and what appeared to be gyration and skipping of 
the right main gear as if the brakes were on. The vibration got worse as they slowed and the 
aircraft veered to the right. The first officer used aileron to keep the right wing up and rudder 
and brakes to maintain directional control. The aircraft came to a stop with the right wing 
down and the captain directed that all passengers exit via the left front door slide. Rescue 
personnel arrived and requested that the over wing exits be opened and that passengers exit 
over the wing.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Information on the captain and first officer is contained in this report in first pilot 
information and supplement E to this report.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
On December 24, 1995, 312 flight hours before the accident, the right main landing gear 
torque links on N903VJ failed during landing roll at Raleigh, North Carolina. The gear strut 
piston and axle rotated within the shock strut cylinder. The flightcrew was able to taxi off the 
runway, and the aircraft was towed to the gate. The right torque links, shimmy damper, and 
wheel assemblies were changed and the aircraft was ferried to Miami, Florida for further 
repairs. In Miami, the right gear strut piston was replaced and all lines and wires, including the 
anti-skid brake system wiring, were repaired. The gear strut cylinder was not changed. The 
aircraft was returned to service.
Metallurgical examination of the failed torque link and the removed shimmy damper 
was performed by McDonnell Douglas Aircraft, Materials Process and Engineering Laboratory. 
The lower torque link arm had failed at the apex bolt/shimmy damper as a result of fatigue 
cracking. The shimmy damper was found sealed, but almost empty of fluid. (See the attached 
McDonnell Douglas report)
Flight log discrepancy records obtained from ValuJet Airlines showed that from July 1, 
1995 until the Raleigh incident there were numerous occurrences of the right main gear tires 
being changed and discrepancies with the anti-skid brake system. These occurrences stopped 
after the repairs following the Raleigh incident. (See the attached records)
Additional aircraft information is contained in this report under aircraft information 
and in attachments to this report.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. Additional 
meteorological information is contained in this report under weather information.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The cockpit voice recorder and the digital flight data recorder were removed from the 
aircraft and forwarded to the NTSB Flight Recorder Laboratory, Washington, D. C., for 
readout. The cockpit voice recorder was not readout.
The readout indicated that at the moment of apparent touchdown the maximum 
recorded vertical acceleration value was 1.448 G's, at an airspeed of 134.43 knots. The vertical 
acceleration data from the twelve previous landings showed that the highest recorded value 
during the landing sequences was 1.448 G's. (See the attached Factual Report-Digital Flight 
Data Recorder)
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the runway by FAA, ValuJet, and McDonnell Douglas personnel showed 
the aircraft touched down at about the 1,500 foot point on the runway. The aircraft traveled 
about 500 to 1,000 feet before debris separated from the failed right main landing gear. The 
aircraft stopped on the runway center line at about the 6,500 foot point.
Examination of the separated portion of the right main landing gear showed the gear 
strut cylinder and piston had failed causing the separation of the axle, wheels, and tires.
METALLURGICAL EXAMINATION
Metallurgical examination of the failed right main landing gear cylinder and piston was 
performed by James F. Wildey II, National Resource Specialist, Metallurgy, NTSB, 
Washington, D.C. The landing gear cylinder fracture surface had a large majority of the 
fracture at a 45 degree shear plane, indicative of an overstress separation. No evidence of 
preexisting fracture areas was found on either of the mating fracture faces. However, two areas 
of the fracture, located on diametrically opposite sides of the cylinder, were not entirely on a 45 
degree plane. The fracture faces had sustained damage as a result of the accident and contained 
ratchet marks that usually separate initiation sites on slightly offset planes. The landing gear 
piston fracture faces showed no evidence of preexisting fracture areas. The fracture around the 
entire circumference of the break was on a 45 degree plane typical of an overstress separation. 
(See the attached Metallurgist's Factual Report)  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The aircraft was released to David L. Gentry, Vice President Maintenance, ValuJet 
Airlines, on February 6, 1996. Components retained by NTSB for further examination were 
released to Mr. Gentry on December 18, 1996.
