National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GREENFIELD, IA
Accident Number: CHI98LA186
Date & Time: 06/02/1998, 1830 CDT
Registration: N487JS
Aircraft: Sheets KITFOX II
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he was using 20-degrees of flaps for takeoff, which is not the normal takeoff configuration, because he was testing a new takeoff technique he had seen in an aviation publication.
The piloted stated that the aircraft became airborne, sooner than expected, and drifted to the right of the runway centerline.
While the aircraft was drifting across the runway it impacted the ground approximately 30' from the runway centerline.
In a telephone conversation with the pilot, he stated that the accident could of been avoided if he had built up additional airspeed before liftoff and after liftoff kept the aircraft low in ground effect.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the initial climb airspeed not obtained/maintained after liftoff by the pilot in command.
A factor was the improper compensation for wind conditions by the pilot in command.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT OBTAINED/MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was not operating on a flight plan.
The pilot sustained minor injuries.
The one passenger reported no injures.
The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot's written statement, the pilot was attempting a normal takeoff at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that he was using 20-degrees of flaps for takeoff, which is not the normal takeoff configuration, because he was testing a new takeoff technique he had seen in an aviation publication.
The piloted stated that the aircraft became airborne, sooner than expected, and drifted to the right of the runway centerline.
While the aircraft was drifting across the runway it impacted the ground approximately 30' from the runway centerline.
In a telephone conversation with the pilot, he stated that the accident could of been avoided if he had built up additional airspeed before liftoff and after liftoff kept the aircraft low in ground effect.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
