National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NORFOLK, NE
Accident Number: CHI98LA188
Date & Time: 06/01/1998, 1700 CDT
Registration: N6847E
Aircraft: Cessna 175A
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis After takeoff the airplane departed controlled flight and impacted the terrain.
The pilot said that he believes that the airplane encountered a wind shift.
The airplane departed on runway 31.
The reported winds six minutes prior to the accident were 270 degrees at 23 knots with gusts to 27 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's misjudged wind conditions and his not obtaining/maintaining compensation for wind conditions.
A factor was a sudden wind shift.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - SUDDEN WINDSHIFT 2.
(C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The airplane was destroyed on impact with the terrain and a post accident fire.
The pilot and two passengers reported minor injuries.
The pilot stated that the airplane may have encountered windshear and was unable to climb.
The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.
No flight plan was on file.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot said that the airplane lifted off at about 65 knots.
He said that when the airplane reached an altitude of about 200 to 300 feet, the airplane began to descend and he was unable to get the airplane to maintain flight.
He said, "I believe the sole cause of the accident to be a change in wind direction and/or velocity, complicated by large groves of trees to the west of the runway ...
."
He said that there was no mechanical failure or loss of power in the airplane.
He said that just prior to impact he extended the flaps to full.
The departure was on runway 31.
The winds recorded at the departure airport six minutes prior to the accident were 270 degrees at 23 knots with gusts to 27 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
