National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: NORTH PLATTE, NE
Accident Number: CHI98LA189
Date & Time: 06/02/1998, 1125 CDT
Registration: N8469W
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-180
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot elected to land on runway 30R.
The winds were reported as 050 at 13.
During the flare the pilot realized that the left main landing gear was off the side of the runway.
During rollout the left wing impacted a runway light.
The pilot was able to negotiate around a second runway light and re-enter the runway.
A post accident examination of the airplane failed to reveal any pre-accident anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain control of the aircraft.
Factors were the crosswind and runway light.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
(F) OBJECT - RUNWAY LIGHT Factual Information On June 2, 1998, at 1125 central daylight time, a Piper PA-28-180, N8469W, sustained substantial damage when the airplane impacted the terrain while landing on runway 30R at North Platte Regional Airport, near North Platte, Nebraska.
The pilot and one passenger reported no injuries.
The personal flight was being conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan was on file.
The flight departed Council Bluffs Airport, Council Bluffs, Nebraska, at 0933 with an intended destination of Crawford, Colorado, after a stop in North Platte.
The pilot stated that when he flared for the landing he found the left main landing gear to be off the edge of the runway.
The airplane touched down and the left wing struck a runway light.
He stated that he was able to negotiate around another runway light and re-enter the runway.
He said that the wind was reported to be from 050 degrees at 13 knots when he attempted a landing on runway 30R.
An examination of the airplane post accident failed to reveal any pre-accident anomalies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 67, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
