National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: GALVESTON, TX
Accident Number: FTW98LA038
Date & Time: 11/01/1997, 1119 CST
Registration: N40201
Aircraft: Piper PA-23-250
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Ferry
 Analysis After takeoff, at about 250 to 300 feet AGL, the right engine lost partial power, followed by the left engine.
The pilot made a wide left turn toward a small field with trees in front, and retracted the landing gear.
During the forced landing, the pilot 'intentionally' hit the trees in order to slow down and go under some power lines.
After going under the wires, the airplane came to a stop in the field.
The mechanic reported that the fuel tanks were drained and visually inspected.
About one gallon of water was drained from the tanks, and both fuel filters were cleaned.
The mechanic also reported that rained had fallen on the day before the accident flight.
Examination of the fuel filters revealed that they were both clogged with debris.
A related factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
2 ENGINES 2.
(C) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE 3.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,FILTER - BLOCKED(PARTIAL) 4.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING AFTER TAKEOFF ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 5.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 6.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 7.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed.
The airline transport rated pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained minor injuries.
The flight had just originated from the Scholes Field Airport, Galveston, Texas.
During a personal interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the pilot reported that the airplane had not been flown for approximately two years, and he was to ferry the aircraft for the owner from Galveston to Colorado Springs, Colorado.
A mechanic at the Scholes Field Airport prepared the airplane for the flight and obtained a ferry permit from the FAA.
The pilot further reported that after takeoff from runway 31, at about 250 to 300 feet AGL, the airplane's right engine lost partial power, and then the left engine lost partial power.
He made a wide left turn towards a small field with trees in front and retracted the landing gear.
During the emergency landing to the field, he "intentionally" hit the trees in order to slow down and go under some power lines.
After going under the wires the airplane came to a stop in the field.
Examination of the airplane by the FAA inspector revealed fire damage to both the left and right engines.
Both wings and both horizontal stabilizers were structurally damaged.
Examination of the fuel filters revealed that they were both clogged with debris.
During a personal interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge, the mechanic who performed maintenance on the airplane to get it ready for the ferry flight reported that the airplane had been parked outside for two years at the Seafood Warehouse, a private airstrip.
Before ferrying the airplane to Galveston for further maintenance, the fuel tanks were drained and visually inspected.
About one gallon of water was drained from the tanks before fuel started draining out.
Both fuel filters were cleaned.
There were no problems with the engines during the ferry flight to Galveston.
The mechanic also reported that he did not fly the airplane, but he did taxi it.
While taxing the airplane, he spun it around to dislodge any debris that might be in the fuel bladders.
He also shook both wings and no debris was found.
The mechanic further reported that he had test run the engines for about 10 hours.
During the test run, one engine was not developing full power, and he had another mechanic change the engine's fuel injectors.
The mechanic reported that it rained the day before the accident flight.
A flight instructor told the mechanic that he observed the pilot walk out to the airplane; however, he "did not see the pilot sump the fuel."
He also observed the pilot perform several high speed taxis before taking off.
During these taxis the engines were "sputtering and coughing."
During the ensuing takeoff, both engines sounded good until the airplane started to turn.
As the airplane turned, one engine lost power, and then the other engine lost power.
Pilot Information Certificate: Airline Transport; Commercial; Flight Engineer Age: 50 Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane Single-engine Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
