National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ELK CITY, OK
Accident Number: FTW98LA040
Date & Time: 11/02/1997, 1415 CST
Registration: N5745R
Aircraft: Cessna 172G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to personnel at the airport, the airplane, which is based at the Elk City Municipal Airport, taxied to runway 35 to depart for a local flight.
The pilot was reported to have completed the runup facing into the wind at the runup area for runway 35.
Following the runup, the pilot maneuvered the airplane to take the active runway.
While turning the airplane, the tail of the airplane was turned into the prevailing wind and the airplane nosed over and came to rest in the inverted position.
The recorded winds at the Clinton Sherman Industrial Airport which is located 18 miles east of Elk City, were reported from 340 degrees at 27 knots, gusting to 33.
The peak wind was reported at 35 knots on the 1345 hourly observation.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The high winds and the pilot's poor judgment in attempting to taxi in the existing wind conditions.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: TAXI - TO TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(C) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH WIND 2.
(C) JUDGMENT - POOR - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS Factual Information On November 2, 1997, at 1415 central standard time, a Cessna 172G airplane, N5745R, was substantially damaged following a loss of control while taxiing, near Elk City, Oklahoma.
The non-instrument rated private pilot and his passenger were not injured.
The airplane was owned and operated by the pilot.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight which was conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight was originating from the Elk City Municipal Airport at the time of the accident.
According to personnel at the airport, the airplane, which is based at the Elk City Municipal Airport, taxied for departure on runway 35 for a local flight.
The pilot was reported to have completed the runup facing into the wind at the runup area for runway 35.
Following the runup, the pilot maneuvered the airplane to take the active runway.
While turning the airplane, the tail of the airplane was turned into the prevailing wind and the airplane nosed over and came to rest in the inverted position.
The airport manager stated that due to the high winds, the activity at the airport was minimal on the day of the accident.
He further stated that approximately one hour prior to the accident, a Cessna 182 landed, purchased fuel and departed without incident.
The pilot reported to the investigator-in-charge, that he intended to fly to the Sayre Municipal Airport, which is located approximately 13 miles to the southwest of Elk City.
He further stated he was well aware of the winds and had positioned the flight controls in the proper direction to maintain control of the airplane.
He added that he purchased the airplane on August 31, 1997.
Examination of the airplane by the pilot and the airport manager revealed that both wings, the vertical stabilizer and the fuselage, aft of the baggage compartment, sustained structural damage.
The recorded winds at the Clinton Sherman Industrial Airport, which is located 18 miles east of Elk City, were reported from 340 degrees at 27 knots, gusting to 33.
The peak wind was reported at 35 knots on the 1345 hourly observation.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 49, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
