National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CLERMONT, FL
Accident Number: MIA98LA018
Date & Time: 11/01/1997, 1548 EST
Registration: N813LJ
Aircraft: Saldairiaga BUCCANEER II
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Witnesses stated they observed the airplane start a steep left turn, estimated more than a 45 degree angle of bank, between 150 to 300 feet at a slow airspeed.
The airplane appeared to enter an accelerated stall.
The nose pitched down,  and the airplane collided with the ground in a left wing low, nose-down attitude.
Before the airplane collided with the ground, the engine was heard to increase to full power.
Examination of the airframe and flight control assembly revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to maintain adequate airspeed, while maneuvering at a low altitude, which resulted in an inadvertent stall and subsequent in-flight collision with terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
MANEUVER - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane was destroyed.
The student pilot was fatally injured.
The flight originated from Flying Gator Airpark, Clermont, Florida, about 1 hour 18 minutes before the accident.
Witnesses who knew the pilot stated they observed the airplane between 150 to 300 feet southwest of the airpark.
The airplane entered a steep left turn, estimated more than a 45- degree angle of bank at a slow airspeed.
The airplane  appeared to enter an accelerated stall.
The nose pitched down and the airplane collided with the ground in a left wing low nose-down attitude.
Before the airplane collided with the ground the engine was heard to increase to full power.
Examination of the airframe, flight control system and engine assembly revealed no evidence of a precrash mechanical failure or malfunction.
All components necessary for flight were present at the crash site.
Continuity of the flight control system was confirmed for pitch, roll, and yaw.
An examination of the engine assembly and accessories was not conducted based on statements provided by eyewitnesses indicating the engine was operating at time of impact with the terrain.
Postmortem examination of the pilot was conducted by Dr. Susan M. Rendon, Associate Medical Examiner District Five, Leesburg, Florida, on November 2, 1997.
The cause of death was injuries related to the aircraft accident.
Postmortem toxicology studies of specimens from the pilot was performed by the Forensic Toxicology Research Section, Federal Aviation Administration, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
These studies were negative for alcohol, basic, acidic and neutral drugs.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Yes Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
