National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: EUGENE, OR
Accident Number: SEA98LA029
Date & Time: 11/01/1997, 1833 PST
Registration: N5190B
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported to the operator that the engine experienced a loss of power during the return leg of a cross-country flight.
A forced landing was made on an open field.
During the landing roll, the airplane collided with a fence.
Inspection of the fuel tanks revealed that the left fuel tank was empty, and no fuel was produced when sumped.
The right fuel tank contained approximately 1/8 of an inch of fuel, and produced approximately eight ounces of fuel when sumped.
No fuel was added during the course of the cross-country flight.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to refuel which subsequently led to fuel exhaustion.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed.
The aircraft was substantially damaged and the private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The flight originated from Eugene at about 1400 and was destined for Elma, Washington.
The flight was returning from Elma to Eugene, when the accident occurred.
The pilot reported to the operator that the engine experienced a loss of power.
A forced landing was made on an open field.
During the landing roll, the airplane collided with a fence.
Personnel from the airport, who helped recover the aircraft, reported that the tachometer indicated that 4.0 hours had been accumulated, and the Hobbs meter indicated that a total of 4.4 hours had been accumulated for the flight.
The fuel tanks and sumps were inspected to determine the quantity of fuel remaining in the tanks.
It was reported that there was no visible sign of fuel in the left fuel tank, and no fuel was produced when sumped.
The right fuel tank contained approximately 1/8 of an inch of fuel, and produced approximately eight ounces of fuel when sumped.
The engine sump produced approximately 14 ounces of fuel.
Fueling records indicate that the aircraft was last fueled on October 31, 1997.
The structural damage was not reported to the National Transportation Safety Board until January 27, 1998.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 52, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
: 1670 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 59 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 6884 Hours Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-235-L2C Registered Owner: CHUCKS SERVICE CENTER Rated Power: 108 hp Operator: AERIAL COMM.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
