National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ELKIN, NC
Accident Number: MIA98LA023
Date & Time: 11/01/1997, 1521 EST
Registration: N65140
Aircraft: Let L-13
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The instructor pilot stated that while on final approach to runway 20, the student encountered both an increase in headwinds and a sink condition.
Noticing a loss of altitude, the student voiced doubt they would make the runway, and the instructor pilot took control of the glider.
The instructor quickly considered and then rejected a cow pasture, and then continued his approach to runway 20.
The glider collided with an airport perimeter fence, short of the runway.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The instructor's pilot's misjudgment of altitude and distance, and his inadequate compensation for the wind conditions.
Unfavorable winds and a fence were contributing factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: UNDERSHOOT Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - UNFAVORABLE WIND 2.
(F) DISTANCE/ALTITUDE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 3.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 4.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The glider sustained substantial damage.
The certified flight instructor, (CFI) and rated commercial pilot student reported no injuries.
The flight departed the same airport about 1509.
The CFI stated that the student had flown seven to eight instructional flights with a least two other instructors, and was close to soloing.
Previously, the student had "bounced" a landing, so the training emphasis this flight was to be towed flight and landing touchdown.
The student's turn to final approach put them about 2,000 feet from the runway threshhold, on speed, on centerline, and about 100 feet high; high enough, in fact, that the CFI remembers considering that to be an opportune time to demonstrate the sideslip maneuver, but reconsidered.
In quick succession the glider went low, the student voiced doubt they would make the runway, the CFI took control, quickly considered and rejected a cow pasture, and collided with an airport perimeter fence short of the runway.
The tow pilot compared landing to takeoff conditions as, "higher winds from the south, heavy sink, and turbulence".
The CFI said, "...winds picked up...160, 170 to 210" (degrees), "...15 gusting to 20" (knots) and he  ".. encountered sink, but little turbulence".
: 1102 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 56 Hours Engines: Unknown Airframe Total Time: 2329 Hours Engine Manufacturer: ELT: Not installed Engine Model/Series: Registered Owner: WILSON BROWN Rated Power: Operator: WILSON BROWN Operating Certificate(s) Held: None Operator Does Business As: SOUTHERN SOARING, INC.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
