National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: TOOELE, UT
Accident Number: FTW98LA041
Date & Time: 11/01/1997, 1055 MST
Registration: N96575
Aircraft: Cessna 172P
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot had planned to practice stop-and-go landings on runway 34.
He said the airplane touched down on all three wheels simultaneously, because he did not flare sufficiently.
The left main and nose wheel came up, but instead of going around, he pushed the nose down.
The airplane began to veer to the left, and the student corrected by applying right rudder.
When the left main wheel contacted the runway, the airplane veered further to the left.
The student applied additional right rudder retracted the flaps and added power to abort the landing.
As the airplane departed the left side of the runway, the student closed the throttle and applied brakes.
The left wing struck a 3,000-foot marker sign, and the airplane collided with a fence.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: failure of the pilot to maintain directional control of the airplane, while landing.
Factors related to the accident were: the pilot's improper flare for landing, his delay in attempting to go around (abort the landing), and the encounter with a runway marker and a fence.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 1.
(F) FLARE - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) RECOVERY FROM BOUNCED LANDING - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
(F) ABORTED LANDING - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 5.
(F) OBJECT - AIRPORT SIGN/MARKER 6.
(F) OBJECT - FENCE Factual Information On November 1, 1997, approximately 1055 mountain standard time, a Cessna 172P, N96575, owned by Flightech LLC, which was leased back by Great Western Aviation, was substantially damaged when it collided with a sign and a fence during takeoff at Tooele, Utah.
The student pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the instructional flight being conducted under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The Flight originated at Salt Lake City, Utah, at 0950.
The student pilot had planned to practice unsupervised stop and go landings on runway 34.
He said the airplane touched down on all three wheels simultaneously because he did not flare sufficiently.
The left main and nose wheel came up but instead of going around, he pushed the nose down.
The airplane began to veer to the left and he corrected by applying right rudder.
When the left main wheel contacted the runway, the airplane veered further to the left.
The pilot applied additional right rudder retracted the flaps, and added power to abort the landing.
As the airplane departed the left side of the runway, the pilot closed the throttle and applied brakes.
The left wing struck the 3,000-foot marker sign and the airplane collided with a fence.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 19, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
