National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: ARNAUDVILLE, LA
Accident Number: FTW98LA039
Date & Time: 11/02/1997, 1630 CST
Registration: N9437B
Aircraft: Cessna 175
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The flight had been airborne for 1 hour 15 minutes when a total loss of engine power occurred.
During a forced landing in a field, the airplane hit a drainage ditch, the nose gear collapsed, and subsequently, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.
The airplane contained 43 gallons of fuel at the time of departure, and the fuel selector remained in the 'BOTH' position during the flight.
At the site, fuel was found in the fuel tanks; however, a crack was noted in the fuel line between the fuel strainer (mounted on the firewall) and the engine fuel pump.
There was evidence that air entered the fuel system through the cracked line, resulting in fuel starvation to the engine.
The reason for the crack in the line was not determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: a cracked fuel line, which allowed air to enter the line and lead to fuel starvation and loss of engine power.
A related factor was: the lack of suitable terrain for a forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM,LINE - CRACKED 2.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH Factual Information On November 2, 1997, at 1630 central standard time, a Cessna 175, N9437B, struck the terrain during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power near Arnaudville, Louisiana.
The airplane was owned and operated by a private individual under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The private pilot and 3 passengers were not injured and the airplane sustained substantial damage.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight that departed from Homer, Louisiana, at 1515.
A flight plan was not filed.
The pilot performed the emergency checklist procedures; however, the engine did not restart.
The pilot commenced the forced landing procedures for landing in a plowed field.
During the landing roll, the airplane hit a drainage ditch, collapsing the nose gear.
Subsequently, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted.
Prior to the original departure from Beaux Bridge, the pilot fueled the airplane with 43 gallons of fuel and performed a preflight inspection.
The fuel selector remained in the "BOTH" position during the flight.
The FAA inspector examining the airplane found structural damage on the left wing.
Approximately 6 gallons of fuel was found in the fuel tanks.
The inspector noted a crack in the "fuel line between the fuel strainer (mounted on the firewall) and the engine fuel pump.
It is suspected that air was suctioned in to the fuel system through the cracked line, resulting in fuel starvation to the engine."
The reason for the crack in the line was not determined.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 41, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
