Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
OAKWOOD, OH
Accident Number:
IAD96LA088
Date & Time:
06/01/1996, 2100 EDT 
Registration:
N2261U
Aircraft:
Brantly Helicopter B2B
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that while he maneuvered during the approach to land, the helicopter 
experienced a total loss of engine power.  When the power loss occurred, he '...nosed down and 
put the collective down...' to enter autorotation. He '...picked a spot [for landing] ... looked at 
the rotor RPM (RRPM), it was 320... [and] at 60 to 80 feet I pulled collective...' to begin 
deceleration.  The helicopter struck the ground with a forward speed of 30 MPH with the tail 
skid striking the ground prior to the main gear.  According to the pilot, the normal operating 
range for RRPM is 400-472 and that 400 RRPM was minimum for autorotation.  The pilot did 
not possess a helicopter rating, but had received 5 to 6 hours of instruction in helicopters.  He 
reported that he had flown 28 hours within the preceding six months, including 3 hours in the 
accident aircraft.  Postaccident examination revealed that the fuel tank vent tube assembly was 
clogged with '...insect and nest remains... .' The most recent documented 100-hour 
maintenance inspection of the helicopter occurred on 5/18/70. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
a loss of engine power due to inadequate maintenance and inspection by the owner/operator 
which failed to detect the clogged fuel vent line, and the pilot's improper autorotation.  A 
related factor was the pilot's inadequate training/familiarization with helicopter emergency 
procedures. 
Page 2 of 6IAD96LA088
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,VENT - BLOCKED(TOTAL)
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSPECTION - INADEQUATE - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: HARD LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
3. (C) AUTOROTATION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (F) INADEQUATE TRAINING(EMERGENCY PROCEDURE(S)) - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6IAD96LA088
Factual Information
 On June 1, 1996, at 2100 eastern daylight time, a Brantly B2B helicopter, N2261U, sustained 
substantial damage when it collided with terrain during a forced landing near Oakwood, Ohio.  
The certificated private pilot/helicopter owner received minor injuries and the one passenger 
sustained serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident, no flight plan was filed.  The flight operated under 14 CFR Part 91.  The helicopter 
departed private property adjacent to the accident site for a local orientation flight, exact time 
unknown.
The pilot reported that while he maneuvered during the approach to land, the helicopter 
experienced a total loss of engine power.  The pilot said that when the power loss occurred, he 
"...nosed down and put the collective down..." to enter autorotation.  He stated that when he 
attempted to enter autorotation the helicopter was at "...200-300 feet at around 40 MPH."  He 
reported that he "...picked a spot [for landing]... looked at the rotor RPM (RRPM), it was 
320...[and] at 60 to 80 feet I pulled collective..." to begin deceleration.  The pilot said that the 
helicopter struck the ground with a forward speed of 30 MPH with the tail skid striking the 
ground prior to the main gear.  According to the pilot, the normal operating range for RRPM is 
400-472 and that 400 RRPM was minimum for autorotation.  While discussing the attempted 
autorotation, the pilot said: "Normally, the rotor will speed up when you bring collective in."  
The response to an engine power loss at altitude is described in a United States Army Training 
Circular as follows: "Upon detecting engine failure, the [pilot] will lower the collective to 
maintain rotor RPM within limits while adjusting the pedals to trim the aircraft.  He will select 
a suitable landing area and, using turns and adjusting airspeed as necessary, maneuver the 
aircraft for a safe landing to the intended landing area.  At approximately 100 feet AGL, apply 
aft cyclic to initiate a smooth, progressive deceleration.  Maintain aircraft alignment with the 
touchdown area by properly adjusting the pedals and cyclic.  Adjust the collective as necessary 
to prevent excessive rotor RPM.  At approximately 15 feet AGL, apply sufficient collective to 
control the rate of descent and ground speed.  Adjust the cyclic to attain a landing attitude, and 
apply collective as necessary just prior to touchdown to cushion the landing."  Excerpts from 
the referenced publication (United States Army Training Circular No. 1-211: Aircrew Training 
Manual Utility Helicopter p. 6-76, 9 December 1992) are appended.
The pilot reported that he "...lost fuel pressure which resulted in engine failure."  A 
postaccident inspection of the aircraft and its records by a Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) Aviation Safety Inspector revealed that the fuel overboard vent tube assembly was 
clogged.  The FAA Inspector stated: "Cutting open the tube near the open overboard vent 
end...resulted in finding insect and nest remains that filled the tube.  The vent tube was 
plugged in at least two places and a third plugged location was not opened up for examination."  
The examination of the aircraft records revealed that the most recent documented 100 hour 
inspection was accomplished on May 18, 1970.  
The pilot reported that he did not possess a helicopter rating, and that he had received "...5 to 6 
hours..." of instruction in helicopters.  According to the Ohio State Highway Patrol Aircraft 
Crash Record, the pilot reported that he had flown 28 hours within the preceding six months, 
including about 3 hours in the accident aircraft.
Page 4 of 6IAD96LA088
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/17/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Brantly Helicopter
Registration:
N2261U
Model/Series:
B2B B2B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
423
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/18/1970, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1670 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
53 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
640 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
VIO-360-A1A
Registered Owner:
C. W. BRIGHT
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
RICK DOBBELAERE
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6IAD96LA088
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Bright
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FDY, 812 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
33 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
2050 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
100°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 25000 ft agl
Visibility
15 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
120°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0000 
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
BRIAN      C RAYNER
Adopted Date:
10/22/1996
Additional Participating Persons:
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6IAD96LA088
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
