Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
RIMROCK, WA
Accident Number:
SEA96LA108
Date & Time:
06/01/1996, 1500 PDT 
Registration:
N2965N
Aircraft:
Cessna 120
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot attempted to take off from a 2,471-foot-long rough turf runway. He reported that the 
takeoff attempt went normally until the airplane reached a speed of 40 to 45 MPH and that the 
airplane did not accelerate beyond that speed. Unable to accelerate or to get airborne by the 
point on the runway at which he was accustomed to doing so, the pilot aborted the takeoff and 
initiated braking. The tailwheel-equipped airplane nosed over onto its back about 200 feet 
short of the runway end. After the accident, an FAA inspector computed the airplane to be 32 
pounds over maximum gross weight. The U.S. Government and Washington state airport 
directories indicated that the unattended airport was closed form October 1 through June 1. 
Density altitude at the airport was calculated to be 3,424 feet. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's delay in aborting the takeoff, and his excessive use of brakes while decelerating the 
airplane during the aborted takeoff.  Factors relating to the accident were: the pilot's loading 
the airplane above its maximum gross weight, high density altitude, and the rough surface of 
the runway. 
Page 2 of 6SEA96LA108
Findings
Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ABORTED
Findings
1. (F) AIRCRAFT WEIGHT AND BALANCE - EXCEEDED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH DENSITY ALTITUDE
3. (C) ABORTED TAKEOFF - DELAYED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) BRAKES(NORMAL) - EXCESSIVE - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (F) AIRPORT FACILITIES,RUNWAY/LANDING AREA CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
6. AIRPORT/FACILITIES - CLOSED
Page 3 of 6SEA96LA108
Factual Information
 On June 1, 1996, at approximately 1500 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 120, N2965N, 
sustained substantial damage when it nosed over during an aborted takeoff at Tieton State 
Airport near Rimrock, Washington.  The private pilot received a minor injury; his single 
passenger was uninjured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed for the 14 CFR 91 local flight. 
The pilot was attempting to take off on runway 20, which according to the U.S. Government 
Airport/Facility Directory (A/FD)  is a 2,471 by 140 foot turf runway with a rough surface.  The 
airport elevation is 2,961 feet above sea level.  The pilot reported that the takeoff proceeded 
normally until the airplane reached an indicated airspeed of 40 to 45 MPH, but that "after that 
the indicated airspeed didn't increase."  He reported what happened during the rest of the 
accident sequence as follows:
After landing and taking off about 30 or 40 times from this strip, and in this airplane, 
over the last five or six years, I knew where I should be developing lift and able to get the 
mains off the  rough ground and build airspeed in ground effect.  This was not 
happening.  Even though the airspeed indicator had not risen over about 40 or 45 I was 
still attempted [sic] to ease the yoke back and see if the airplane wanted to fly....The plane 
still did not want to lift into ground effect. Based on previous experience I should have 
had the plane developing lift before the camp ground [just beyond midfield according to a 
hand-drawn sketch furnished with the pilot's statement.] When I passed the camp ground, 
went a little further and still was not developing lift, I pulled all the power...and started 
applying the [brakes].  I eased back on the yoke lowering the tail to the ground and then 
continued to hold the yoke in my gut while applying brakes.  As we slowed I applied more 
brakes....The tail rose and I saw the nose go down as we nosed over the front and  came to rest 
upside down...approximately 200 [feet] from the end of the strip.
The pilot reported the weather at the airport as clear, 30 miles visibility, temperature 72 
degrees F, and altimeter setting 30.80 inches Hg, with no precipitation or restrictions to 
visibility.  He stated in his narrative that the wind sock at the top of the field "was hanging limp 
at the time I launched."  Based on the reported temperature and altimeter setting and the field 
elevation, density altitude was computed by the investigator to be 3,424 feet.
The FAA investigator assigned to the accident, an operations air safety inspector from the 
Flight Standards District Office at Renton, Washington, furnished a post-accident weight and 
balance computation which indicated (based on weight and balance data in the aircraft 
records, and fuel and occupant loading reported by the pilot) that the aircraft's gross weight at 
the time of the accident was 32 pounds over its maximum gross weight (1,482 pounds actual 
versus 1,450 pounds maximum.)
The pilot made the following recommendations on his accident report as to how the accident 
could have been prevented:  "(1) greater power  (2) less weight  (3) abort sooner  (4) go easier 
on the brakes as airplane slows."
The A/FD and the Pilot's Guide to Washington Airports (published by the Washington State 
Department of Transportation Aeronautics Division, which also maintains the unattended 
airport) both indicate that Tieton State Airport is closed from October 1 through June 1.  The 
A/FD contains an instruction to contact the state Aeronautics Division prior to use of the 
Page 4 of 6SEA96LA108
airport.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/05/1995
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
428 hours (Total, all aircraft), 300 hours (Total, this make and model), 329 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 4 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 3 
hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N2965N
Model/Series:
120 120
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
13223
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/12/1995, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1450 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
200 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
3276 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
C-85-12F
Registered Owner:
YAKIMA 65N FLYING CLUB
Rated Power:
85 hp
Operator:
LYNN L. HARDEN
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6SEA96LA108
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
, 0 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0000 
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
30 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C 
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (WA49)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
TIETON STATE (WA49)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
2961 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Rough
Runway Used:
20
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2471 ft / 140 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
GREGG        NESEMEIER
Adopted Date:
04/03/1997
Additional Participating Persons:
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6SEA96LA108
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
