Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Owatonna, MN
Accident Number:
CHI03LA034
Date & Time:
10/01/2002, 1530 CDT 
Registration:
N32039
Aircraft:
Waco UPF-7
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The instructional flight resulted in substantial damage to the airplane during a go-around from 
a bounced landing when it veered off runway 30, impacted the runway's precision approach 
path indicator light unit, and nosed over in a ditch.  The wind was from 360 degrees at 14 knots 
gusting to 18 knots.  The dual student was receiving tailwheel training from a certified flight 
instructor (CFI), which began earlier in the day in a Champion 7ECA and transitioned to a 
Waco UPF-7, which was owned by the CFI.  The fourth flight of the day was to serve as a 
transition for landing on a hard surface runway in the Waco UPF-7.  The first landing on the 
hard surface runway was reported as successful.  The second landing resulted in a bounced 
landing followed by a go-around.  The third landing resulted in a bounced landing followed by 
a go-around attempt at which point there was a reported transfer of controls to the CFI.  The 
Waco UPF-7 was described in a publication as having little visibility straight ahead.  The 
publication suggested that CFIs have at least 20 hours in the specific model of tailwheel 
airplane in which they want to give instruction in. All of the flights were accomplished with the 
CFI occupying the front seat and the dual student in the rear seat.  The CFI reported a total 
flight time of 17 hours as instructor in Waco UPF-7 airplanes, of which about 3 hours were 
accumulated on the day of the accident.  The dual student had a tailwheel endorsement and 
accumulated total flight time 2.7 hours in the accident airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The remedial action not performed by the certified flight instructor (CFI) during the bounced 
landing and directional control not maintained during the go-around by CFI.  Contributing 
factors were the CFIs preflight planning/preparation in placing the dual student in the rear 
seat, the limited ability for visual detection from the rear seat, and the lack of instructional 
experience of the CFI in the make and model of the accident airplane.  The gusts and crosswind 
were additional factors.
Page 2 of 6CHI03LA034
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR)
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND
2. (F) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
3. (F) LACK OF EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
4. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS
5. (C) REMEDIAL ACTION - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
6. (F) VISUAL/AURAL DETECTION
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR)
Findings
7. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
----------
Occurrence #3: NOSE OVER
Phase of Operation: GO-AROUND (VFR)
Page 3 of 6CHI03LA034
Factual Information
On October 1, 2002, at 1530 central daylight time, a Waco UPF-7, N32039, was substantially 
damaged during a go-around from a bounced landing on runway 30 at Owatonna Regional 
Airport (OWA), Owatonna, Minnesota.  The airplane veered off the left side of the runway, 
impacted the runway's precision approach path indicator lights, and nosed over in a ditch.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 
instructional flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The certified flight instructor (CFI) and 
dual student were uninjured.  The local flight originated from OWA at 1500.
The dual student stated that he was receiving tailwheel training from the CFI.  He stated that 
there were four flights preformed on the day of the accident, all of which were flown with the 
CFI occupying the front seat.  The first flight was in a Champion 7ECA which was 0.7 hours in 
duration.  During that flight, he successfully performed three three-point landings and three 
tail wheel landings at OWA.  The second flight was in the accident airplane in which they 
performed slips, stalls, and slow flight, demonstrating airspeed control and the airplanes 
descent rate with no power during a 1.2 hour flight.  The third flight was flown in the accident 
airplane at OWA where they demonstrated five three point landings and five wheel landing 
during a 1 hour flight.   The fourth flight, which was the accident flight, was to serve as a 
transition to the paved runway at OWA.  The dual student stated that he made two successful 
wheel landings on grass as practice for the paved runway.  He then moved to the paved runway 
and made a successful wheel landing.  A second landing resulted in a bounce and a go-around.  
The third landing attempt resulted in a bounce followed by an addition power to execute a go-
around.  At that point, the CFI took control.  The airplane continued to the left, off the runway, 
through the grass, and struck a ditch, flipping the airplane over.
The Compleat Taildragger Pilot (1998) states under Selecting An Instructor, "It would be 
beneficial if his record included at least 20 hours in the specific model which you want your 
instructor in.  Remember that the instructor has two primary functions.  First, he is there to 
teach; secondly he must prevent any accident while you learn, and he can hardly accomplish 
this with only 10 or 15 hours of taildragger time.  To be sure, time flown is not the only criterion 
for choosing an instructor, and you can certainly think of others.  However, the minimums 
mentioned above are a good starting point.  The publication also states under Visibility, 
"Taildraggers in general have a reputation for poor visibility... Most of the older bi-planes as 
exemplified by the Stearman and Waco UPF-7 have little visibility straight ahead while in the 
three-point attitude, and the visibility to the sides is somewhat impaired by the presence of the 
wings and struts."
The accident airplane, serial number 5670, was owned by the CFI who had a total flight time of 
15,500 hours, of which 2,000 hours were in single engine airplanes and 36 hours were in the 
accident make and model.  The CFI reported a total flight time of 32 hours in the last 90 days 
and a total flight time of 17 hours as an instructor in the accident make and model.  Three 
hours in the accident make and model were accumulated in the last 24 hours.
The dual student pilot had a tail wheel endorsement prior to receiving instruction in the 
accident airplane.  He reported a total flight time of 2,205 hours in single engine airplane of 
which 2.7 hours were in the accident make and model.
The OWA weather, at 2120, recorded wind from 360 degrees at 14 knots gusting to 18 knots.
Page 4 of 6CHI03LA034
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial; Flight 
Engineer
Age:
47, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Balloon; Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/18/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/25/2002
Flight Time:
15500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 36 hours (Total, this make and model), 13800 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 150 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
58, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/30/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2423 hours (Total, all aircraft), 3 hours (Total, this make and model), 2356 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6CHI03LA034
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Waco
Registration:
N32039
Model/Series:
UPF-7 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
5670
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/25/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1488.11 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
W670-6N
Registered Owner:
David A. Schroeder
Rated Power:
220 hp
Operator:
David A. Schroeder
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OWA, 1146 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
2120 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
14 knots / 18 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
360°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.92 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Owatonna, MN (OWA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (OWA)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
OWATONNA MUNI (OWA)
Runway Surface Type:
Concrete
Airport Elevation:
1145 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
30
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5500 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Go Around
Page 6 of 6CHI03LA034
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
44.123333, -93.260556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Mitchell F Gallo
Adopted Date:
09/30/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
OT Frampton; Federal Aviation Administration; Minneapolis, MN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
