National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location: Hebron, IL
Incident Number: CEN12IA050
Date & Time: 11/01/2011, 1730 CDT
Registration: N30CY
Aircraft: NUSBAUM VAQUERO
Aircraft Damage: None
Defining Event: Miscellaneous/other
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot experienced a medical event in-flight and landed his airplane in a field.
The airplane sustained no damage.
The pilot's son arrived where the airplane landed and saw the pilot lying back in the airplane™s seat; the pilot did not appear to be breathing.
First responders revived and subsequently transported the pilot to a local hospital.
The pilot died about two days later and the cause of death was determined to be a myocardial infarction.
The pilot had previous heart conditions, including bypass surgery.
The pilot last applied for a medical certificate about ten years prior to the incident flight.
On the application for his last medical certificate, the pilot indicated his previously reported ﬁheart or vascular troubleﬂ on prior medical applications and his use of Coumadin, an anticoagulant medication.
The airplane the pilot was flying required the pilot to have a current medical certificate to operate it.
The investigation could not determine the exact extent of and time that the pilot experienced the medical event that he had to be revived from when the airplane landed.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be: The pilot™s operation of the airplane with known medical conditions and his subsequent heart attack in flight.
The personal flight was operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the incident.
No flight plan was on file.
The local flight originated from Hebron, Illinois, at time unknown.
According to a McHenry County Sheriff™s Incident/Offense Report, the pilot™s son reported that he had been monitoring his father™s flight.
The pilot™s son stated that he saw the airplane land and he went to the field where the airplane had landed.
He saw the pilot lying back in the airplane™s seat and the pilot did not appear to be breathing.
First responders made their way to the open farm field and two personnel performed cardiopulmonary resuscitation on the pilot.
An automated external defibrillator (AED) was applied to the pilot and the AED advised a shock needed to be administered, which it administered.
The pilot was subsequently transported to a local hospital.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records, the pilot held a private pilot certificate.
FAA medical records showed that the pilot reported that he had accumulated 4,000 hours of total fight time on the application for his last third- class medical dated May 11, 2001.
On that application, the pilot indicated he previously reported that he had ﬁheart or vascular troubleﬂ on prior medical applications and that, he was using Coumadin.
The generic name for Coumadin is Warfarin.
The FAA Forensic Toxicology's WebDrugs website description of Warfarin indicated it is an anticoagulant medication.
N30CY was a high wing, two-place, tailwheel airplane.
According to FAA airworthiness records, the pilot provided airplane weight and balance calculations, dated November 5, 2001, which indicated that the airplane™s the gross weight with two occupants would be 1,492 pounds.
According to a McHenry County Department of Health Certificate of Death, the pilot died on November 3, 2011.
The cause of death was attributed to a myocardial infarction.
An autopsy was not performed.
Samples for toxicological examination were not taken nor sent to the FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute and a Final Forensic Toxicology Accident Report was not produced.
The pilot™s son indicated that the pilot had previous heart conditions to include by- pass surgery.
He was sent requests to confirm the details involved in the incident and to date has not responded to the requests.
