National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Dayton, OH
Accident Number: CEN10LA001
Date & Time: 10/01/2009, 0930 EDT
Registration: N3635N
Aircraft: DUSENBERRY MARK J 1905 WRIGHT
FLYER
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control in flight
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane, which was built by the pilot, was a replica of the Wright Brothers 1905 airplane.
The purpose of the flight was to practice in preparation for the 104th Anniversary of Practical Flight celebration.
The accident occurred on the second flight of the day.
After takeoff, the airplane climbed to an altitude of 15 to 20 feet, then entered a shallow descending right bank.
The wings of the airplane leveled and the nose pitched up.
The nose of the airplane then dropped and the airplane impacted the terrain.
The airplane received substantial damage to the fuselage, wings, and elevator.
A 4-knot tailwind prevailed at the time of the accident.
Postaccident inspection of the airplane failed to reveal any preimpact failures or malfunctions.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain control of the airplane during the flight, which resulted in an aerodynamic stall.
The pilot received serious injuries.
The airplane received substantial damage to the fuselage, wings, and elevator.
The local flight was being operated under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The flight originated just prior to the accident.
The accident occurred on the second flight of the day.
A series of photos were submitted documenting both flights.
On the accident flight, the photos show the airplane prior to takeoff up to and including the accident.
After takeoff, the airplane climbed to an altitude of 15 to 20 feet.
The airplane then entered a shallow descending right bank.
The wings of the airplane leveled and the nose pitched up.
The nose of the airplane then dropped and the airplane impacted the terrain.
The airplane, which was built by the pilot, was a replica of the Wright Brothers 1905 airplane.
The purpose of the flight was to practice in preparation for the 104th Anniversary of Practical Flight celebration.
The pilot's logbook shows that he flew a total of 39 flights in the airplane.
These flights totaled approximately 27 minutes of flight time.
A 4 knot tailwind prevailed at the time of the accident.
A post accident inspection of the airplane failed to reveal any pre-impact failures/malfunctions.
