National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Rosemount, MN
Accident Number: CEN10LA002
Date & Time: 10/03/2009, 1547 CDT
Registration: N70585
Aircraft: PIPER J3C-65
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries: 1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that he started the engine and waited for about 10 minutes for the oil temperature to rise before he departed from a grass airstrip.
During takeoff, he reported that the airplane ﬁfelt slow.ﬂ He turned the carburetor heat on, but the engine lost partial power and the airplane "started to sink."
He banked to the left to avoid trees.
He reported losing altitude, and then the airplane experienced a ﬁstall spin to the left,ﬂ impacting a mature corn field.
Postaccident inspection of the engine and airframe revealed no preexisting anomalies that would preclude normal operation of the airplane.
The pilot received minor injuries and the front seat passenger received serious injuries.
The 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight was departing from Jensen Airfield, a private grass airstrip, on a local flight.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that there was a fly-in at the private airstrip and he decided to take a friend for a flight ﬁaround the patch.ﬂ  After he preflighted the airplane, he started the engine and waited for about 10 minutes for the oil temperature to rise.
He taxied out and did a run-up prior to departure.
During takeoff, he added power slowly to full power, got the tail up, and slowly rotated.
He reported that the airplane "felt slow."
He tried to land, but he was too fast and there was ﬁnot enough room.ﬂ He pulled the carburetor heat on, but the engine lost partial power and the airplane ﬁstarted to sink.ﬂ He banked to the left to avoid trees.
He reported losing altitude, and then the airplane experienced a ﬁstall spin to the left.ﬂ The airplane impacted a mature corn field.
The pilot shut off the airplane™s magnetos and fuel, and exited the airplane with the passenger.
A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector examined the airplane.
The inspection revealed that the magnetos and fuel selector were turned off.
The fuel tank was ruptured.
The primer was in and locked.
The carburetor heat was out (on).
The propeller was bent aft.
The airplane was equipped with a seat belt and shoulder harness for the rear seat.
The front seat was equipped with a seat belt, but no shoulder harness, although there was a hard attachment point for a shoulder harness.
The flight controls exhibited cable continuity to the ailerons, elevator, and rudder.
The inspection of the 65-horsepower Continental A-65-8 engine revealed that the carburetor was broken in half, top to bottom.
The carburetor air box was crushed from impact forces.
The spark plugs were clean and clear.
The left and right magnetos produced spark.
The engine was rotated and it exhibited continuity in the drive train, and there was compression on all four cylinders.
