National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lake City, FL
Accident Number: ERA10LA463
Date & Time: 09/02/2010, 1800 EDT
Registration: N7108Z
Aircraft: QUICKSILVER MX-2
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot completed a preflight inspection of the airplane and a run-up check of the engine, noting no anomalies.
During the initial climb, the pilot noted that the engine coolant temperature had risen above its normal range, and he responded by reducing engine power.
He also turned the airplane left toward the overrun area for a perpendicular runway.
The engine coolant temperature continued to rise as the pilot pitched the airplane for the best glide speed.
As the pilot continued to maneuver the airplane, the sink rate was increasing, so he applied full power, with no accompanying response from the engine.
During the attempted landing, the pilot gradually lost control of the airplane as it slowed, and subsequently struck a pool enclosure attached to a home.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
The certificated commercial pilot incurred minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight, which was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
According to a written statement submitted by the pilot, he completed a preflight inspection of the airplane, and after taxiing to the end of runway 27, completed an engine-run up check noting no anomalies.
The pilot subsequently applied full takeoff power (6,400 rpm) and began the takeoff.
Upon reaching about 200 feet msl, the pilot noticed that the engine coolant temperature had risen above 210 degrees Fahrenheit, with the normal range being between 160 degrees and 180 degrees.
He responded by reducing the engine power to 4,500 rpm, and made a left turn to a heading of 180 degrees magnetic in an attempt to land in an overrun area for the perpendicular runway at the airport.
The engine coolant temperature continued to rise above 220 degrees as the pilot pitched the airplane for the best glide speed of 45 mph.
During the turn, the pilot noted that the airplane's sink rate was increasing, so he applied full power, with no accompanying response from the engine.
After reaching the desired alignment with the overrun area, the pilot applied full right rudder an aileron to stop the turn, but the controls' effectiveness were decreased due to the airplane's slow speed.
The airplane continued to turn and struck a pool enclosure attached to a home, resulting in substantial damage.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION A review of Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airman records revealed that the pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single and multiengine land and sea.
The pilot's most recent second-class medical certificate was issued in March 2010.
The pilot reported 3,600 total hours of flight experience, 25 hours of which were in the accident airplane make and model.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION The 1053 recorded weather at Gainesville Regional Airport (GNV), Gainesville, Florida, located about 34 nautical miles southeast of the accident site, included calm winds, clear skies, 10 statute miles visibility, temperature 32 degrees C, dewpoint 18 degrees C, and an altimeter setting of 29.90 inches of mercury.
According to a carburetor ice probability chart published by the FAA  "serious icing at glide power" was possible based on the reported temperature and dewpoint.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION The amphibious airplane was equipped with a Rotax 582, two-stroke, two-cylinder, liquid- cooled, 65 horse power reciprocating engine.
According to the pilot, the airplane's most recent condition inspection was completed on August 5, 2010, and at that time the airframe and engine had accumulated 204 total flight hours.
Since that inspection, the airplane had accumulated 16 additional flight hours.
According to FAA aircraft registration records, the pilot purchased the airplane on August 11, 2010.
Additionally, according to FAA airworthiness records, the airplane was manufactured in 1999, and had been previously operated as an ultralight vehicle until it was registered as an experimental light sport aircraft on September 21, 2007.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION The engine was separated from the airframe, and a representative of the engine manufacturer examined the engine under the supervision of an FAA inspector.
According to the representative's Investigation Report, the carburetor float bowls were removed to expose the main jets and examine the condition of the carburetors.
Contamination in the form of varnish was found in both carburetor float bowls and the sieve screens were crushed, preventing them from free floating.
The cylinder head was removed to expose both pistons and cylinders, and no evidence damage or seizure was observed on the pistons or cylinder walls.
The cylinders also exhibited evidence of a previous disassembly and repair.
The lower piston rings on both cylinders were stuck in their respective lands and exhibited extreme carbon build-up.
The sides of the pistons, connecting rods, and crank case were coated in a black/brown glaze.
No other evidence of any mechanical malfunction or defects of the engine were discovered.
