National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: McMinnville, TN
Accident Number: ERA10CA461
Date & Time: 09/02/2010, 1400 CDT
Registration: N320CY
Aircraft: Yeager Inc. Lancair
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Miscellaneous/other
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he taxied to the runway for the purpose of performing a high speed taxi run.
After an engine run-up, he latched the two canopy latches on the right side and scanned the instrument panel, noticing that the cylinder head temperature and oil temperature were rising.
He stated that his attention was diverted in concern of the rising temperature and did not recall if he latched the two latches on the left side of the canopy.
He started the takeoff roll and after becoming airborne, he noticed the canopy opening on the left side.
The pilot attempted to latch the canopy, but realized it would take both hands, and continued to climb to pattern altitude while trimming the aircraft for better airspeed control.
He then pulled the throttle back to slow the airspeed and attempted to latch the canopy.
The canopy started flapping up and down, and when he tried to secure it shut with his hands he was not be able to control the airplane.
He stated that debris was flying everywhere and the wind blew off his headset.
When he realized that he was getting low he added full engine power and looked for a clear area; shortly thereafter the airplane collided with the ground.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot™s failure to properly latch the cockpit canopy prior to takeoff, resulting in his diverted attention and failure to maintain aircraft control.
Registration: N320CY Model/Series: Lancair 320 Aircraft Category: Airplane Year of Manufacture: Amateur Built: Yes Airworthiness Certificate: Experimental Serial Number: 384-320-139 Landing Gear Type: Retractable - Tricycle Seats: 2 Date/Type of Last Inspection: 09/02/2010, Condition Certified Max Gross Wt.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=77183
