Page 1 of 9
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Tonopah, NV
Accident Number:
WPR18LA002
Date & Time:
10/02/2017, 1230 PDT 
Registration:
N5311H
Aircraft:
CESSNA 172S
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The private pilot departed for a long cross-country flight with the mixture leaned to the high 
field elevation. He then further leaned the mixture for lean-of-peak exhaust gas temperature as 
he climbed the airplane to 10,500 ft mean sea level (msl) for improved fuel efficiency. Thirty 
minutes into the flight, he descended the airplane to about 8,000 ft msl. The pilot did not 
enrich the mixture during the approximate 2,500-ft descent. Shortly after, the engine 
sputtered, followed by a loss of about 700 rpm. He verified the position of the throttle and 
enriched the fuel/air mixture with one full rotation of the control knob, but he never advanced 
the knob to the "full rich" position. The pilot then decided to perform a precautionary landing 
because he was concerned the airplane would not have the power to cross an approaching 
mountain range. He chose a dry river bed despite the availability of two nearby airports with 
dirt runways. During the landing, the airplane nosed over and came to rest inverted, which 
resulted in substantial damage to the rudder. 
Postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not reveal any evidence of preimpact 
mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation, and the engine achieved 
full and continuous power during a test run. 
The Pilot's Operating Handbook (POH) required a mixture adjustment during the descent for 
smooth operation, which the pilot did not do during the 2,500-ft descent. An engine 
manufacturer representative reported that the engine may suffer leaning misfires if the fuel/air 
mixture is not enriched during a descent. Therefore, it is likely that the engine sputtered and 
lost partial power due to the pilot's failure to properly enrich the fuel/air mixture during the 
descent in accordance with the POH. The pilot could have remediated this condition if he had 
advanced the mixture to the "full rich" position in accordance with the POH emergency 
procedures; however, instead the pilot made a minor mixture adjustment, which did not 
restore engine power. 
Page 2 of 9WPR18LA002
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to enrich the mixture during the descent, as required by the Pilot's Operating 
Handbook (POH), and his subsequent failure to follow the POH emergency procedures, which 
resulted in an excessively lean fuel/air mixture and subsequent loss of rpm. Contributing to the 
accident was the pilot's improper decision to land on unsuitable terrain despite the availability 
of two nearby airports.
Findings
Aircraft
Mixture control - Incorrect use/operation (Cause)
Engine (reciprocating) - Failure (Cause)
Personnel issues
Lack of action - Pilot (Cause)
Use of checklist - Pilot (Cause)
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Factor)
Environmental issues
Terrain - Decision related to condition (Factor)
Page 3 of 9WPR18LA002
Factual Information
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Miscellaneous/other
Landing
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT) 
Nose over/nose down
On October 2, 2017, about 1230 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 172S airplane, N5311H, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted a dry river bed near Tonopah, Nevada. The private 
pilot was not injured. The airplane was registered to L-Bird, LLC and operated by Tactical 
Aeronautics (a.k.a. TacAero) under the provisions of Title 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91 
as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. 
The flight departed from Winnemucca Municipal Airport (WMC), Winnemucca, Nevada at 
0900, and was destined for St. George, Utah. 
According to the pilot, he refueled the accident airplane to capacity with 100 low-lead aviation 
grade gasoline, and then departed WMC in a flight with three other airplanes. The flight was 
uneventful until the engine began to "sputter" as the flight neared a large dry river bed in 
eastern Nevada. Almost instantaneously, the engine rpm decreased from 2,200 rpm to 1,500 
rpm. At the time of the event, the pilot had BOTH fuel tanks selected on the fuel selector, and 
both magnetos were engaged. He enrichened the fuel/air mixture by turning the control one 
full rotation, but at no point did he advance the mixture control to the FULL RICH setting. The 
pilot then verified the throttle was in the FULL OPEN position and configured the airplane for 
a precautionary landing as he was concerned the airplane would not have the power to cross an 
approaching mountain range. He then completed a 180
o
 turn over the riverbed to approach his 
selected landing zone with a headwind. After the airplane touched down, the pilot applied back 
pressure to the yoke to keep the nose landing gear from touching down for as long as possible. 
Once the nose gear settled down, the airplane stopped abruptly, nosed over and came to rest 
inverted. 
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the rudder during the nose-over. The debris field 
was composed of about 200 ft of main landing gear marks and a nose landing gear impact 
mark where the airplane came to rest. 
The pilot stated that he normally flies with the fuel/air mixture set to lean-of-peak exhaust gas 
temperature, and on the day of the accident, he leaned the mixture prior to departing from 
WMC, which had a field elevation of 4,308 ft mean sea level (msl) and then further leaned the 
mixture in flight as he climbed the airplane. His altitude varied throughout the flight and the 
partial loss of power occurred shortly after he descended from 10,500 ft msl to about 8,000 ft 
msl.
Page 4 of 9WPR18LA002
The pilot, who was the Director of Maintenance for the airplane operator, stated that the loss of 
rpm may have been due to the presence of carbon in the spark plugs. He added that he 
regularly removes carbon from their fleet airplane's spark plugs as the students improperly 
lean the fuel/air mixture during flight operations, and the airplanes often fail magneto checks 
during their engine run-ups. 
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/15/2016
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
11/11/2016
Flight Time:
145.2 hours (Total, all aircraft), 8.6 hours (Total, this make and model), 102.7 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
The pilot, age 54, held a private pilot certificate with a rating for single-engine land. The pilot's 
most recent second-class medical certificate was issued on August 15, 2016, which included the 
limitation, "must have available glasses for near vision." According to the pilot, his flight time 
included 145 hours of total flight time in all aircraft of which 9 hours had been accumulated in 
the accident airplane make and model. 
Page 5 of 9WPR18LA002
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N5311H
Model/Series:
172S S
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
2002
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
172S9278
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/01/2017, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2299 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
37 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1770.4 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
C91  installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-L2A
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Pilot School (141)
According to FAA records, the airplane was manufactured in 2002 and registered to L-Bird 
LLC on June 23, 2016. The airplane was powered by a Lycoming IO-360-L2A, fuel injected, 
180 horsepower engine. Maintenance records indicated that the airplane's most recent 100 
hour inspection was completed on August 1, 2017 at a total time of 1,770.4 flight hours. The 
engine's most recent 100 hour inspection was completed at the same time. According to the 
airplane's tachometer, at the time of the accident, the engine had accrued 1,810 hours of total 
time in service. 
Page 6 of 9WPR18LA002
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ELY, 6259 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
60 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
30°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 8000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
250°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.93 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / -11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Winnemucca, NV (KWMC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
St. George, NV (KSGU)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0900 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
The 1253 recorded weather observation at Yelland Field, located about 60 nm northeast of the 
accident site, included wind from 250° at 5 knots, visibility 10 statute miles, few clouds at 
8,000 feet, temperature 08° C, dew point -11° C, and an altimeter setting of 29.91 inches of 
mercury.
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
38.510000, -115.620000
The airplane came to rest inverted in a dry river bed located about 13 nm southwest of Currant 
Ranch Airport (9U7), Currant, Nevada, and 20nm south of Duckwater Airport (01U), 
Duckwater, Nevada.
A postaccident examination of the airplane and engine was completed on January 9, 2018, by a 
representative of Textron Aviation under the supervision of the National Transportation Safety 
Board Investigator-in-Charge. 
The engine mounts were unremarkable, and the engine case was intact. Loose sand and debris 
from the accident site were found on the battery case and engine case.
Page 7 of 9WPR18LA002
Continuity of the mixture and throttle controls were confirmed from the cockpit to their 
respective arms on the fuel control unit, and both controls could be operated unencumbered 
from with the cabin. The air filter was removed from the air induction system and did not 
exhibit any contamination or debris. 
Each of the engine's four Champion 38S series fine wire top spark plugs were gray in 
appearance with some carbon deposits, consistent with normal wear when compared to the 
Champion Aerospace Aviation Service Manual. A thumb compression test revealed intake and 
exhaust pressure for each cylinder. Each ignition harness lead displayed normal wear, with the 
exception of the cylinder no. 1 ignition lead, which exhibited some foreign debris. Continuity 
was verified from the magneto switch to each of the engine's 8 ignition harness leads, which 
displayed spark when the propeller was turned.
Fuel System
A trace amount of fuel that resembled 100 low-lead aviation grade gasoline was drained 
through the fuel strainer. The fuel selector moved normally through its detents from the LEFT, 
RIGHT, and BOTH positions. 
Flight Control System
Flight control continuity was traced from the cockpit to the elevator, rudder, and ailerons. The 
wing flap actuator was not extended, consistent with a flap retracted position. 
Engine Test
The airplane tail was secured to a forklift and several gallons of 100 low lead aviation grade 
gasoline were plumbed into the aft port of the airplane's left tank at the wing root. Additionally, 
the original propeller displayed aft bending and was replaced with a test propeller. 
The auxiliary fuel pump was activated, and positive fuel flow was verified. The following engine 
start procedure was used:

Throttle: open ¼ inch

Mixture: Full lean

Aircraft Master: ON

Ignition Switch: "START"

Mixture: Full rich when engine starts
Page 8 of 9WPR18LA002
The engine momentarily ran rough at idle before power was increased to 1,800 rpm for a run-
up engine test. At the engine run-up power setting, the right and left magnetos were 
individually tested, and both showed a drop of about 100 rpm. The engine power was then 
reduced to idle performance, about 500 rpm, without any roughness before it was increased to 
full power. The engine held 2,300 rpm with the throttle in the FULL OPEN position and did 
not exhibit any roughness or hesitation. During the test, the fuel flow, amperage, oil 
temperature, and oil pressure all displayed normal measurements. 
Post-Engine Run Examination 
The bottom spark plugs exhibited normal wear when compared to the Champion Aerospace 
Aviation Safety Manual. The bottom spark plug to cylinder no. 2 displayed evidence of lead 
deposits on the cone adjacent to the ground electrode, and the bottom plug to cylinders no. 3 
exhibited bridging between the cone and the ground electrode. However, neither plug 
displayed any bridging or debris between the ground electrode and post. 
The fuel injectors were not obstructed. The rocker arm movement for each cylinder was 
smooth and unremarkable when the propeller was rotated. 
The fuel strainer was disassembled and contained trace amounts of debris, but was not 
obstructed. The fuel lines from the right and left wing roots to the engine driven fuel pump 
were free of debris. 
Additional Information
Pilot's Operating Handbook (POH)
The emergency procedures section of the POH includes the following guidance in the event of 
an engine failure in flight:

Airspeed: 68 kts

Fuel shutoff valve: ON

Fuel selector valve: BOTH

Auxiliary fuel pump switch: ON

Mixture: RICH

Ignition switch: BOTH
The normal procedures section of the POH includes the following guidance for an inflight 
descent:
Page 9 of 9WPR18LA002

Power Œ As desired

Mixture Œ Adjust for smooth operation

Altimeter Œ Set

NAV/GPS switch Œ Set

Fuel selector valve Œ BOTH

Wing flaps Œ As desired
Fuel/Air Mixture Adjustments
A representative of the engine manufacturer reported that the engine may suffer leaning 
misfires if the fuel/air mixture is not enrichened during a descent. 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Stephen R Stein
Adopted Date:
11/15/2018
Additional Participating Persons:
John Waugh; Federal Aviation Administration; Las Vegas, NV
Publish Date:
11/15/2018
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=96136
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
