Page 1 of 2CEN18FA003
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Eden Prairie, MN
Accident Number:
CEN18FA003
Date & Time:
10/04/2017, 1105 CDT 
Registration:
N428AP
Aircraft:
SCHAFFER Fisher Horizon 2
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On October 4, 2017, at 1108 central daylight time, N428AP, an amateur built Schaffer Fisher 
Horizon 2 airplane, collided with terrain in Eden Prairie, Minnesota. The private rated pilot 
was fatally injured, and the airplane was destroyed by impact forces and a postimpact fire. The 
airplane was registered to and operated by a private individual as a 14 
Code of Federal 
Regulations 
Part 91 personal flight. Visual flight rules conditions existed near the accident site 
at the time of the accident, and a flight plan had not been filed. The local flight departed from 
the Flying Cloud Airport (FCM), Eden Prairie, Minnesota, about 1103.
According to the FCM control tower controller, the pilot had departed on runway 28R. Several 
witnesses reported seeing the airplane takeoff and just prior to the impact. Witnesses on the 
airport that saw the takeoff, reported the airplane was "unstable" during the takeoff. They 
described the airplane pitching up and down, and banking as it climbed out. One witness 
stated he was able to see the top of the wings as if the airplane was straight up and down before 
it made a turn to the southeast. Other witnesses who saw the airplane just before the impact 
reported the airplane was a in a steep nose down, left descending spiral. The witnesses 
reported seeing the airplane complete between 1 ½ and 3 spirals before it descended below the 
trees. Several witnesses reported hearing the airplane engine sound. The FCM controller also 
reported the pilot had aborted a previous takeoff attempt, just prior to the accident flight. The 
reason for the aborted takeoff is unknown.
The initial impact point was in the parking lot on the south side of the Resurrection Life 
Church located on Glory Lane, Eden Prairie, Minnesota. The wreckage debris path from the 
first impact to the main wreckage was on a magnetic heading of 30°. The initial ground impact 
consisted of scrape marks on the asphalt. About 20 feet further along the path was a gouge 
mark in the pavement which contained numerous pieces of splintered wood. The right wing 
was located wrapped around a light pole about 210' from the initial impact. Further along the 
wreckage path were the burned fuel tanks, the engine, what remained of the cockpit/fuselage, 
the empennage, and lastly the propeller hub. The wreckage from the right wing to the end of 
the wreckage path was mostly destroyed by fire. Pieces of the splintered composite propeller 
blade, plexiglass, and wood were scattered along the entire wreckage path.
Page 2 of 2CEN18FA003
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
SCHAFFER
Registration:
N428AP
Model/Series:
Fisher Horizon 2 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
Yes
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Condition of Light:
Observation Facility, Elevation:
FCM, 906 ft msl
Observation Time:
1605 UTC
Distance from Accident Site:
225 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / 5°C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
8 knots / , 260°
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 2400 ft agl
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30.37 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
Eden Prairie, MN (FCM)
Destination: 
Eden Prairie, MN (FCM)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
44.855833, -93.483889 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Pamela S Sullivan
Additional Participating Persons:
Allan Thilmany; FAA; Minneapolis, MN
Note:
The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
