Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Mount Airy, NC
Accident Number:
ATL03FA052
Date & Time:
03/01/2003, 1930 EST 
Registration:
N343BA
Aircraft:
Beech BE-36A
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
5 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
According to the airport manager, the instrument flight collided with the ground shortly after 
takeoff. Weather at the time of the accident was wind calm, visibility two statue miles, drizzle, 
ceiling overcast 500 feet, temperature eight degrees Celsius, dew point six degrees Celsius, 
altimeter 30.00 inches of mercury. Examination of the wreckage site found that the airplane 
had collided with terrain on the south side of an east-west oriented hill, in a near vertical nose-
down attitude. The engine and forward cabin had penetrated the ground to a depth of about 
eight feet. The wreckage examination failed to disclose anomalies with the airframe or systems. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilots failure to maintain control of the aircraft due to spatial disorientation. A factor was 
low clouds.
Page 2 of 8ATL03FA052
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
2. (C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) SPATIAL DISORIENTATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 8ATL03FA052
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 1, 2003, at 1930 eastern standard time, a Beech BE-36A, N343BA, registered to and 
operated by the commercial pilot, collided with terrain shortly after takeoff from the Mount 
Airy/Surry County Airport in Mount Airy, North Carolina. The personal flight was operated 
under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and instrument flight rules (IFR). Instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight plan was filed. The pilot and four 
passengers received fatal injuries, and the airplane was destroyed. The flight was originating 
from Mount Airy, North Carolina, at the time of the accident on March 1, 2003.
The airport manager stated that he had watched the pilot load the airplane, and he heard the 
pilot file an IFR flight plan in the airport lobby for a flight to the Curtis L. Brown, Jr. Field 
identifier 4W1, located in Elizabethtown, North Carolina. The manager stated that the pilot 
reported he was expecting an 800-foot ceiling and 2 statute miles visibility at arrival in 
Elizabethtown. After the airplane was loaded, the airport manager noted that the 
Elizabethtown Automated Weather Observation System (AWOS) readout was reporting the 
ceiling was 500 feet broken, 1,800 feet overcast, and 2 statute miles visibility in light drizzling 
rain. The airport manager heard the airplane takeoff from runway 18, and he stated that the 
engine sounded normal. Shortly after the takeoff, the airport manager said he received a 
telephone call from a local resident who stated that she had heard an airplane making a 
"flapping" sound followed by the sound of a crash. The airport manager stated that he notified 
the local authorities, who then initiated a search from the residents home. He said the airplane 
was quickly located near the resident who reported the accident.
PERSONAL INFORMATION
A review of information on file with the FAA Airman's Certification Division, Oklahoma City, 
Oklahoma, revealed the pilot was issued a commercial pilot certificate on June 7, 2002, with 
ratings for airplane single and multiengine land, and instrument airplane.  A review of records 
on file with the FAA Aero Medical Records revealed the pilot held a second-class medical 
certificate issued on March 5, 2002, with no restrictions. The pilot reported on his application 
for the medical certificate that he had accumulated 475 total flight hours, and a review of the 
pilot's logbook revealed that the pilot had accumulated 712 total flight hours. The flight book 
review also disclosed that the pilot had accumulated 44 hours of actual instrument flying, 3 
hours of actual instrument flying within the last 90-days. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
A review of maintenance records revealed that the last recorded total time for the airframe was 
during the annual inspection on December 16, 2002, of 4,852.53 hours, and an engine total 
time of 205.1 since factory overhaul. The tachometer time and hobs meter was damaged and 
the current airframe times could not be recovered. The altimeter system, static pressure 
system, and transponder were inspected on July 23, 2002. Refueling records on file at Mount 
Airy-Surry County Airport, Mount Airy, North Carolina, revealed that N343BA, was topped off 
with 26.4 gallons of fuel on March 1, 2003. The engine logbooks revealed that the factory-
overhauled engine was installed on August 31, 2001, and that the engine was equipped with a 
Shadin fuel flow indicating system installed under STC-SA449GL. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Page 4 of 8ATL03FA052
Mount Airy Automated Surface Observation at 1920, wind calm, visibility two statue miles, 
drizzle, ceiling overcast 500 feet, temperature eight degrees Celsius, dew point six degrees 
Celsius, altimeter 30.00 inches of mercury. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time of the accident. According to local law enforcement Surry County Sheriff Department 
and ground search teams, the visibility in the vicinity of the crash scene was very low with fog.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the wreckage site found that the airplane had collided with terrain on the south 
side of an east-west oriented hill, in a near vertical nose-down attitude. The engine and forward 
cabin had penetrated the ground to a depth of about eight feet. The wing leading edges had 
collapsed rearward, and were compressed flat to the front wing spars. The top and bottom wing 
panel skins were symmetrically ballooned outward, exposing the wing internal structure. The 
flap and aileron control surfaces remained loosely attached to the wings. The rear cabin and 
rear fuselage displayed accordion crush damage. The empennage was found lying partially on 
top of the fuselage structure and on the hillside. The top of the airplane and empennage were 
on a northerly heading towards the airport. Flight control continuity could not be verified, 
however flight control components were examined, and no anomalies were noted. It was found 
during the recovery of the airplane that the landing gear was retracted, flaps retracted, and that 
the nose trim tab was set to 10 degrees trailing edge down.
The fuel selector was found positioned on the right main wing tank. The electric fuel boost 
pump system had been modified to a boost pump that could be selected to either LOW or ON 
(High). The cabin door and the two utility baggage doors were separated from the airplane.  
Both utility doors had separated from their hinges and had fragmented into multiple pieces.
The instrument panel was damaged, and the engine and flight instruments were dislodged 
from the normally install positions. The lower instrument panel switches were deformed or 
missing. The King 200 (2-axis) autopilot enunciator panel was not located. The airplane was 
equipped with an auxiliary electric-driven instrument air pump mounted on the firewall. The 
artificial horizon was disassembled. There was scoring present on the gyro mechanism.
The engine was a Teledyne Continental Motors IO-550. Examination of the engine and 
accessory components revealed the following. The engine and propeller were located 8 feet 
below ground level at the accident site. The engine remained partially attached to the firewall 
by control cables, wiring and hoses. The engine driven fuel pump, alternator, air conditioner 
compressor, outboard portions of the propeller governor and the starter were separated from 
the engine. Both magnetos separated from their mounting flanges and were resting on the top 
of the engine. A small amount of fuel was found in the separated engine driven fuel pump at 
the accident site. The cooling fins on the Number 5 and 6 cylinders revealed heavy impact 
damage on the top and forward facing portions. The number 5 and 6 valve covers were found 
broken. All six cylinders remained attached to the engine case. The engine was moved to a 
storage facility in Mount Airy, North Carolina for a post recovery disassembly and 
examination. The engine was rinsed prior to the post-recovery examination to remove mud and 
soil from the engine.
The engine driven fuel pump was broken off of the engine at its attachment flange. The lead 
seal and safety wire was found intact. All fuel lines to and from the fuel pump were fractured at 
the fuel pump fittings. The fuel pump drive coupler was found fractured at mid-span with the 
pump end remaining in the fuel pump. Some fuel was found in the engine driven fuel pump. 
Page 5 of 8ATL03FA052
The throttle arm remained attached to the throttle body at the throttle shaft and was separated 
from the throttle cable attachment end. The throttle shaft was bent and the throttle arm was 
partially disengaged. The fuel metering unit mixture arm was found bent and resting against 
the full rich stop. The fuel distribution manifold fuel screen was found clean and free of 
particles. The plunger moved up and down with spring tension noted and the diaphragm was 
found intact. The wiring harness was found impact damaged and was cut by impact forces in 
numerous locations. Both magnetos were impact damaged and contained some mud in the 
internal mechanisms. Both impulse couplers actuated during hand rotation. No spark was 
produced from either magneto during hand rotation. The number 1,2,3,4 and 6 top spark plugs 
and the number 1,2,3,4, and 5 bottom spark plugs were removed and appeared "normal" when 
compared to the Champion Aviation Check-a Plug index.  The number 5 top and number 6 
bottom spark plugs were impact damaged and were not removed for inspection.
The number 5 cylinder sustained heavy impact damage. The number 5 intake valve retainer 
halves were found displaced slightly outward from the normal position. The number 5 intake 
push-rod tubes were found bent upward and aft, and were removed from the engine prior to 
hand rotation of the crankshaft. The engine was rotated by hand utilizing the fuel pump drive 
coupler fitting on the aft end of the crankshaft. Continuity to the engine camshaft, engine 
driven accessories and to the front end of the crankshaft was established during rotation. The 
engine crankshaft was separated at the propeller flange, which remained attached to the 
propeller. 
 The propeller was a three-bladed McCauley propeller. One propeller blade had separated from 
the propeller hub, and one blade was loose in the hub. All three-pitch change knobs separated 
from their respective blades. The two blades that remained attached to the propeller hub were 
bent aft eight to 12 inches out from the hub. All three blades tips were bent forward and 
partially separated. Blade face polishing was minimal. The spinner was crushed around the 
structure of the hub.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, conducted a 
postmortem examination of the pilot on March 2, 2003. The reported cause of death was 
"massive blunt force injury". The forensic Toxicology Research Section, Federal Aviation 
Administration, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma performed postmortem toxicology of specimens 
from the pilot. Carbon Monoxide and Cyanide testing was not performed. No Ethanol was 
detected in the urine. The following drugs were identified; Paroxetine was detected in the Liver 
4.912 (ug/mL, ug/g), Paroxetine was also detected in the urine 0.141 (ug/mL, ug/g), 
Doxylamine was detected in the Liver, Dextromethorphan was present in the Liver, 
Dextrorphan was detected in the Lever, Dextrorphan was also detected in the kidney, 
Pseudoephedrine was detected in the Liver, Phenylpropanolamine was detected in the Lever, 
and Acetaminophen was detected in the Urine 16.82 (ug/ml, ug/g).
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage of N343BA was released to Surveyor CTC Services Aviation (LAD Inc) Adjuster 
for Avemco Insurance Co., on March 5, 2003. Components retained for further testing were 
released to CTC Services on October 15, 2003.
A review of voice transcripts provided by the FAA Raleigh (RDU) Automated Flight Service 
Station (AFSS) found the on March 1, 2003 N343BA, contacted the RDU AFSS on four 
Page 6 of 8ATL03FA052
separated occasions requested weather information. N343BA was provided an outlook briefing 
for a flight from Mount Airy (MWK) North Carolina to Elizabethtown (EYF), North Carolina. 
These outlook briefings occurred at 1737 Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) 2010 UTC, 2029 
UTC, and 2324 UTC at which time N343BA filed and IFR flight plan from Mount Airy, North 
Carolina to Elizabethtown, North Carolina with an Alternate of Fayetteville (FAY) North 
Carolina.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
32, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/05/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/07/2002
Flight Time:
712 hours (Total, all aircraft), 272 hours (Total, this make and model), 653 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 110 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 28 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N343BA
Model/Series:
BE-36A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Utility
Serial Number:
E-1317
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/16/2002, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4853 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550
Registered Owner:
Oscar Nathan Harris II
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
Oscar Nathan Harris II
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 7 of 8ATL03FA052
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MWK, 1247 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
2 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1920 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
2 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 500 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
8°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Mount Airy, NC (MWK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Elizabethtown, NC (EYF)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1925 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
Mount Airy/Surry County (MWK)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
1247 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Wet
Runway Used:
18
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4300 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
4 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
5 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
36.427500, -80.558056
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Butch Wilson
Adopted Date:
12/28/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Richard Litka; Greensboro FSDO; Greensboro, NC
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 8 of 8ATL03FA052
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
