The pilot stated that during the turn around maneuver, he extended full flaps [26 degrees] and 
the 'flaps remained fully extended thus jamming [the flight] controls.' Manufacturer personnel 
stated that 5 to 8 degrees of flaps may be used as a turning aid. Flight control continuity was 
confirmed. The wing flap actuator components and microswitches were intact, were not 
deformed, and tested functional as designed.  The actuator jackscrew was extended 3 1/2 
inches (flaps 26 degrees). Push rod clearance at full flaps and full aileron is a minimum of .257 
inch. An actuator jackscrew extension of 4 1/16 inches is required before the actuator assembly 
malfunctions. An extension beyond 4 inches (flaps 34.5 degrees) places the flap push rod and 
the aileron push rod in contact; however, the controls continue to be movable.  Multiple flap 
actuator assembly malfunctions are required to jam the flight controls. 
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control. A factor was the pilot's excessive use of flaps 
during the maneuver. 
 On July 1, 1996, at 1205 central daylight time, an Air Tractor AT-502, N7314C, registered to 
and operated by Hartley Flying Services, Inc., was destroyed during impact with terrain/water 
following a loss of control while maneuvering near Almyra, Arkansas.  The commercial pilot 
sustained serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the Title 14 CFR Part 
137 local aerial application flight.  A flight plan was not filed for the flight that originated at a 
private airstrip approximately 6 miles west of the accident site.
During telephone interviews, conducted by the investigator-in-charge, and on the 
Pilot/Operator Report the pilot reported that during the turn around maneuver, he extended 
full flaps.  He further stated that the "flaps remained fully extended thus jamming [the flight] 
controls [and] the airplane continued to turn, making two or three turns before crashing into 
the water."  The airplane came to rest in the Tindall Reservoir approximately 250 feet off-shore 
where the water depth was approximately 3 feet.  
During an interview, conducted by the investigator-in-charge, manufacturer personnel 
revealed the following information.  In the AT-502, "all conventional types of turns may be 
performed."  Flaps "may be used as a turning aid providing small deflections are used (5 to 8 
degrees)."  
During telephone interviews, conducted by the investigator-in-charge, another pilot 
conducting loading and reloading from the private airstrip, reported observing N7314C 
arriving and departing from the private airstrip; however, he did not observe the accident.  A 
feed truck driver, working close to the farm where the accident occurred, reported to the 
investigator-in-charge that he saw several agricultural airplanes flying in the area; however, he 
did not observe the accident. 
A review of the airplane records, by the investigator-in-charge, revealed that the airplane was 
manufactured in 1986 by Air Tractor, Inc., as a model AT-501 with the P & W R1340 radial 
engine installed.  In 1989 the operator purchased the airplane, converted it to a model AT-502 
airplane, and installed the P & W PT6A-34 turbine engine.  The last maintenance entry 
referring to the control surfaces was made on January 11, 1993, and it indicated that new flap, 
aileron, rudder, and elevator bearings were installed and the rudder cables and pulleys were 
replaced.  An annual inspection was completed on January 15, 1996.
The commercial pilot reported having 2,243.3 hours in this make and model of aircraft.  The 
pilot's flight time in airplanes with a turbine engine was not made available to the Board.
The FAA inspector, the operator and the manufacturer's representative examined the airplane 
during the recovery from the water.  The wing leading edges were crushed aft toward the spar.  
The integrity of all fuel tanks was compromised.  The propeller separated from the engine 
which had separated from the airframe.  The propeller blades exhibited bending and torsional 
twisting.  Flight control continuity was confirmed.  The wing flap actuator components were 
intact and the extension of the jackscrew was measured to be "slightly less (1/32) than 3 1/2 
inches." 
On November 12, 1995, Air Tractor issued Service Letter #140 (copy enclosed) to "prevent a 
possible overrun of the flap control system causing the flap push rod to bind on the aileron 
push rod making aileron control difficult."  Service Letter #140 had not been accomplished on 
N7314C.
An FAA inspector examined N7314C at the storage facility in Clinton, Arkansas, and measured 
the flap actuator jackscrew at 3 1/2 inches.  The inspector removed the flap actuator assembly 
and forwarded the assembly to the investigator-in-charge for examination.  
Upon examination by the investigator-in-charge and the manufacturer representative, the flap 
actuator jackscrew extension measured 3 1/2 inches and operated throughout its design range 
of travel to the installed mechanical stop set at 3 11/16 inches.  According to the manufacturer 
representative, with the jackscrew at 3 1/2 inches, flap extension would be 26 + or -1.5 degrees 
and the flap actuator at full stop (3 11/16 inches) would extend the flaps 30 degrees.  The flap 
motor coupling rotated and drove the jackscrew.  There was no physical evidence of a loss of 
roller balls from the flap actuator. The microswitch mounting bracket was not deformed and 
the flap up and down limit microswitches functioned per design. 
In September 1996, the investigator-in-charge and manufacturer personnel examined a flap 
actuator assembly at Olney, Texas.  The mechanical stop of the actuator was set at 3 6/16 
inches with 26.5 degrees of flap travel.  When the flap actuator jackscrew was extended to 4 
1/16 inches, the roller balls would start to fall out of the actuator and at 5 1/16 inches all of the 
roller balls were lost from the actuator.  
A production Air Tractor AT-502 was examined and during that examination the following 
parameters were observed.  The flap actuator assembly jackscrew extended to 3 5/16 inches 
placed the flap extension within the manufacturer specifications of 26 + or - 1.5 degrees.  The 
jackscrew, extended to 3 14/16 inches, placed the flap torque tube against the flap microswitch 
bracket and the flap extension at 31 degrees.  The microswitch bracket was removed.  With the 
jackscrew extended to 4 2/16 inches, which placed the flap extension at 34.5 degrees, the flap 
push rod touched the aileron push rod.  There was some perceptible scraping on the aileron 
push rod when the cockpit control stick was moved laterally; however, the controls continued 
to be movable with an estimated 4 pounds of force on the cockpit control stick.  In order to get 
the flap push rod into a binding position with the aileron push rod, it was necessary to shorten 
the aileron rigging by 9/16 inch and to disconnect the aileron stop at the aileron bellcrank 
assembly.  In this out of rig condition, approximately 10 pounds of control stick pressure was 
applied to remove the push rods from  the binding condition.  
Additional examination of the push rods was performed.  Micrometer measurements of the 
flap push rod and the aileron push rod clearances were recorded with the flaps retracted and 
with the flaps extended.  In the flap retracted position with the cockpit control stick left (full 
aileron), the clearance between the left flap push rod and the left aileron push rod was .158 
inch. In the flap retracted position with the cockpit control stick right (full aileron), the 
clearance between the right flap push rod and the right aileron push rod was .173 inch.  In the 
full flap (26 degrees) extended position with the cockpit control stick right (full aileron), the 
clearance between the right flap push rod and the right aileron push rod was .391 inch and the 
clearance between the left flap push rod and the left aileron push rod was .354 inch.  In the full 
flap extended position with the cockpit control stick left (full aileron), the clearance between 
the right flap push rod and the right aileron push rod was .257 inch.     
In October 1996, the manufacturer examined a production Air Tractor AT-401 at Olney, Texas, 
and determined that it was possible to bind the flight controls under the following parameters:  
down limit microswitch inoperative, jackscrew mechanical stop separated from the shaft, and 
the flap motor continues to drive the system.  With the jackscrew extended 4 2/16 inches the 
flap push rods touched the aileron push rods.  Beyond a 4 2/16 inch extension of the jackscrew 
the roller balls began to fall out of the assembly.  Increasing force was required to move the 
ailerons, and as the jackscrew was extended to 4 7/16 inches (10 roller balls had fallen out of 
the jackscrew assembly), the flaps extended in excess of 35 degrees.
The flap actuator assembly was released to the owner's representative.
