The airplane's owner hired the flight instructor to give him instruction so he could qualify as 
pilot-in-command. After about 1 hour of flight an owner-devised fuel tank change alarm 
sounded.  The instructor said he thought the owner had switched the fuel tanks.  The instructor 
was flying the airplane as it entered a base leg for landing when the engine stopped.  The 
instructor selected another fuel tank and the engine would not start.  The airplane landed gear 
up near the runway.  The on-scene investigation revealed empty main fuel tanks.  The flight 
had started with an empty left and full right main tank.  The fuel tank selector was on the left 
main tank.  The auxiliary fuel tanks were full.  The instructor said he gave the owner 6 to 10 
minutes of ground instruction regarding flight maneuvers to be performed.  He said he did not 
observe the owner's preflight inspection. 
the flight instructor's failure to assure a proper fuel tank selector position.  Factors associated 
with the accident were improper preflight preparation and complacency by the flight 
instructor. 
 On July 1, 1996, at 1000 central daylight (cdt) a Bellanca 17-30 Viking, N838MM, was 
substantially damaged during a gear up landing following a total loss of power while on base 
leg for landing.  The airplane landed on the clearway area next to runway 22 (4,800' X 75' dry 
asphalt) at Chandler Field, Alexandria, Minnesota.  The airplane was piloted by a commercially 
certificated flight instructor who was giving a checkout in the airplane to a private pilot.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.  The 14 CFR Part 91 dual 
instructional flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The private pilot reported serious 
injuries and the flight instructor reported no injuries.  The flight departed Alexandria, 
Minnesota, at 0900 cdt.
The airplane's owner said he was receiving dual instruction to act as pilot-in-command in the 
Bellanca 17-30.  He said the instructor was flying the airplane as it turned onto base leg for 
runway 22 when the engine stopped running.  The owner said the instructor landed "...within 
the airport perimeter, making wheels up landing."  He said the instructor checked "...one of the 
right wing tanks, and indicated that he had plenty of gas."  
The instructor's written statement said they had flown "...around for approximately an hour..." 
before returning to the airport.  During an interview with the instructor it was revealed he had 
allowed the owner to do an unsupervised preflight inspection.  He said a mechanic reviewed 
the fuel system with the owner for about 45 minutes.  When asked if he gave the owner any 
preflight ground instruction the instructor said he had spent about 6 to 10 minutes covering 
the flight maneuvers for the flight.  
The instructor said the owner had a timer that sounded an alarm when the fuel tanks needed to 
be switched.  He said the alarm sounded during the flight and that he believed the owner had 
switched the fuel tank selector.  He said he didn't check the owner's response to the alarm.  
N838MM's engine quit when the airplane was maneuvering to make its first landing.  He said 
the owner became frustrated and that he helped him with the emergency procedures.  The 
instructor said he switched the fuel selector from the right to left main fuel tank.  
The on-scene investigation revealed empty main fuel tanks.  The right and left auxiliary fuel 
tanks were full.  The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Principal Maintenance Inspector 
(PMI) stated the mechanic who gave the airplane its annual inspection said the left main tank 
was empty.  There was no record of any fuel being added to the airplane before the accident 
flight.  According to the PMI, each main tank holds 15.5 gallons of usable fuel.  The airplane 
consumes about 14 gallons per hour according to the PMI.  The PMI said it was estimated that 
the airplane had about 19 gallons of fuel in its right tank before departing on the accident 
flight.
