The airplane sustained substantial damage when it impacted a fence and a ditch after 
overrunning the runway on takeoff.  The pilot reported he taxied the airplane onto the runway 
centerline and applied full power to the airplane's engine while holding the brakes.  The pilot 
noted he released the brakes and the airplane began to roll.  The pilot stated the airplane would 
not lift-off before 1/2 to 3/4 of the runway was used.  The pilot reported he decided to execute 
an aborted takeoff and  reduced engine power to idle and applied brakes.  The pilot noted the 
airplane overran the end of the runway where it impacted a barbwire fence and a ditch.  The 
pilot reported the airplane's loaded weight and center of gravity were within the performance 
limitations of the airplane at the time of the accident flight.  The airplanes weight and balance 
was calculated using information obtained from data given by the pilot and the airplane was 
found to be within performance limitations.
The pilots delayed attempt to perform an aborted takeoff and subsequent overrun.  
Contributing factors to the accident were the fence and the ditch.
On June 1, 2003, about 1900 central daylight time, a Cessna 152, N68778, operated by St. 
Charles Flying Service as a rental airplane, sustained substantial damage during an aborted 
takeoff when it departed the end of runway 9 (1,800 feet by 100 feet, turf) and impacted a fence 
at Winter Field Airport, Owensville, Missouri.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at 
the time of the accident.  The private pilot and his passenger reported no injuries.  The 14 CFR 
Part 91 personal flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The flight was originating at the time 
of the accident with an intended destination of St. Charles Municipal Airport (3SQ), St. 
Charles, Missouri.
The pilot reported he taxied the airplane onto the runway centerline and applied full power to 
the airplane's engine while holding the brakes.  The pilot noted he released the brakes and the 
airplane began to roll.  The pilot stated, "Approximately 1/2 to 3/4 the runway was used and 
the decision was made that the airplane would not lift-off and climb."  The pilot reported he 
reduced engine power to idle and applied brakes.  The pilot noted the airplane had not stopped 
by the end of the runway and impacted a barbwire fence and a ditch.
The pilot reported he performed a weight and balance calculation and a takeoff performance 
calculation prior to takeoff on the accident flight.  The pilot noted the airplane's loaded weight 
and center of gravity were within the performance limitations of the airplane.  The pilot stated 
he used 10 degrees of flaps on takeoff and calculated his takeoff distance to be 950 feet.
The airplanes weight and balance was calculated using information obtained from the pilot.  
The airplane's empty weight was reported as 1,155 pounds with a moment-arm of 29.6 inches.  
The pilot indicated his weight as 220 pounds and his passengers weight as 180 pounds.  The 
pilot noted the airplane contained 14 gallons, or 84 pounds, of fuel.  The airplane's total weight 
at the time of the accident flight was calculated to be 1,639 pounds with a moment of 53,618 
inches per pound.  The center of gravity was calculated to be 32.7 inches aft of the datum line.  
The maximum certificated gross weight for the airplane was 1,670 pounds.  The forward center 
of gravity limitation was 31.0 inches aft of the datum line and the aft center of gravity 
limitation was 36.5 inches aft of the datum line.
The airplane's takeoff performance was calculated using the pilots operating handbook.  The 
ground roll distance for takeoff was calculated to be about 825 feet and the take-off distance 
over a 50-foot obstacle was calculated to be 1,530 feet with a temperature of 19 degrees Celsius 
and a pressure altitude of 898 feet.
The pilot reported no mechanical malfunctions with the airplane or the airplane's engine prior 
to the accident.
