The airplane sustained substantial damage during a hard landing.  A witness to the accident 
stated that the airplane was approaching "too hot" and touched down three separate times due 
to its high approach speed.  On the third touchdown, the airplane's landing gear collapsed and 
the airplane slid to a stop.  Photographs of the runway surface displayed a noticeable crack 
running the length of the runway, left of the centerline.  Significant markings were located 
approximately midpoint down the runway.  Two parallel black skid marks with irregular zigzag 
patterns, exhibiting heavy tread markings, were also visible left of the centerline.  These skid 
marks were about 6 feet apart and parallel to the runway centerline.  The left skid mark was 
located about 6 inches left of the crack.  The right skid mark was located about 5 feet to the 
right of the crack.  There were two sets of six thin scrape marks dimensionally similar to 
propeller slashes in the runway surface located adjacent to each of the two black skid marks.  
There was approximately 12 inches in between each of the scrape marks, which were 
perpendicular to the runway centerline.  One set of scrape marks was on the left side of the left 
skid mark.  The second set of scrape marks was on the right side of the right skid mark.  A third 
mark, located midpoint in between the two black skid marks, consisted of a skid mark, which 
was nearly covered by a white paint transfer. This mark ran parallel to the runway centerline.  
All three skid marks faded as they continued down the length of the runway.  The accident 
aircraft was painted white.  The mechanic who examined the airplane after the accident stated 
that there was no evidence of a mechanical gear failure.  Flight control and flap continuity were 
also checked with no anomalies noted.  The flaps were examined, and found to be in the up 
position, consistent with the flap selector position.  The flaps were not damaged.  The mechanic 
noted that the flaps are normally damaged if they are in the down position and the gear 
collapses.  The pilot told the mechanic that he was not sure if he had put the flaps down during 
the approach.
The pilot's excessive approach speed and misjudged landing flare, which resulted in a hard 
landing and collapse of the landing gear.  A factor in the accident was the pilot's failure to use 
flaps.
On June 1, 2003, about 1500 Pacific daylight time, a Beech 58, N18142, a twin-engine airplane, 
sustained substantial damage during a hard landing at Big Bear City Airport (L35), Big Bear 
City, California.  The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR 
Part 91.  The commercial pilot and two passengers were not injured.  The personal cross-
country flight departed Catalina Airport (AVX), Avalon, California, en route to L35 at 1415.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had not been filed. 
According to the pilot, the approach was normal.  As he touched down, it felt like the nose gear 
was in a rut.  He immediately pulled back on the yoke and the airplane became airborne.  As it 
touched down a second time, the nose gear collapsed, and the airplane skidded down the 
runway to a stop.  He examined the runway and found a rut that ran the length of the runway.
A witness told a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector that the airplane appeared to 
oscillate on final approach, made a hard landing, and porpoised down the runway.  The Big 
Bear City Airport Director, also a witness to the accident, stated that the airplane was 
approaching "too hot" and began to touch down.  It touched down three separate times due to 
its high approach speed.  On the third touchdown, the airplane's landing gear collapsed and the 
airplane slid to a stop.
During a telephone interview with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the Big Bear City Airport Manager stated that there were several significant 
cracks on the runway, which develop each winter.  Some of the cracks had just recently been 
filled in.  The Airport Manager took pictures of the runway after the accident.
Photographs received by the IIC displayed a noticeable crack running the length of the runway, 
left of the centerline.  Significant markings were located approximately midpoint down the 
runway.  Two parallel black skid marks with irregular zigzag patterns, exhibiting heavy tread 
markings, were also visible left of the centerline.  These skid marks were about 6 feet apart and 
parallel to the runway centerline.  The left skid mark was located about 6 inches left of the 
crack.  The right skid mark was located about 5 feet to the right of the crack.  There were two 
sets of six thin scrape marks dimensionally similar to propeller slashes in the runway surface 
located adjacent to each of the two black skid marks.  There was approximately 12 inches in 
between each of the scrape marks, which were perpendicular to the runway centerline.  One set 
of scrape marks was on the left side of the left skid mark.  The second set of scrape marks was 
on the right side of the right skid mark.  A third mark, located midpoint in between the two 
black skid marks, consisted of a skid mark, which was nearly covered by white paint transfer. 
This mark ran parallel to the runway centerline.  All three skid marks fade as they continue 
down the length of the runway.  The accident aircraft was painted white.
During a telephone interview with the IIC, the mechanic who examined the airplane stated that 
there was no evidence of a mechanical gear failure.  Flight control and flap continuity were also 
checked with no anomalies noted.  During the inspection he noticed that the flaps were in the 
up position, consistent with the flap selector position.  The flaps were not damaged.  The 
mechanic noted that the flaps normally are damaged if they are in the down position and the 
gear collapses.  The pilot told the mechanic that he was not sure if he had put the flaps down 
during the approach.
