Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Venice, FL
Accident Number:
ERA16LA055
Date & Time:
12/01/2015, 1530 EST 
Registration:
N8560M
Aircraft:
ROBINSON R22
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Hard landing
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
The flight instructor was preparing the pilot for her commercial rotorcraft-helicopter practical 
test. The instructor stated that they were returning to the airport when the engine shut down. 
The instructor entered an autorotation, which terminated in a hard landing. The instructor 
stated that he assumed the pilot pulled the mixture control instead of the carburetor heat 
because he saw it pulled after the helicopter came to a full stop on the ground; however, he 
never actually saw her pull the mixture control. The pilot stated that the instructor rolled the 
throttle to idle to simulate an in-flight loss of engine power as part of her checkride 
preparation. Both she and the instructor were operating the controls for the autorotation. The 
pilot said she was not sure what happened, but they landed hard and a section of windscreen 
popped out. She then pulled the mixture to shut off the engine, while the instructor used the 
rotor brake to stop the main rotor blades. The pilot exited the helicopter to recover the 
windshield and was subsequently struck in the head by a main rotor blade. Although the 
instructor's and pilot's accounts varied regarding the events leading up to the autorotation, 
they both reported that the autorotation ended in a hard landing, and that there were no 
mechanical issues with the helicopter or the engine that contributed to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The flight instructor's failure to maintain control of the helicopter during an autorotation, 
which resulted in a hard landing.
Page 2 of 6ERA16LA055
Findings
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Instructor/check pilot (Cause)
Page 3 of 6ERA16LA055
Factual Information
On December 1, 2015, about 1530 eastern standard time, a Robinson R22, N8560M, made a 
forced landing to a field near Venice, Florida. The flight instructor sustained minor injuries and 
the private pilot was seriously injured. The helicopter was registered to N8560M, LLC, and 
operated by Helicopter Academy under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91 as an instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions existed near the accident site at 
the time of the accident and no flight plan was filed. The flight originated from the Venice 
Municipal Airport (VNC), Venice, Florida, about 1430.
The flight instructor reported that he was preparing the pilot for her commercial rotorcraft-
helicopter checkride. They had practiced several maneuvers before heading back to the airport. 
While en route to the airport, the instructor was asking the pilot where she would land in the 
event of an engine failure when he noticed that the manifold pressure had dropped below 18 
inches of mercury, which necessitated activation of the carburetor heat. The instructor did not 
recall if he told the pilot to turn the carburetor heat on, but remembered looking back outside 
because they were discussing forced landing areas. The instructor said the pilot then 
accidentally "pulled the mixture" versus the carburetor heat and "shut off the engine." He 
immediately took control of the helicopter, entered an autorotation, and landed "hard." The 
windshield popped out and the helicopter rocked back and forth before it came to rest. The 
instructor said the pilot then exited the helicopter and ran toward the front. The main rotor 
blades were still moving and struck the pilot's head. The instructor said he never saw the pilot 
actually pull the mixture control in flight. He assumed that she did, because when he went to 
shut the engine down, the mixture control's safety gate was on the floor and the mixture 
control was pulled out.
The pilot stated that while returning to Venice, the instructor asked her where she would land 
if they had an engine failure. She said the beach, but the instructor pointed out a more suitable 
spot. The instructor then called out "3-2-1" and rolled off the throttle to simulate an engine 
failure. The pilot said that both of them were on the controls and the autorotation looked good 
until they were about 250 feet from the landing spot. The helicopter landed hard, but she did 
not know why. Once on the ground, the pilot said she "pulled the mixture" while the instructor 
had his hand on the rotor-brake. She then exited the helicopter to go retrieve the windshield 
that had popped off during landing. While standing out in front of the helicopter, one of the 
main rotor blades struck her on the left side of the head, fracturing her orbital bone.
Both the instructor and pilot reported there were no mechanical deficiencies that would have 
precluded normal operation of the helicopter or engine.
The instructor held a commercial pilot certificate for rotorcraft-helicopter and was also a 
certified flight instructor in rotorcraft-helicopter. He reported a total flight experience of 700 
hours, of which, 600 hours were in the R22. The instructor's last Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) second class medical was issued on August 11, 2015.
Page 4 of 6ERA16LA055
The pilot held a private pilot certificate for rotorcraft-helicopter. She reported a total flight 
experience of 150 hours, of which, 150 hours were in the R22. The pilot's last FAA second class 
medical was issued on June 6, 2015.
Weather reported at VNC at 1535 was wind 310 degrees at 6 knots, clear skies, and visibility 
great than 10 miles. The temperature was 79 degrees F and the dewpoint was 72 degrees F.
History of Flight
Autorotation
Hard landing (Defining event)
After landing
AC/prop/rotor contact w person
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial; 
Private
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/11/2015
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/16/2015
Flight Time:
700 hours (Total, all aircraft), 600 hours (Total, this make and model), 650 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 200 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 10 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
31, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
None
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
4-point
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/06/2015
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
150 hours (Total, all aircraft), 150 hours (Total, this make and model), 100 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6ERA16LA055
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON
Registration:
N8560M
Model/Series:
R22 UNDESIGNAT
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
1985
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0476
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid;
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/09/2015, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1369 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8358.6 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
O-320 SERIES
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
130 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
VNC, 16 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1535 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
310°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
29.97 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Venice, FL (VNC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Venice, FL (VNC)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1430 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Unknown
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
27.100000, -82.433333 (est)
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Leah D Read
Adopted Date:
05/23/2017
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Blake; FAA/FSDO; Tampa, FL
Publish Date:
05/23/2017
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=92385
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
