The pilot stated that the flight departed with full fuel and after takeoff, he orbited the airport 
about 10-15 minutes at 1,100 feet agl, then proceeded on course at the same altitude.  About 10-
15 minutes later, he noted that the CHT increased but the oil pressure and temperature 
indications were normal.  He verified the mixture control was in the full rich position and 
continued the flight, noting that the CHT continued to increase.  He applied throttle to 
maintain altitude but the CHT increased and at that time, the engine rpm began to decrease.  
Unable to maintain altitude, he selected a site for a forced landing but was unable to land there 
due to a total loss of engine power. While descending for a forced landing on a off-ramp of a 
highway, the right wing collided with a light pole.  The airplane then rolled inverted and 
impacted a fence.  Examination of the engine by an FAA Airworthiness Inspector revealed that 
a plastic 90-degree fitting located at the inlet of the carburetor was broken.  Additionally, all 
cylinder heads were found to be cracked between spark plug holes.  Impact damage to the right 
aft cylinder head was noted. 
The unsuitable terrain encountered during the forced landing.  Contributing to the accident 
was the total loss of engine power due to the failure of a plastic 90-degree fitting at the inlet 
fitting of the carburetor. 
 On March 1, 1999, about 1530 eastern standard time, a homebuilt George A. Scott Jr., Fisher 
Celebrity, N1122V, registered to R. Wayne Pearce and Cyrus D. Rogers, experienced a total loss 
of engine power and subsequent collision with a light pole while descending for a forced 
landing near Simpsonville, South Carolina.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight.  The airplane was 
substantially damaged and the airline transport-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  
The flight originated about 30 minutes earlier from Flight World Airport, Greer, South 
Carolina.
     The airplane was purchased on February 6, 1999, and the pilot stated that the purpose of the 
flight was to position the airplane to the new owners.  After takeoff with full fuel, he circled the 
departure airport at about 1,100 feet agl for about 10-15 minutes then proceeded on the flight.  
About 10-15 minutes later, while flying at 1,100 feet agl, he first noted that the cylinder head 
temperature (CHT) increased but the oil pressure and oil temperature were indicating 
normally.  He verified that the mixture was in the full rich position, continued the flight, and 
noted that the CHT continued to increase.  He applied throttle to maintain altitude but the 
CHT increased and at that time, the engine rpm began to decrease.  Unable to maintain 
altitude, he selected a sight for the forced landing, but was unable to land there due to a total 
loss of engine power.  While descending for a forced landing on an off ramp for a highway, the 
right wing collided with a light pole.  The airplane then rolled inverted and collided with a 
highway security fence.  Fuel leakage was noted postcrash.
     Examination of the accident site by an FAA airworthiness inspector revealed that the 
airplane was inverted against the perimeter fence for the on-ramp to the highway.  The right 
wing was damaged due to the contact with the light pole about 18 feet agl, and the left wing was 
damaged due to ground contact.  The right main and tailwheel were separated; the left main 
was attached.  The airplane was recovered and examination of the engine by an FAA 
airworthiness inspector revealed that after the top cowling was removed, the fuel line at the 
inlet of the carburetor was not connected.  A 90-degree fitting which was made of plastic and 
connected the fuel line to the carburetor inlet, was broken.  The electric fuel pump was 
operationally checked and found to operate normally.  Examination of each cylinder for 
compression was accomplished and all were normal except for the right aft cylinder which had 
no compression.  All cylinder heads were removed and a hole was found at the 6 o'clock 
position of the cylinder which had no compression.  The FAA inspector attributed the hole to 
impact damage.  All cylinder heads were noted to be cracked between the spark plug holes.  
Examination of the valves, pistons, and connecting rods showed no signs of damage.
