The airplane impacted terrain during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power on 
takeoff.  The airline transport pilot receiving instruction was on the controls of the airplane for 
the takeoff.  At an altitude of approximately 100 feet, the engine lost power, and the certified 
flight instructor took control.  The flight instructor turned the airplane left to avoid a steel rail 
fence at the end of the runway.  During the turn, the left wing tip struck the ground, and the 
airplane turned 180 degrees and came to rest.  A mechanic, who examined the airplane, 
attributed the loss of engine power to a broken throttle control cable clamp.  The broken clamp 
was made of aluminum; however, a steel clamp was specified by the airframe manufacturer. 
The total loss of engine power on takeoff resulting from the failure of an incorrect throttle 
control cable clamp, which was installed by an unknown person.  A factor was the lack of 
suitable terrain for the forced landing. 
 On March 1, 1999, at 1515 central standard time, a Piper J3C-65 airplane, N92350, sustained 
substantial damage during a forced landing following a loss of engine power on takeoff from 
Hartlee Field Airport near Denton, Texas.  The airplane was registered to and operated by a 
private individual.  The flight instructor sustained minor injuries, and the airline transport 
pilot receiving instruction was not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a 
flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight.
The flight instructor reported that the "check out" flight departed Lakeview Airport, Lake 
Dallas, Texas, about 1440 and proceeded to Hartlee Field.  Following a full stop landing, with 
the pilot receiving instruction on the controls, a takeoff was initiated to the north.  According to 
the flight instructor, "at approximately 100 feet the engine power completely disappeared."  
The flight instructor took control and turned the airplane approximately 45 degrees left to 
avoid a steel rail fence at the end of the runway.  While the airplane was in the turn, the left 
wing tip struck the ground.  The airplane turned 180 degrees and came to rest heading south 
approximately 50 feet from the wing touchdown point and 150 feet west of the runway 
centerline.  An FAA inspector examined the airplane and reported that the left wing, main 
landing gear, propeller, engine, and firewall were damaged.
A mechanic examined the airplane and found "the throttle control cable housing free, due to a 
broken attaching clamp."  The mechanic reported that the broken clamp was made of 
aluminum; however, a steel clamp, Piper P/N 7536, "should have been used."  The mechanic 
further reported that "the clamp appeared to have been fretting for some time, due to the 
appearance of the edges, but the main break looked fresh."  He did not think the impact broke 
the clamp, "because when [he] held the cable assembly in its proper place, it was relaxed, with 
no strain, even though the airframe was bent in that area."  The mechanic found no other 
anomalies during his examination of the airplane.
