National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Somerville, TN
Accident Number: ATL07LA001
Date & Time: 10/04/2006, 1815 CDT
Registration: N493Y
Aircraft: Grumman G-164
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The pilot reported that he was conducting an aerial application flight.
He stated that about half way through the third turn-around maneuver a gradual loss of power occurred.
He added full throttle but did not notice the difference in the engine sound or the power output.
He made a forced landing into a small field of trees and the airplane collided with the ground.
The pilot exited the airplane, and an immediate post-crash fire consumed the airplane.
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that all components for flight were located at the crash site.
An examination of the engine revealed that all of its components were heavily fire damaged, and an engine examination could not be facilitated due to the fire damage.
Due to the engine fire damage the cause of the loss of power could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The total loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 2.
The airplane collided with a tree while making a force landing, and was substantially damaged by post-crash fire.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The private pilot received minor injuries.
The flight originated from the Fayette County Airport, Somerville, Tennessee, at 1750.
The pilot reported that he was conducting an aerial application flight.
He stated that about half way through the third turn-around maneuver a gradual loss of power occurred.
He added full throttle but did not notice the difference in the engine sound or the power output.
He made a forced landing into a small field of trees and the airplane collided with the ground.
Examination of the airplane by an FAA inspector revealed that all components for flight were located at the crash site.
An examination of the engine revealed that all of its components were heavily fire damaged, and an engine examination could not be facilitated due to the fire damage.
A review of the engine logbook pages revealed that the engine was overhauled on July 27, 2006 at an engine total time of 524.7 hours.
After the engine was reinstalled it was run for 1-hour.
The owner of the airplane did not submit the airplane logbooks or records for review to the NTSB.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
