National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Canaan Valley, WV
Accident Number: GAA17CA316
Date & Time: 06/02/2017, 1400 EDT
Registration: N102CM
Aircraft: MALINOWSKI WALTER S RV8
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of control on ground
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that, during the landing, as the main gear touched down, a wind gust "carried" the airplane off the right side of the runway.
He added that, when the nose gear touched down, it sunk into the soft ground, and the airplane "flipped over on its back."
The airplane sustained substantial damage to its canopy and empennage.
The pilot reported that there were no preaccident mechanical failures or malfunctions with the airplane that would have precluded normal operation.
The pilot reported that the weather at the accident site about the time of the accident was wind from 330° at 12 knots, gusting to about 20 knots.
The pilot landed on runway 06.
An automated weather observation system about 14 nautical miles from the accident site reported that, about the time of the accident, the wind was from 310° at 8 knots, gusting to 16 knots.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control while landing in gusting wind conditions.
Although most loss of control during landing accidents do not result in serious injuries, they typically require extensive airplane repairs and may involve potential damage to nearby objects such as fences, signs, and lighting.
Often, wind plays a role in these accidents.
Landing in a crosswind presents challenges for pilots of all experience levels.
Other wind conditions, such as gusting wind, tailwind, variable wind, or wind shifts, can also interfere with pilots™ abilities to land the airplane and maintain directional control.
What can pilots do?
Evaluate your mental and physical fitness before each flight using the Federal Aviation Administration™s (FAA) ﬁI'M SAFE Checklist."
Being emotionally and physically ready will help you stay alert and potentially avoid common and preventable loss of control during landing accidents.
Check wind conditions and forecasts often.
Take time during every approach briefing to fully understand the wind conditions.
Use simple rules of thumb to help (for example, if the wind direction is 30 degrees off the runway heading, the crosswind component will be half of the total wind velocity).
Know your limitations and those of the airplane you are flying.
Stay current and practice landings on different runways and during various wind conditions.
If possible, practice with a flight instructor on board who can provide useful feedback and techniques for maintaining and improving your landing procedures.
Prepare early to perform a go around if the approach is not stabilized and does not go as planned or if you do not feel comfortable with the landing.
Once you are airborne and stable again, you can decide to attempt to land again, reassess your landing runway, or land at an alternate airport.
Incorporate go-around procedures into your recurrent training.
During landing, stay aligned with the centerline.
Any misalignment reduces the time available to react if an unexpected event such as a wind gust or a tire blowout occurs.
Do not allow the airplane to touch down in a drift or in a crab.
For airplanes with tricycle landing gear, do not allow the nosewheel to touch down first.
Maintain positive control of the airplane throughout the landing and be alert for directional control difficulties immediately upon and after touchdown.
A loss of directional control can lead to a nose-over or ground loop, which can cause the airplane to tip or lean enough for the wing tip to contact the ground.
Stay mentally focused throughout the landing roll and taxi.
During landing, avoid distractions, such as conversations with passengers or setting radio frequencies.
Interested in More Information?
The FAA™s ﬁAirplane Flying Handbookﬂ (FAA-H-8083-3B), chapter 8, ﬁApproaches and Landings,ﬂ provides guidance about how to conduct crosswind approaches and landings and discusses maximum safe crosswind velocities.
The handbook can be accessed from the FAA™s website (www.faa.gov).
The courses listed below can be accessed from the FAASTeam website (www.faasafety.gov).
Avoiding Loss of Control  Maneuvering: Approach and Landing  Normal Approach and Landing  Takeoffs, Landings, and Aircraft Control The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association Air Safety Institute offers several interactive courses, presentations, publications, and other safety resources that can be accessed from its website (www.aopa.org/asf/).
The NTSB™s Aviation Information Resources web page, www.ntsb.gov/air, provides convenient access to NTSB aviation safety products.
The NTSB presents this information to prevent recurrence of similar accidents.
Note that this should not be considered guidance from the regulator, nor does this supersede existing FAA Regulations (FARs).
Administrative Information Investigator In Charge (IIC): Eric A Swenson Adopted Date: 08/22/2017 Additional Participating Persons: Earl D Wilson; FAA; Charleston, WV Publish Date: 08/22/2017 Note: This accident report documents the factual circumstances of this accident as described to the NTSB.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=95291
