National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Factual Report
Location: Bowling Green, OH
Accident Number: CEN17FA207
Date & Time: 06/01/2017, 1159 EDT
Registration: N4635V
Aircraft: VARGA AIRCRAFT CORP. 2150A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Medical event
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
HISTORY OF FLIGHT 
On June 1, 2017, at 1157 eastern daylight time, a Varga 2150A airplane, N4635V, was destroyed 
when it impacted terrain near Bowling Green, Ohio. The private pilot was fatally injured. The 
airplane was privately owned by the pilot, and he was operating it under the provisions of Title 
14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
(
CFR
)
 
Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for 
the personal flight, which originated from Tri-City Airport (3G6), Sebring, Ohio, and was en 
route to Conklin Airport (OI92), Bowling Green, Ohio.
The pilot had recently purchased the airplane and was relocating it to a private airstrip near his 
home. GPS data recovered from an onboard device showed that the airplane departed 3G6 
about 1034 and flew northwest toward OI92. The airplane maintained consistent 
groundspeeds and headings until 1156, when it entered a left-turning spiral descent. (See 
figure.)
Figure: Final GPS Data (oriented Northeast up, times are depicted in UTC)
Witnesses observed the airplane flying erratically at low altitude before it impacted terrain. 
One witness stated, "the airplane was flying very low to the ground and turned to the east 
almost turning sideways and upside down. The plane flew south and then turned – the plane 
was nose down, heading north." Each witness reported that the engine was running before 
impact. The accident location was about 6 miles southeast of the destination airport.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was manufactured in 1977. The airframe maintenance logs located during the 
investigation were annotated "Logbook #2, 10/2/92." The first work documented in the engine 
log was an engine overhaul dated June 11, 1992. The first work documented in the propeller log 
was an annual inspection dated June 23, 2014. The aircraft log recorded 15 annual inspections 
between 1992 and 2017. The last annual inspection occurred on May 5, 2017. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Wreckage and impact signatures were consistent with the fixed-tricycle gear, tandem-seat 
airplane impacting terrain left-wing-low in an attitude that exceeded 70° nose-low. The impact 
point and wreckage debris field were contained within an area about 200 ft in diameter. All 
airplane and engine components were accounted for at the accident location. The propeller was 
found separated from the engine. Leading edge gouges and chordwise scratches were present 
on both propeller blades. The fuel selector was found in the "BOTH" position. The left wing and 
fuel tank were destroyed by impact forces. The right-wing fuel tank contained an undetermined 
amount of fuel and the tank displayed evidence of hydraulic deformation. Fuel was present in 
the fuel selector valve and inside the remnants of the engine-driven fuel pump. The flap 
selector was found at the second notch (extended) position and the flaps were also found in an 
extended position. No pre-impact anomalies were noted with the airframe or engine during 
examination at that time.
The NTSB investigator-in-charge conducted an additional examination of the engine on 
November 1, 2017. Portions of the engine exhaust system, heat exchanger, and associated scat 
tubing were removed and examined. No nonimpact-related anomalies were identified with the 
exhaust system or the scat tubing.
The heat exchanger was impact-damaged. The examination also revealed that the outside 
casing was comprised of metals with different properties. About one-half of the casing was 
constructed of a material similar to stainless steel that was discolored but showed no 
indications of corrosion. The remainder of the casing was discolored and exhibited varying 
signs of corrosion. Small holes were found where corrosion had occurred in the casing 
material. There were cracks in the casing in areas affected by impact damage. It could not be 
determined if the cracks were present before impact or resulted from impact forces. 
Review of the maintenance logbooks revealed no entries regarding repairs or replacement of 
the heat exchanger. 
MEDICAL AND PATHALOGICAL INFORMATION
The Lucas County Coroner's Office, Toledo, Ohio, conducted an autopsy of the pilot. The cause 
of death was blunt force trauma. 
The FAA's Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
performed toxicology testing and identified 55% carbon monoxide in cavity blood. No other 
tested-for substances were identified. 
Carbon monoxide (CO) is an odorless, tasteless, colorless, nonirritating gas formed by 
hydrocarbon combustion. CO binds to hemoglobin with much greater affinity than oxygen, 
forming carboxyhemoglobin; elevated levels result in impaired oxygen transport and 
utilization. Nonsmokers may normally have up to 3% carboxyhemoglobin in their blood; heavy 
smokers may have levels of 10 to 15%. Acutely, low levels of CO may cause vague symptoms like 
headache and nausea but increasing levels (40% and above) lead to confusion, seizures, loss of 
consciousness, and death. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Title 14 
CFR
Part 43, Appendix D states, in part: (d) Each person performing an annual or 100-hour inspection shall inspect (where applicable)
components of the engine and nacelle group as follows:–
(8) Exhaust stacks - for cracks, defects, and improper attachment.
Pilot Information  
Certificate: Private
Age: 70, Male
Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied: Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): None
Restraint Used: Unknown
Instrument Rating(s): Airplane
Second Pilot Present: No
Instructor Rating(s): None
Toxicology Performed: Yes
Medical Certification: BasicMed
Last FAA Medical Exam: 05/18/2015
Occupational Pilot: No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time: 793 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: VARGA AIRCRAFT CORP.
Registration: N4635V
Model/Series: 2150A A
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Year of Manufacture: 1977
Amateur Built: No
Airworthiness Certificate: Normal; Utility
Serial Number: VAC-91-78
Landing Gear Type: Tricycle
Seats: 2
Date/Type of Last Inspection: 05/05/2017, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.: 4006 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection: 3 Hours
Engines: 1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time: 2410 Hours as of last
inspection
Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming
ELT: Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series: O-320-A2C
Registered Owner: On file
Rated Power:
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time: 
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Visibility
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: /
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual: /
Wind Direction: Turbulence Severity
Forecast/Actual: /
Altimeter Setting:
Temperature/Dew Point: 14°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: Sebring, OH (3G6)
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Destination: Bowling Green, OH (OI92)
Type of Clearance: None
Departure Time: 1034 CDT
Type of Airspace: Airport Information
Airport: CONKLIN (OI92)
Runway Surface Type: N/A
Airport Elevation: 675 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used: N/A
IFR Approach: None
Runway Length/Width: 
VFR Approach/Landing: None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude: 41.339167, -83.598611
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Daniel Baker
Additional Participating Persons: Alex McAninch; FAA; Cleveland, OH
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=95276
