Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Vero Beach, FL
Accident Number:
ERA09LA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2008, 1502 EDT 
Registration:
N373DB
Aircraft:
Bezinque Alisport-Silent
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot of the powered glider stated that about 30 seconds after takeoff, about 170 feet above 
the ground, the engine rpm decreased. He then leveled the glider and the engine stopped 
producing power. The pilot entered a left turn to land to the east and the engine "suddenly 
regained power." He then turned the glider to return to the airport, but when he leveled the 
wings the engine again stopped producing power. Lacking the altitude to return to the airport, 
the pilot chose a road for a forced landing. The landing area was blocked with cars and power 
poles, so he landed the glider "hard" in the grass adjacent to the roadway to avoid the obstacles. 
A detailed examination of the glider revealed that with electrical power applied, the fuel boost 
pump did not pump fuel from the pump outlet port.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the electric fuel boost pump which resulted in a loss of engine power due to fuel 
starvation.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel pumps - Failure (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA09LA001
Factual Information
On October 1, 2008, at 1502 eastern daylight time, an experimental amateur-built Alisport 
Silent-IN powered glider, N373DB, was substantially damaged during a forced landing after 
takeoff from Indian River Aerodrome (FL74), Vero Beach, Florida. The certificated private 
pilot/owner was seriously injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight 
plan was filed for the local personal flight that was conducted under the provisions of 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
The pilot was interviewed by telephone, and provided a written statement. The pilot explained 
that the engine was electronically controlled, and that engine start was "automatic" and the 
engine would only accelerate from idle once it had "warmed up." Once warm, the pilot would 
advance the throttle to full operating rpm.
The pilot said that once he advanced the throttle, the engine "reached a satisfactory static rpm 
of 6,190" prior to takeoff from runway 17. During the initial climb to the south, about 30 
seconds after takeoff, the engine rpm decreased to 5,500 and the pilot leveled the glider 170 
feet above the ground, at which point the engine stopped producing power.
The pilot entered a left turn to land to the east, and the engine "suddenly regained power." The 
pilot then turned the glider to return to the airport, and when he leveled the wings, the engine 
again stopped producing power. Lacking the altitude to return to the airport, the pilot chose a 
road for a forced landing. The landing area was blocked with cars and power poles, so he 
landed the glider "hard" in the grass adjacent to the roadway to avoid the obstacles.
The pilot held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) private pilot certificate with a rating for 
airplane single engine land and glider aero-tow. He reported 2,800 total hours of flight 
experience, 1,000 hours of which were in gliders, and 36 hours of which were in the accident 
aircraft make and model. His most recent FAA third class medical certificate was issued in 
January 2007.
According to FAA records, the powered glider was manufactured in 2003 from a kit. The 
pilot/owner reported that its most recent annual inspection was completed December 2007, at 
76 aircraft hours. The glider had accrued about 110 total aircraft hours at the time of the 
accident.
At 1453, the weather reported at Vero Beach Municipal Airport (VRB), located 6 miles south of 
the accident site, included visibility 10 miles, few clouds at 5,500 feet, a broken ceiling at 7,000 
feet, and winds from 090 degrees at 7 knots. The temperature was 28 degrees Celsius, and the 
dew point was 22 degrees Celsius. The calculated density altitude was 1,973 feet.
An FAA inspector examined the glider at the accident site and all major components were 
accounted for. The cockpit canopy was shattered, and pieces were scattered forward of the 
fuselage. The cockpit, fuselage, and wings appeared largely intact. The empennage was 
fractured aft of the cabin, but the tailboom and tail control surfaces appeared otherwise intact.
Control continuity was established from the cockpit area to the flight control surfaces. The 
retractable engine pylon was still deployed and locked in the up position. The engine and 
propeller appeared intact. The on-scene examination revealed no pre-impact mechanical 
anomalies. 
Reexamination of the glider by the FAA inspector revealed that with electrical power applied, 
Page 3 of 5ERA09LA001
the fuel boost pump did not pump fuel from the pump outlet port.
History of Flight
Initial climb
Sys/Comp malf/fail (non-power)
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-flare/touchdown
Hard landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
57, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Single
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/31/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 36 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bezinque
Registration:
N373DB
Model/Series:
Alisport-Silent 
Aircraft Category:
Glider
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Yes
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
37K
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
1
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/31/2007, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
640 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
34 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
110 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
C and V Aircraft Corporation
Rated Power:
28 hp
Operator:
Vincent Powers
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5ERA09LA001
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
VRB, 24 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
6 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1453 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
233°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 5500 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 7000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.8 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 22°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Vero Beach, FL (FL74)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Vero Beach, FL (FL74)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Indian River Aerodrome (FL74)
Runway Surface Type:
Grass/turf
Airport Elevation:
25 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
17
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2600 ft / 200 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
27.585000, -80.501944 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Brian C Rayner
Adopted Date:
11/09/2009
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Potts; FAA/FSDO; Orlando, FL
Leo Benetti-Longhini; Alisport Silent; Nashville, TN
Publish Date:
11/17/2009
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5ERA09LA001
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
