Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
El Paso, TX
Accident Number:
CEN12LA605
Date & Time:
09/01/2012, 1100 MDT 
Registration:
N5489X
Aircraft:
BURKHART GROB G 103 TWIN II
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of control in flight
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Glider Tow
Analysis 
The glider club was launching gliders via a mechanical ground winch. On the first launch 
attempt, the glider overflew the tow cable and it automatically disconnected when the glider 
was low to the ground. The glider was able to make a safe landing on the runway. The pilot was 
overheard saying that the first launch failed because he should have initiated the climb sooner. 
On the second attempt, the glider once again overran the tow cable. Before the tow cable 
released, the pilot lowered the nose to pick up the slack in the cable and he instructed the 
winch operator to go faster. These two steps appeared to have corrected the problem, and the 
pilot initiated a climb. Shortly after, the glider began to overfly the cable again and it 
disconnected. The glider entered free flight just above stall speed about 75 feet above the 
runway. A witness saw the glider nose over and thought the pilot was going to land. Instead, 
the glider descended rapidly and drifted to the left toward a taxiway. The witness saw the wings 
of the glider rock back and forth before it impacted the ground hard. Examination of the glider 
and release hook revealed no mechanical anomalies. The ground winch's engine was reportedly 
running rough and most likely was unable to produce enough speed to launch the glider.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot‚s failure to maintain glider control while attempting to take off using a ground winch, 
which resulted in an inadvertent stall low to the ground. Contributing to the accident was the 
ground winch, which was unable to produce enough speed for a successful glider launch.
Findings
Aircraft
Towing - Related operating info (Cause)
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Factor)
Misc hardware - Not specified (Factor)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 5CEN12LA605
Factual Information
On September 1, 2012, about 1100 mountain daylight time, N5489X, a Burkhart Grob G103 
Twin II glider, sustained substantial damage when it  landed hard during an attempted takeoff 
using a ground winch at the Horizon Airport (T27) near El Paso, Texas. The commercial pilot 
was fatally injured. The glider was registered to and operated by the El Paso Soaring Society 
Incorporated, El Paso, Texas. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed for the local flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The El Paso Soaring Society was using the ground winch to launch gliders because their tow 
airplane was down for maintenance. The winch was set up on the overrun area on the east side 
of Runway 08. 
According to a witness, a week before the accident, he attended a class on how to launch a 
glider using the ground winch. The class was given by the pilot and the person who operated 
the winch on the day of the accident. The witness said the class was taught from both a pilot 
and winch-operating perspective.
The following weekend, the witness returned to the airport to assist with the glider launches. 
He said that on the first launch attempt, he  ran alongside the glider's wing until it got 
airborne. When the glider was approximately 15 feet above the ground, it overran the winch 
cable and the center of gravity (CG) hook automatically disconnected. The glider landed 
straight ahead without incident.
While ground-towing the glider back to the takeoff area, the witness heard the pilot telling the 
winch operator to do the same exact thing with the winch as he did on the first attempt. The 
pilot felt the first launch had failed because he didn't initiate a climb soon enough.
During the second attempt, the witness said the glider once again overflew the winch cable. He 
said, "According to the class [the pilot] gave the previous week, he performed the correct 
procedure - he lowered the nose to let the slack out of the cable. As this happened, he also came 
on the radio and directed the winch to go "faster". Then, once it started pulling him again, he 
raised the nose up as he was supposed to do in order to initiate a climb. After he did this, the 
cable once again seemed to develop some slack and the glider out ran it." The witness said the 
cable disconnected and the glider was in free-flight approximately 75 feet above the ground 
and appeared to be traveling just above stall speed. He then saw the glider nose over as if the 
pilot was preparing to land. But the glider began to sink rapidly as it drifted to the left toward 
the taxiway. The witness then saw the wings of the glider rock back and forth before it hit the 
ground "very hard."
According to an inspector with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the glider came to 
rest just north of the taxiway. The area was damaged and the tail had separated from the 
airframe. Examination of the CG hook revealed no mechanical deficiencies and functioned 
normally when tested. The inspector also said the ground winch utilized a 350-cubic-inch 
Chevrolet engine with a two-speed automatic transmission. Club members reported the winch 
had only been used about 9 times in the last 4 years. The pilot's son, who was standing behind 
the winch on both launch attempts, said the winch engine sounded as if it was producing a high 
RPM, but was running rough. 
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate for airplane single-engine land and glider. He also 
had a certified flight instructor certificate for gliders. The pilot's last FAA Third Class medical 
Page 3 of 5CEN12LA605
was issued on December 28, 2011. At that time, he reported a total of 1,500 flight hours.
Weather at El Paso International Airport (ELP), El Paso, Texas, approximately 9 miles 
northwest of T27, at 1051, was reported as wind from 150 degrees at 4 knots, visibility 10 miles, 
clear skies, temperature 30 degrees Celsius, dewpoint 6 degrees Celsius, and a barometric 
pressure setting of 30.16 inches Hg.
History of Flight
Takeoff
Glider tow event
Loss of control in flight (Defining event)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
76, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Glider
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/28/2011
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 1500 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BURKHART GROB
Registration:
N5489X
Model/Series:
G 103 TWIN II 
Aircraft Category:
Glider
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3877-K-115
Landing Gear Type: 
None
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
0 
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
Registered Owner:
EL PASO SOARING SOCIETY 
INC
Rated Power:
Operator:
EL PASO SOARING SOCIETY 
INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN12LA605
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ELP, 4007 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
9 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1051 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
330°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.16 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
30°C / 6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
El Paso, TX (T27)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
El Paso, TX (T27)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1300 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Horizon Airport (T27)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4007 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
08
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
6885 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
31.718611, -106.235278 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Leah D Yeager
Adopted Date:
06/19/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Donald Halbert; FAA/FSDO; Albuqueque, NM
Publish Date:
06/19/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=84928
Page 5 of 5CEN12LA605
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
