National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BRISTOW, OK
Accident Number: FTW01LA045
Date & Time: 01/04/2001, 1500 CST
Registration: N68472
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot reported that a crosswind kept the airplane left of the runway's centerline.
The airplane's left main landing gear struck a snow bank and the airplane veered off the runway.
The pilot applied full power; however, the airplane nosed down, the left wing and propeller struck the ground, and the airplane returned to a level attitude before coming to rest.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's inadequate compensation for the crosswind conditions, which resulted in the airplane striking a snow bank during the landing flare/touchdown.
A factor was the crosswind weather condition.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 2.
(C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOWBANK Factual Information On January 4, 2001, at 1500 central standard time, a Cessna 152, single-engine airplane, N68472, sustained substantial damage when the left main landing gear struck a snow bank during the landing flare/touchdown on runway 17 at the Jones Memorial Airport, Bristow, Oklahoma.
The airplane was owned by Christiansen Aviation at Tulsa, Oklahoma, and operated by the Oklahoma State University, at Stillwater, Oklahoma, under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The student pilot, sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the instructional flight, and a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan was filed.
The cross-country flight departed Shawnee, Oklahoma, at 1345.
The pilot reported that a "slight crosswind from approximately 180 degrees kept me left of course to touchdown."
At touchdown, the airplane continued left until the "left main [landing gear] hit the snow bank."
The airplane veered off the runway into the grass.
The pilot applied full power for a soft field takeoff "but it didn't work."
The airplane nosed down, the left wing and propeller struck the ground, and the airplane returned to a level attitude before coming to rest.
The operator's personnel responding to the accident site, found the left wing bent and crumpled with structural damage to the main spar.
The operator reported the wind from the south at 10 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 23, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
