National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lincoln, IL
Accident Number: CHI01LA057
Date & Time: 01/01/2001, 1740 CST
Registration: N737WQ
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot said he performed a normal landing to runway 03 (4000 feet by 75 feet, dry asphalt), at the Lincoln-Logan County Airport, Lincoln, Illinois.
He said the airplane settled on the runway approximately 1,000 feet down from the runway threshold.
The pilot raised the flaps and applied full power.
The airplane lifted, came back down, and veered to the right.
The pilot said the airplane plowed into the snow, nosed over, and came to rest upside down.
An examination of the airplane revealed no anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control on the runway.
Factors relating to this accident were the aborted takeoff attempt, the pilot's improper in-flight planning/decision, and the snowbank.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) ABORTED LANDING - ATTEMPTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
(F) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF Findings 4.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
There was no flight plan filed.
The pilot and passenger on board the airplane reported no injuries.
The local flight originated at Springfield, Illinois, at 1715.
In his written statement, the pilot said that he performed a normal approach to runway 03.
He said that approximately 800 feet from the runway's threshold, the airplane bounced and floated for about 200 feet.
"We settled back onto the runway and started the rollout.
I feared not having enough runway and raised the flaps and applied full power.
The airplane lifted and came back down to the runway and began to veer to the right.
The aircraft did not respond to control input and plowed into snow, nosed over and came to rest upside down."
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector examined the airplane at the Lincoln-Logan County Airport.
The airplane was found resting inverted in a snow-covered field, off the right side of runway 03, approximately half-way down the runway.
The airplane's nose gear was broken off.
The cowling, engine mounts and firewall were crushed inward and bent aft and upward.
Both wings were bent downward, outboard of the wing struts.
The airplane's vertical stabilizer and rudder were crushed downward.
The propeller was torsionally bent and showed chordwise scratches.
Flight control continuity was confirmed.
An examination of the engine, engine controls, and other airplane systems revealed no anomalies.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 37, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2300 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 63.8 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 2633.6 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: O-320-H2AD Registered Owner: Capital Aircraft Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
