National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Eden, UT
Accident Number: DEN01LA038
Date & Time: 01/04/2001, 1500 MST
Registration: N26HV
Aircraft: Aviat A-1A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot was planning to practice landings on a snow covered field near his home.
He said there was 2 to 3 inches of snow at his house, but he did not check the snow conditions in the field before the flight.
The pilot said he was flying low over the field, dragging one tire in the snow.
The crust covering the snow broke, and the tire was pulled into the snow.
The airplane nosed over to the inverted position.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control during a landing attempt.
A contributing factor was his failure to check the snow conditions in the field before the flight.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - SNOW COVERED Factual Information On January 4, 2001, at approximately 1500 mountain standard time, an Aviat A-1A, N26HV, was substantially damaged while attempting a landing on a snow covered alfalfa field near Eden, Utah.
The airline transport pilot, the sole occupant in the airplane, was not injured.
The owner/pilot was operating the airplane under Title 14 CFR Part 91.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the cross-country personal flight that originated from Ogden, Utah, approximately 30 minutes before the accident.
The pilot had not filed a flight plan.
The pilot said that he departed Ogden to practice landings on a snow covered alfalfa field near his home.
He said that the snow at his home was 2 to 3 inches deep; however he did not check the snow conditions in the field before the flight.
The pilot said he was flying low over the field, "dragging one tire [tundra tire] in the snow."
He said that the snow had a crust on it, and when the tire broke through the crust, it got "pulled down" into the snow.
The airplane subsequently nosed over onto its back.
The left wing spar, the two wing struts, and the rudder were bent.
: 1890 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-360 Registered Owner: A Bar V Cattle & Commerce Corp.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
