National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Placerville, CA
Accident Number: LAX01LA068
Date & Time: 01/01/2001, 1529 PST
Registration: N94LW
Aircraft: Wallace Rotorway EXEC 152
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot finished building the helicopter and this was its first flight.
He had received 11 hours of flight instruction and was endorsed for hover only solo.
The pilot reported that he was 1-2 feet in the air and as he began backing the helicopter the tail rotor guard struck the ground, the main rotor struck the tail boom, and the left skid struck the ground.
The skid collapsed and the helicopter rolled over.
After exiting, the pilot attempted to right the helicopter, but fuel leaking from the fuel cap ignited when it contacted the exhaust.
The helicopter was destroyed in the subsequent fire.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the student pilot to maintain adequate ground clearance while hovering.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: HOVER Findings 1.
TERRAIN CONDITION - OPEN FIELD 2.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
The helicopter was operated by the pilot under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
The student pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed for the local solo instructional flight, which was departing at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated to a deputy sheriff, who responded to the scene, that he had just finished building the helicopter and this was its "maiden voyage."
He had been receiving instruction towards his private pilot certificate and was endorsed for hover only solo.
He reported that he was hovering in a dirt field and as he started to back the helicopter the tail rotor guard struck the ground, the main rotor flapped down striking the tail boom, and the left skid hit the ground and collapsed.
The helicopter then rolled over.
After exiting the helicopter the pilot attempted to roll the helicopter upright but fuel leaking from the fuel cap ignited when it contacted the engine exhaust.
The helicopter was destroyed in the subsequent fire.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 39, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
