National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Sioux Falls, SD
Accident Number: CHI01LA060
Date & Time: 01/04/2001, 1046 CST
Registration: N727SP
Aircraft: Cessna 172S
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot lost directional control of the aircraft during a takeoff run while practicing solo touch-and-go landings.
The pilot stated that after a successful landing he initiated a takeoff and, "as I added power the airplane seemed to shimmy at which time I tried to correct the plane.
As I was unable to correct I powered back to idle and tried to stop which is when the plane went off the left side of the runway and hit a windrow of snow."
The pilot reported, "Hitting the snow made the planes [plane's] tail lift and spin around which made the right wing hit the ground causing damage."
The pilot stated that his total time in all aircraft was 24.1- hours and all hours were flown in the accident airplane make and model.
The pilot reported that he had accumulated 1.4-hours of pilot-in-command time.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Aircraft directional control not being maintained by the student pilot during the takeoff roll.
Factors to the accident were the snow bank and the student pilot's lack of total experience.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - ROLL/RUN Findings 3.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The solo-instructional flight was being conducted under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91 and was not on a flight plan.
The student pilot, the sole occupant, reported no injuries.
The local flight was departing at the time of the accident.
According to the pilot's written statement, he was practicing solo touch-and-go landings at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that after a successful landing he initiated a takeoff and, "as I added power the airplane seemed to shimmy at which time I tried to correct the plane.
As I was unable to correct I powered back to idle and tried to stop which is when the plane went off the left side of the runway and hit a windrow of snow."
The pilot reported, "Hitting the snow made the planes [plane's] tail lift and spin around which made the right wing hit the ground causing damage."
The pilot reported that his total time in all aircraft was 24.1-hours and all hours were flown in the accident airplane make and model.
The pilot reported that he had accumulated 1.4-hours of pilot-in-command time.
Pilot Information Certificate: Student Age: 25, Male Airplane Rating(s): None Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2550 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 19 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 21 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: IO-360-L2A Registered Owner: Daedalus Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
