National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Atmautluak, AK
Accident Number: ANC01LA028
Date & Time: 01/03/2001, 1740 AST
Registration: N19771
Aircraft: Cessna 172
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 3 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis The certificated commercial pilot stated that while on final approach to runway 33, he inadvertently allowed the airplane to descend below his intended glide path.
In an attempt to arrest the descent he applied full engine power, but the airplane continued to descend.
The airplane inadvertently touched down on the snow-covered approach end of the runway, about 15 yards short of the runway surface.
As he attempted to abort the landing, the airplane become airborne, drifted to the left of the runway, and settled into an area of soft snow.
During the second touchdown, the nose wheel collapsed at the firewall bulkhead.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the engine firewall.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain a proper glidepath during final approach.
A factor associated with the accident was soft terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: UNDERSHOOT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) PROPER GLIDEPATH - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED Findings 2.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - SOFT Factual Information On January 3, 2001, about 1740 Alaska standard time, a wheel-equipped Cessna 172 airplane, N19771, sustained substantial damage during landing at the Atmautluak Airport, Atmautluak, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) on-demand passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was registered to, and operated by, Village Aviation, Inc., Bethel, Alaska.
The certificated commercial pilot, and the two passengers aboard, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated at the Bethel Airport, Bethel, about 1730.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator- in-charge on January 4, the pilot stated that while on final approach to runway 33, he inadvertently allowed the airplane to descend below his intended glide path.
He said that in an attempt to arrest the descent he applied full engine power, but the airplane continued to descend.
The airplane inadvertently touched down on the snow-covered approach end of the runway, about 15 yards short of the runway surface.
He said that as he attempted to abort the landing, the airplane become airborne, drifted to the left of the runway, and settled into an area of soft snow.
During the second touchdown, the nose wheel collapsed at the firewall bulkhead.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the engine firewall.
The pilot reported that wind conditions at the time of the accident were from the northeast at 5 knots.
The pilot indicated that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the airplane.
Pilot Information Certificate: Commercial Age: 57, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 2300 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 16 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 4115 Hours at time of accident Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, activated, did not aid in locating accident Engine Model/Series: O-320-2J Registered Owner: Village Aviation, Inc.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
