National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Port Huron, MI
Accident Number: CHI01LA061
Date & Time: 01/01/2001, 1245 EST
Registration: N2184N
Aircraft: Mooney M20S
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane contacted a snow bank on the side of the runway during landing.
The landing was being made on runway 04 (5,103 feet by 100 feet).
The pilot reported the winds were from the northwest at 10 knots and that a "minimal" crosswind correction was required on final approach.
He continued to report that just prior to touchdown while 2 feet above the runway "–a significant gust ballooned the aircraft 5-6 ft. above the runway where the aircraft stalled and began to settle abruptly with a nose high attitude."
The pilot added power in an attempt to recover, however, the airplane traveled to the right side of the runway where it contacted a snow bank and spun around prior to coming to rest.
The local weather observation, taken 5 minutes prior to the accident, reported winds from 270 degrees at 11 knots, gusting to 18 knots.
T Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot failed to maintain directional control of the airplane and the runway selected resulted in a tailwind condition.
Factors associated  with the accident were the gusty crosswind and the snow bank.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS 2.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND 3.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 4.
(C) WRONG RUNWAY - SELECTED - PILOT IN COMMAND 5.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 6.
The pilot was not injured and the airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.
The flight originated from Detroit, Michigan, at 1200 eastern standard time.
The pilot reported he flew a practice ILS approach to runway 04.
The approach was terminated in a go-around followed by VFR traffic pattern and full stop landing on runway 04.
He reported the winds were out of the northwest at 10 knots.
He then departed on runway 04 and made a left hand traffic pattern for another landing.
The pilot reported, "Final approach required minimal crab to correct for crosswind and then mild slip to maintain the centerline."
He reported that just prior to touchdown while 2 feet above the runway "–a significant gust ballooned the aircraft 5-6 ft. above the runway where the aircraft stalled and began to settle abruptly with a nose high attitude."
He reported he applied power to recover, but could not gain enough airspeed.
The airplane veered to the right and the right main landing gear contacted the snow on the side of the runway.
According to the pilot, the airplane spun around clockwise into the snow where it came to rest.
The local weather observation, taken 5 minutes prior to the accident, reported winds from 270 degrees at 11 knots, gusting to 18 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 44, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
