The 246.6-hour pilot was conducting a series of touch-and-go landings in an amateur-built 
race airplane.  While the airplane was turning from base leg to final within the airport traffic 
pattern, a witness observed the airplane "descending rapidly in a nose down" attitude through 
approximately 500 feet agl.  The witness stated that the airplane "fell straight down in a spin" 
until it impacted terrain.  Another witness located at the airport reported seeing the airplane 
turn left base at a bank angle of approximately 90 degrees.  Examination of the engine and 
airframe were conducted by the Federal Aviation Administration and no anomalies were noted.  
Review of the pilot's logbooks revealed he had accumulated approximately 2 hours in the 
accident make/model airplane.  The former owner of the accident airplane reported that the 
pilot had recently purchased the airplane approximately six months prior to the accident.
The pilot's failure to maintain airspeed sufficient for flight resulting in an inadvertent stall/spin 
while turning from the base leg of the traffic pattern to final.  A contributing factor was the 
pilot's lack of experience for the make/model airplane.
On September 1, 2004, approximately 1945 central daylight time, an amateur-built Cassutt 
IIIM single-engine airplane, N3TW, registered to and operated by a private individual, was 
destroyed when it impacted terrain following a loss of control while in the landing pattern at 
the Pearland Regional Airport (LVJ), near Pearland, Texas.  The private pilot, sole occupant of 
the airplane, was fatally injured.  Visual metrological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was 
not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight.  The local flight 
originated from LVJ approximately 40 minutes prior to the time of the accident. 
In a written statement, a witness, who was the pilot of a Cessna 206 that was on a left 
downwind for Runway 32R, at an altitude of 800 feet above ground level (agl), reported that he 
observed N3TW approximately 1/4 mile away "descending rapidly in a nose down attitude 
through approximately 500 feet agl."  The witness stated that the airplane "fell straight down in 
a spin" until it impacted terrain.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who responded to the site 
of the accident, another witness reported observing the airplane turn left base at a bank angle 
of approximately 90 degrees.  A family member of the pilot reported to the FAA inspector that 
the pilot stated that the airplane had approximately 6 gallons of automotive gasoline onboard 
the airplane prior to departure.  
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with an airplane single engine land rating.  His most 
recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third class medical certificate was issued on 
December 13, 2002.
A review of the private pilot's logbook revealed that he accumulated approximately 241.6 flight 
hours.  As of June 16, 2004, the most recent logbook entry, the pilot had accumulated 2 hours 
of flight time in the accident make/model airplane.  
The 1974 Cassutt IIIM was an amateur built mid-wing airplane composed of a tubular steel 
frame covered by fabric.  The airplane was equipped with a Continental O-200-A engine rated 
at 100 horsepower.  The former owner of N3TW reported that he had recently sold the airplane 
to the pilot in February of 2004.  The former owner added that the airplane was designed for 
competition air racing and was "challenging to fly."
Review of the airplane logbooks revealed that the most recent Annual/100-hour inspection was 
performed on March 13, 2003, at an airframe and engine total time of 280.1 hours. The engine 
was last overhauled on August 8, 1994.
The Pearland Regional Airport features 3 runways: 14R/32L (4,302-foot long and 70-foot wide 
asphalt runway), 14L/32R (2,800-foot long and 90-foot wide turf runway), and 4/22 (2,400-
foot long and 100-foot wide turf runway).  The airport is an uncontrolled airfield operating 
under class G airspace.  The common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF) is 122.8 megahertz.
At 1953, the automated surface observing system at LVJ reported wind calm, visibility 10 
statute miles, sky clear, temperature 80 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 63 degrees Fahrenheit, 
and an altimeter setting of 30.03 inches of Mercury.  The NTSB investigator-in-charge 
calculated the density altitude to be 1,376 feet.
Examination of the airplane by the FAA inspector revealed that the airplane came to rest 
upright in a hay field approximately 1/2 mile south of LVJ.  The fuselage area forward of the aft 
section of the cockpit was crushed aft, and both wings were crushed aft throughout their 
respective spans.  Flight control continuity was established throughout the airplane.  The FAA 
inspector also reported that there was a strong odor of fuel at the accident site. 
On September 3, 2004, at the facilities of D&N Aviation, near Pearland, Texas, under the 
supervision of an FAA inspector, a representative from Teledyne Continental Motors, 
examined the Continental O-200-A engine (serial number 231221R).  
Examination of the engine revealed the left and right magnetos were separated form their 
respective mounts.  The oil sump was pushed aft and upwards.  The exhaust pipes were 
crushed upwards and aft.  The top sparkplugs were removed, and when compared to the 
Champion Aviation Check-A-Plug Chart, displayed moderate wear, dark deposits in the 
electrode area. Rotational continuity throughout the engine and accessories housing was 
established when the engine was rotated by hand using the propeller.  Compression was noted 
from all four cylinders.  The gascolator screen was absent of debris.  The carburetor was 
separated from its mount and was impact damaged.  No fuel was found within the gascolator 
bowl.  The throttle body was partially separated from the carburetor bowl.  The fuel screen was 
absent of debris.  No fuel was observed within the carburetor bowl.
The propeller remained attached to the crankshaft propeller flange.  One blade was separated 
approximately 1/3 of its length outboard of the propeller flange.  The other blade was crushed 
aft and splintered. 
An autopsy was performed on the pilot by the office of the Galveston County Medical Examiner 
in Galveston, Texas, on September 2, 2004.  According to the report, "The cause of 
death...[was] multiple blunt force injuries."  Toxicological tests performed by the Federal 
Aviation Administration's Civil Aeromedical Institute (CAMI) were negative for carbon 
monoxide, alcohol, however was positive for trace amounts (values confirmed by the FAA) of 
Sertraline, Desmethylsertraline, Diphenhydramine, and Burpropion.  
According to an FAA Medical Examiner, the use of Sertraline and Burpropion would have 
disqualified the pilot's medical certification if it had been reported.
