The 290-hour pilot reported that shortly after take-off, when the airplane was approximately 
175 feet above ground level (agl) and approximately 4,000 feet down the 5,495- foot-long and 
100-foot-wide runway, the engine lost power and was unable to maintain altitude.  He elected 
to execute a forced landing, and turned approximately seven degrees to the left of the runway 
to avoid hitting a localizer antennae located near the end of the runway; however, the airplane 
impacted a fence with the left wing.  The engine was later test run under the supervision of an 
FAA inspector.  The reason for the reported loss of engine power could not be determined.
The partial loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.  A contributing factor was the lack 
of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
On September 2, 2004, approximately 1725 central daylight time, a Cessna 175 single engine 
airplane, N6517E, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of engine 
power shortly after takeoff from the Beauregard Regional Airport (DRI) near De Ridder, 
Louisiana.  The private pilot and his passenger were not injured.  The airplane was registered 
and operated by a private individual.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight 
plan was filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.  
The flight was originating at the time of the accident and was destined for the Leesville Airport 
near Leesville, Louisiana.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, who responded to the accident site, 
interviewed the pilot.  According to the inspector, the 290-hour pilot reported that after 
takeoff, when the airplane was approximately 175 feet above ground level (agl) and 
approximately 4,000 feet down the 5,495- foot-long and 100-foot-wide runway, the engine lost 
power.  The pilot cycled the throttle, but the engine showed no increase in power.  The airplane 
was unable to maintain altitude, and the pilot elected to turn approximately seven degrees to 
the left of the runway to avoid colliding with the localizer antennae located near the end of the 
runway; however the airspeed was too high and the airplane impacted a fence with the left 
wing.  After impacting the fence, the pilot re-started the engine and taxied the airplane back to 
the hangar.
Examination of the airframe by the FAA inspector revealed structural damage to the left wing.
The engine was run on September 8, 2004, under the supervision of an FAA inspector.  It ran 
at various power settings for approximately five minutes with no interruptions.  No leaks were 
observed at this time.  The reason for the reported loss of engine power could not be 
determined.
At 1655, the automated weather observing system at Polk Army Airfield located near Fort Polk, 
Louisiana, approximately 15 nautical miles northeast of the accident site, reported wind from 
010 degrees at 4 knots, scattered clouds at 5,000 feet, broken clouds at 12,000 feet, an overcast 
at 20,000 feet, temperature 84 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 68 degrees Fahrenheit, and a 
barometric pressure of 29.97 inches of Mercury.
