Immediately after becoming airborne the pilot realized that he had failed to remove the 
exterior aileron wing locks.  About 75 to 100 feet above ground level (AGL) the pilot reduced 
power and lowered the nose to maintain airspeed and a wings level attitude.  About 75 feet AGL 
the left wing started to drop slowly and eventually impacted the ground at an approximate 30 
to 35 degree left bank.  A post crash examination of the accident site revealed the left and right 
aileron wing gust locks were located approximately 10 and 15 feet on the ground outboard of 
their respective wingtips.
The pilot's failure to remove the aileron wing gust locks prior to flight, which resulted in a loss 
of control during the descent/emergency landing.  A factor contributing to the accident was the 
pilot's inadequate preflight.
On September 1, 2004, approximately 1235 Pacific daylight time, a Helio Aircraft LTD H800, 
single-engine airplane, N4033G, was destroyed after impacting terrain following takeoff-initial 
climb approximately 14 nautical miles southwest of Fossil, Oregon.  The airplane was 
registered to Schmidt Aviation Inc., of Boring, Oregon, and operated by a private individual.  
The certificated private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained serious injuries.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight, which was conducted in accordance 
with 14 CFR Part 91, and a flight plan was not filed.  The flight was originating at the time of 
the accident.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB form 6120.1/2), the pilot 
reported that he intended to make a short flight of approximately 5 miles to a friend's ranch.  
The pilot stated that flight conditions were favorable with light winds, and that immediately 
after becoming airborne he realized that he had inadvertently failed to remove the exterior 
aileron wing locks.  The pilot reported that immediately after realizing this, "...I made the 
decision to get the plane back on the ground as quick as possible."  The pilot stated that he was 
about 75 to 100 feet above ground level (AGL) when he reduced power and lowered the nose to 
maintain airspeed and a wings level attitude.  The pilot further stated that while in his descent 
and about 75 feet AGL, the left wing started to drop slowly and eventually impacted the ground 
at an approximate 30 to 35 degree left bank.  There was no post crash fire.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) airworthiness inspector, who traveled to the accident 
site, reported the aft fuselage/tail section had been severed aft of the rear cabin bulkhead, 
coming to rest vertically against the right underside area of the forward fuselage.  The forward 
fuselage, comprising the cabin and cockpit areas, came to rest in a vertical position resting on 
the forward cockpit area and both leading edge wings.  The leading edges of both wings were 
wrinkled and crushed aft.  The inspector also reported that the left and right wing gust locks 
were located approximately 10 and 15 feet on the ground outboard of their respective wingtips.
