Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
GRAND CANYON PK, AZ
Incident Number:
LAX99IA085
Date & Time:
02/01/1999, 1010 MST 
Registration:
N32GA
Aircraft:
Aerospatiale AS350B
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries:
7 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Sightseeing
Analysis 
While descending on an aerial tour flight with six passengers, the left side bubble window 
separated from the helicopter and impacted a tail rotor blade.  The pilot made a precautionary 
landing in the canyon without further incident.  Neither the separated window nor its 
doorframe attachment seal (gasket) was recovered.  Examination of the helicopter's tail rotor 
blade found it bent and scratched with areas of debonded material.  The damaged blade was 
not repairable.  During preflight inspection the pilot did not see any damage to the window, 
and during the flight the left seated passenger was not observed pressing on it.  Due to 
observed cracks in the previous window 4.5 months and 589 flight hours earlier, it had been 
replaced with a window removed from another helicopter.  No maintenance record entry was 
found for the window installation.  The operator's replacement window was manufactured 
under a FAA Supplemental Type Certificate.  The STC holder said that if its 'wedge' window is 
not properly installed, or if it becomes cracked or damaged due to exposure to harmful 
cleaning solvents, its integrity may be compromised.  The operator reported that if a small 
crack existed near the window's edge, it may not have been noticed/reported by the pilot due to 
a lack of conspicuity.  The reason(s) for the window separation could not be determined. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The in-flight separation of a side window for undetermined reasons. 
Page 2 of 6LAX99IA085
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - NORMAL
Findings
1. WINDOW,CABIN - SEPARATION
2. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
Page 3 of 6LAX99IA085
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 1, 1999, about 1010 hours mountain standard time, an Aerospatiale AS350B, 
N32GA, operated by Silverado Helicopters, Inc., d.b.a. Heli USA, experienced the sudden loss 
of the entire left side passenger bubble window during descent over the Grand Canyon 
National Park, Arizona.  The window impacted and damaged a tail rotor blade (paddle).  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed during the on-demand sightseeing flight that was 
performed under 14 CFR Part 135.  The commercial pilot landed without further mishap near 
the south side of the Colorado River in Arizona, about 2 miles from the Grand Canyon West 
Airport.  The airplane sustained minor damage; neither the commercial pilot nor the six 
passengers were injured.  The aerial tour flight originated from Las Vegas, Nevada, at 0928.
The pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that during his 
preflight inspection he had looked at the window and it did not appear damaged.  Specifically, 
no abrasions, lacerations, cracks, or stop-drilled holes were observed.  During the flight the 
passenger seated next to the window was not observed taking pictures or "elbowing" the 
window.  
HELICOPTER INFORMATION
The operator reported that the previous left side bubble window had been observed cracked 
during a 5,000-hour inspection of the helicopter.  The cracked window was removed, and it 
was replaced with a window that had been removed from another of the operator's helicopters, 
N122AS, which had a total airframe time of about 5,527 hours.  This work was completed on 
August 21, 1998.  No maintenance record entry was made for the replacement window's 
installation in N32GA, which had about 9,154.0 hours recorded on its airframe. 
The operator reported it believes the replacement window that separated from the helicopter 
was not manufactured by Aerospatiale.  The operator indicated to the Safety Board investigator 
that the window was obtained from Aeronautical Accessories, Inc., which holds a Supplemental 
Type Certificate for the "Wedge Window, 7 place" part number 350-903-001.  
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The operator sent the damaged tail rotor blade to American Eurocopter for evaluation and 
possible repair.  Following a damage assessment review by Eurocopter France, the Quality 
Assurance Department of American Eurocopter's USA facility reported to the Safety Board 
investigator that the blade was found with a debonded area located about 295 mm inboard 
from the tip of the blade's upper surface.  In the debonded area, a 0.43 mm deep score mark 
was also observed in the skin of the blade.  In addition, the straightness of the blade was 
measured, and it was found out of tolerance.  Eurocopter reported that the blade was not 
repairable, and it should be scrapped.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
According to written and verbal information provided to the Safety Board investigator by 
management at Aeronautical Accessories, Inc., it manufactures a wedge window under STC 
Number SR00183AT, which the operator may have utilized in its helicopter.  The manufacturer 
provides specific instructions for the installation of its windows.  In pertinent part, the 
manufacturer indicates that the window is properly installed in the helicopter's doorframe 
Page 4 of 6LAX99IA085
from the inside of the door using a rubber seal (gasket) to hold it in place.  It should not be 
installed from the outside.  Application of excessive pressure on the window assembly or 
pulling the string too fast may cause damage to the rubber seal assembly.  
The manufacturer also reported that if the printed installation instructions are not followed, it 
is possible to install the window backwards.  If installed backwards, the window can be 
displaced upon application of pressure.  A window that has been properly installed, and is 
undamaged, will last indefinitely if maintained without using harmful solvents.
The manufacturer additionally indicated that the window's design has not been changed since 
it was originally certified in November 1991.  The window's overall size is larger than the 
opening in the door.  If pressure is applied to the window, it would likely break prior to 
displacing the amount of material in the overlap area.  The manufacturer indicated it has not 
received information regarding any previous in-flight separations.
The helicopter operator's assistant director of operations verbally indicated to the Safety Board 
investigator that in the Nevada heat, cracks might develop in windows.  A small crack located 
near the window's edge may not have been noticed/reported by the pilot due to a lack of 
conspicuity, or for other reasons.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The operator did not report the circumstances of the mishap to the Federal Aviation 
Administration or to the Safety Board until several days after the helicopter had been returned 
to service and a replacement tail rotor blade installed.  The window and its associated retention 
gasket (seal) remain missing.
The passengers who had been onboard during the incident flight were not interviewed by the 
Safety Board investigator because the operator did not identify them.  
The Safety Board investigator requested that the pilot provide a written statement regarding 
the conditions and circumstances of the mishap flight.  An additional request was made to the 
operator for completion of the accident report form.  The pilot's statement and a partially 
completed accident report form was received on November 22, 1999.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
46, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/29/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
781 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX99IA085
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Aerospatiale
Registration:
N32GA
Model/Series:
AS350B AS350B
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1188
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/21/1998, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
589 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
9743 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Turbomeca
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
ARRIEL 1B
Registered Owner:
JAN LEASING LLC
Rated Power:
529 hp
Operator:
SILVERADO HELICOPTERS, 
INC.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
HELI USA
Operator Designator Code:
S9HA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
IGM, 3449 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
45 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0954 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
175°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
340°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
2°C / -5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
LAS VEGAS, NV (LAS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
GRAND CANYON, AZ (GCN)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0928 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
6 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
7 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Page 6 of 6
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
WAYNE        POLLACK
Adopted Date:
01/18/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
DICK   WRIGHT; LAS VEGAS, NV
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
