Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
San Simeon, CA
Accident Number:
LAX02LA077
Date & Time:
02/03/2002, 1128 PST 
Registration:
N34NL
Aircraft:
Beech T-34B/D-45
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane lost engine power during cruise, made an emergency landing, and collided with a 
fence.  The pilot conducted a preflight of the airplane and noted that the left and right fuel 
tanks were filled to the "caps."  He noted no discrepancies with the airplane or fuel system 
during the preflight inspection.  After flying for about 2 hours the airplane experienced a 
complete loss of engine power.  While established on final for a road, he discovered that he was 
unable to slow down enough to avoid oncoming traffic and maneuvered the airplane to the 
right of the road.  The left gear contacted the asphalt and the airplane continued through a 
cattle fence, collapsing the nose landing gear.  U.S. Navy search and rescue personnel 
responded to the accident site, and noted that there was no fuel in the fuel tanks.  The pilot did 
not have the fuel valve open during preflight.  He was only able to get a small sample of fuel 
from the low point drain (LPD), which was the residual fuel in the lines from the previous 
flight.  The pilot inadvertently locked the LPD in the up (open) position during preflight, which 
would result in fuel leaking from the airplane once he turned the fuel valve on.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's inadequate preflight of the airplane in which he failed to close the fuel drain 
resulting in a fuel leak and fuel exhaustion.
Page 2 of 6LAX02LA077
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) FUEL SYSTEM,DRAIN - OPEN
2. (C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. FLUID,FUEL - LEAK
4. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - ROUGH/UNEVEN
6. OBJECT - FENCE
Page 3 of 6LAX02LA077
Factual Information
On February 3, 2002, at 1128 Pacific standard time, a Beech T34B/D-45, N34NL, lost engine 
power during cruise and made an emergency landing in an open field near San Simeon, 
California.  The airplane, owned by the NAS Lemoore Navy Flying Club and rented to the pilot, 
was being operated under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The airplane sustained substantial 
damage after it collided with a fence.  The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal local area flight, and a visual flight 
rules (VFR) flight plan had been filed.  The flight departed NAS Lemoore (NLC) at 1022, and 
was scheduled to terminate at NLC.
In the pilot's written statement to the National Transportation Safety Board, after arrival at the 
airport he conducted a preflight of the airplane about 0930.  The preflight included a check of 
the fuel valve in the engine compartment.  He noted that the safety wire was in place.  He also 
checked the left and right fuel tanks and noted that both tanks were filled to the "caps."  He 
noted no discrepancies with the airplane or fuel system during the preflight inspection.
After engine startup, the pilot contacted ground control and taxied to the active taxiway.  He 
noted that the left magneto had a drop of 300 rpm.  He conducted a 'burn-out' procedure and 
rechecked the magnetos.  The rpm drop was within manufacturer's specifications.  He then 
contacted the tower and received a takeoff clearance.  The pilot stated that after he departed 
the class D airspace he went through the in-flight checks, and ensured that the oil pressure, 
fuel pressure, and power were within limits.  He proceeded direct to Paso Robles airport and 
entered the pattern.  He did one touch-and-go landing and then departed for the Morro Bay 
very high frequency omni-directional radio range (VOR).  After reaching the Morro Bay VOR, 
he flew direct towards the Big Sur VOR.  During the turn to the north for the Big Sur VOR he 
noted that the fuel gages "were a little erratic, but was not depending on them for a good 
'read'."
The pilot stated that he continued the flight inland and was deciding on whether or not to fly 
back to Paso Robles when the airplane experienced a complete loss of engine power.  He 
established the best glide speed and picked out Highway 1 as a place to land.  He then 
attempted to restart the engine.  The pilot setup on the downwind leg of the approach for the 
forced landing.  While established on final for Highway 1, he was attempting to avoid traffic 
and decrease the airplane's airspeed for landing.  He noted that he was not able to slow down 
enough to avoid oncoming traffic.  He maneuvered the airplane to the right of the highway.  
The left gear contacted the asphalt and the airplane continued through a cattle fence.  The nose 
landing gear collapsed, and the airplane came to rest on its nose.
U.S. Navy search and rescue personnel responded to the accident site, and noted that there was 
no fuel in the fuel tanks.  They also indicated that they did not see or smell fuel on the ground 
or around the airplane.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector and the Navy inspected the airplane at the 
Navy's facilities in Lemoore on February 12, 2002.  Visual examination of the airplane revealed 
no signs of fuel stains.  The interior of the engine compartment was also free of visible fuel 
staining.  The FAA inspector noted that the left and right fuel caps were in place with no 
indication of fuel staining.
Navy personnel conducted further inspection of the airplane.  The Aviation Safety Officer 
Page 4 of 6LAX02LA077
(ASO) reinterviewed the pilot.  The pilot stated that during his preflight he had difficulty 
obtaining a proper fuel sample from the low point drain (LPD).  He stated that the fuel valve 
was not open and that he was only able to obtain a small amount of fuel.  The ASO noted that 
without the valve in the open position the sample from the LPD would have been residual fuel 
from the previous flight.  The pilot indicated that he was satisfied with the fuel sample and 
closed the LPD panel and completed his preflight.
The ASO stated that the LPD is located under the fuselage behind the pilot's seat.  He said that 
the pilot locked the LPD in the up (open) position, which would result in the fuel draining from 
the LPD during flight.  From the pilot's seated position, the fuel leakage would not be visible.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
35, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/12/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
12/27/2001
Flight Time:
220 hours (Total, all aircraft), 13 hours (Total, this make and model), 122 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Beech
Registration:
N34NL
Model/Series:
T-34B/D-45 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
BG139
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/12/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2985 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
8845 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-470
Registered Owner:
NAS Lemoore Navy Flying 
Club
Rated Power:
225
Operator:
NAS Lemoore Navy Flying 
Club
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX02LA077
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PRB, 836 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
26 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1053 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
80°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
320°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.34 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
7°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Lemoore, CA (NLC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 (NLC)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1022 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
36.000000, -119.000000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TEALEYE C CORNEJO
Adopted Date:
06/30/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Margaret Fredoyz; Federal Aviation Administration; San Jose, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX02LA077
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
