Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Hawthorne, CA
Accident Number:
LAX02LA074
Date & Time:
02/02/2002, 1119 PST 
Registration:
N300PS
Aircraft:
Aviat Pitts S-2B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
Analysis 
On the landing rollout the airplane veered to the right of runway centerline and struck a taxi 
light with the left wing.  The purpose of the flight was to practice full stall touch-and-go 
takeoffs and landings.  The student had conducted five touch-and-go takeoffs and landings to a 
full stall with no discrepancies noted.  The sixth touch-and-go landing was the accident 
landing.  The CFI observed that the student had the control stick full aft and was applying left 
rudder to correct for the drift to the right.  As the airplane continued to drift to the right the 
CFI applied full left rudder; however, the left wing struck the taxi light.  During the airplane 
inspection it was observed that the tension of the right main landing gear bungee cord was 
slack.  No further mechanical anomalies were noted.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Failure of the student to maintain directional control of the airplane on the landing rollout and 
failure of the CFI to adequately supervise the flight.  A contributing factor was the decreased 
tension of the right main landing gear shock cord/bungee.
Page 2 of 6LAX02LA074
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (F) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - WORN
2. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT
3. (C) SUPERVISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI)
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
4. OBJECT - TAXIWAY LIGHT
Page 3 of 6LAX02LA074
Factual Information
On February 2, 2002, at 1119 Pacific standard time, an Aviat Pitts S-2B, N300PS, veered off 
runway 25 and ground looped after landing at the Jack Northrop Field/Hawthorne Municipal 
Airport (HHR), Hawthorne, California.  The airplane was operated by Hart Air of Long Beach, 
California, as an instructional flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  The certified flight 
instructor (CFI) and the CFI student were not injured.  The airplane sustained substantial 
damage.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local area flight that departed the 
Long Beach/Daugherty Field Airport (LGB), Long Beach, California, about 1030.  No flight 
plan had been filed.
The Safety Board Investigator-in-Charge (IIC) interviewed the CFI student pilot.  The CFI 
student stated that there was no wind.  The landing was normal, and on centerline, when the 
airplane started to drift to the right of centerline.  He moved the control stick to the full aft 
position and engaged the left rudder; however, the airplane continued off the runway, ground 
looped, and struck a taxi light.
In the CFI's written statement, he reported that this was a training flight with a student who 
had accumulated about 15 hours of dual instruction from him in this airplane.  The purpose of 
the flight was to perform full stall landings at LGB and HHR.  They performed three touch-
and-go landings at LGB with no discrepancies noted.  On the third touch-and-go landing they 
requested a straight out departure for HHR.
Upon reaching HHR they were given permission by the local tower controller to remain in left 
traffic for the touch-and-go's.  The CFI reported that the first two landings were uneventful.  
Initially the third landing was also uneventful.  The touchdown was at a full stall with the tail 
wheel contacting the runway first, followed by the main landing gear.
The CFI stated that as the airplane transitioned to the landing rollout, the airplane began to 
turn to the right.  He did not think this was unusual, and verified that the student had the 
control stick full aft, and was applying left rudder to correct the turn to the right.  About 8 
degrees from centerline the airplane was still departing to the right of the runway.  The CFI 
began to apply left rudder; however, the airplane continued to the right and the left wing struck 
a runway light.
After securing the airplane, the CFI and student got out of the airplane to inspect it.  The CFI 
noted that the right bungee door was extended open about 2 inches.  They got back into the 
airplane and taxied to a local fixed based operator (FBO).  After getting out of the airplane, the 
CFI again looked at the right wing.  He lifted up and pulled down on the wing to check the wing 
tension.  He stated that the bungee "did not act in a normal manner, and did not provide 
stiffness to the right gear."
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane and landing gear 
assembly.  According to the FAA inspector, he did note that the right landing gear assembly 
had more "play" than the left side.  He further stated that there were no mechanical anomalies 
noted with the airplane.
In reviewing the Aviat maintenance manual, there is not a time life specified on the bungee 
cord.  However, the manual does make reference to checks of the shock cords/bungees on a 
daily basis when the airplane is in operation, and at the 50-, 100-, 1000-hour inspections.  The 
maintenance manual also indicated that on every flight and every 50-hour inspection the shock 
Page 4 of 6LAX02LA074
cords/bungees should be inspected for proper tension.  At the 100-hour inspection the landing 
gear should be serviced. 
Prior to the accident Hart Air had ordered a new set of bungee cords; however, they had not 
received them at the time of the accident.
Flight Instructor Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
58, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/23/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/03/2001
Flight Time:
15000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 600 hours (Total, this make and model), 15500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor
Age:
67, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Rear
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider; Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/26/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/06/2001
Flight Time:
5500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 9 hours (Total, this make and model), 4500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Page 5 of 6LAX02LA074
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Aviat
Registration:
N300PS
Model/Series:
Pitts S-2B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Aerobatic
Serial Number:
5340
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/01/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1700 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
76 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
313 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
AEIO-540
Registered Owner:
HART PITTS GROUP
Rated Power:
260 hp
Operator:
HART AIR
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
HHR, 66 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1120 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.14 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Long Beach, CA (LGB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
HAWTHORNE, CA (HHR)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1030 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
HAWTHORNE MUNI (HHR)
Runway Surface Type:
Concrete
Airport Elevation:
66 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
25
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
4956 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Page 6 of 6LAX02LA074
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.926944, -118.336389
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
TEALEYE C CORNEJO
Adopted Date:
09/30/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
MIKE MARCHON; FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION; EL SEGUNDO, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
