Page 1 of 12
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Teterboro, NJ
Accident Number:
NYC05FA026
Date & Time:
12/01/2004, 1623 EST 
Registration:
G-GMAC
Aircraft:
Gulfstream Aerospace G-IV
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
9 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Non-U.S., Commercial
Analysis 
The flight was cleared for the ILS Runway 19 approach, circle-to-land on Runway 24; a 6,013-
foot-long, 150-foot wide, asphalt runway.  The auto throttle and autopilot were disengaged 
during the approach, about 800 feet agl.  However, the auto throttle reengaged just prior to 
touchdown, about 35 feet agl.  The flightcrew did not recall reengaging the auto throttle, and 
were not aware of the autothrottle reengagement.  According to the auto throttle computers, 
the reengagement was commanded through one of the Engage/Disengage paddle switches 
located on each power lever.  The target airspeed set for the auto throttle system was 138 knots.  
After touchdown, as the airplane decelerated below 138 knots, the auto throttle system 
gradually increased the power levers in an attempt to maintain the target airspeed.  Without 
the power levers in the idle position, the ground spoilers and thrust reversers would not 
deploy.  While the flightcrew was pulling up on the thrust reverser levers, they may not have 
initially provided enough aft force on the power levers (15 to 32 lbs.) to override and disconnect 
the auto throttle system.  The flight data recorder indicated that the autothrottle system 
disengaged 16 seconds after the weight-on-wheels switches were activated in ground mode.  As 
the airplane neared the end of the runway, the pilot engaged the emergency brake, and the 
airplane departed the right side of the runway.  The auto throttle Engage/Disengage paddle 
switches were not equipped with switch guards.  Although the autothrottle system provided an 
audible tone when disengaged, it did not provide a tone when engaged.  The reported wind 
about the time of the accident was from 290 degrees at 16 knots, gusting to 25 knots, with a 
peak wind from 300 degrees at 32 knots.  
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The flightcrew's inadvertent engagement of the autothrottle system, and their failure to 
recognize the engagement during landing, which resulted in a runway excursion.  Factors were 
the lack of autothrottle switch guards, lack of an autothrottle engagement audible tone, and 
gusty winds.
Page 2 of 12NYC05FA026
Findings
Occurrence #1: MISCELLANEOUS/OTHER
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
1. (F) AUTOPILOT/FLIGHT DIRECTOR,AUTO THROTTLE - OTHER
2. (C) THROTTLE/POWER CONTROL - INADVERTENT ACTIVATION - FLIGHTCREW
3. (F) AUTOPILOT/FLIGHT DIRECTOR,AUTO THROTTLE - OTHER
4. (C) THROTTLE/POWER CONTROL - NOT RECOGNIZED - FLIGHTCREW
5. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - GUSTS
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN
Findings
6. LANDING GEAR,EMERGENCY BRAKE SYSTEM - ACTIVATED
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
7. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 12NYC05FA026
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 1, 2004, at 1623 eastern standard time, a Gulfstream Aerospace G-IV, G-GMAC, 
was substantially damaged while landing at Teterboro Airport (TEB), Teterboro, New Jersey.  
The certificated airline transport flightcrew, one flight attendant, and six passengers were not 
injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that departed from London 
Luton Airport (EGGW), Luton, United Kingdom.  An instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan 
was filed for the foreign operated charter flight.  
The flightcrew reported that they originally departed Farnborough Airport (EGLF), 
Farnborough, United Kingdom; and flew uneventfully to Luton, United Kingdom.  They then 
boarded passengers and departed for Teterboro, New Jersey.  Upon arrival in the Teterboro 
area, air traffic control (ATC) cleared the flight for the ILS Runway 19 approach, circle-to-land 
on Runway 24; a 6,013-foot-long, 150-foot-wide, asphalt runway.  
The pilot stated that a strong crosswind prevailed, and the planned landing speed was Vref 
(128 knots) plus 10 to 15 knots for wind gusts.  During the last 200 feet of the approach, the 
pilot felt like the airplane was perfectly controllable, and not subject to any strong wind gusts.  
The airplane was at a normal touchdown point, on centerline, at Vref to Vref plus 5 knots.  The 
pilot then attempted to apply reverse thrust, but could not lift the thrust reverser levers 
(piggybacks).  He alerted the copilot and concentrated on braking.  The pilot did not recall any 
cockpit crew advisory message (CAS) of incorrect spoiler operation, and felt the brakes were 
not working properly or achieving the desired result.  The pilot subsequently applied the 
emergency brake and felt the right wing drop slightly, presumably from tire bursts.  The 
airplane then veered right uncontrollably, and departed the right side of the runway.
The copilot added the airplane was fully configured for the ILS Runway 19 approach, with the 
autopilot on and the auto throttles engaged.  At the outer marker, the flightcrew disengaged the 
auto throttles and autopilot, and circled to Runway 24.  Once the airplane was established on a 
final approach for Runway 24, he confirmed the landing configuration.  The airplane was in a 
stabilized descent, and touched down at the 1,000 foot markers, at approximately Vref plus 5 
knots (133 knots).  When the pilot remarked about the thrust reversers, the copilot reached 
over to assist, but was unsuccessful.  At that time, the copilot extended the speedbrakes and 
assisted with the brake pedals.  
The pilot then applied the emergency brakes and the airplane departed the right side of the 
runway about 5,500 feet beyond the approach end.  The airplane traveled over a grassy area, 
struck trees, and came to rest upright.  All nine occupants were able to egress through the 
forward left, number five, emergency window exit.
The accident occurred during the hours of night; located about 40 degrees, 50.01 minutes 
north latitude, and 74 degrees, 03.65 minutes west longitude.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a foreign airline transport pilot certificate, with a rating for multiengine land 
airplanes.  He also held a type rating for the Gulfstream IV.  The pilot reported a total flight 
experience of approximately 10,000 hours; of which, about 1,000 hours were in a Gulfstream 
IV.  In addition, the pilot had accumulated approximately 120 hours of flight time in a 
Page 4 of 12NYC05FA026
Gulfstream IV within the 90 days preceding the accident.
The pilot's first class medical certificate was issued on July 5, 2004.
The copilot held a foreign airline transport pilot certificate, with a rating for multiengine land 
airplanes.  He also held a type rating for the Gulfstream IV.  The copilot reported a total flight 
experience of approximately 8,000 hours; of which, about 2,000 hours were in a Gulfstream 
IV.  In addition, the copilot had accumulated approximately 60 hours of flight time in a 
Gulfstream IV within the 90 days preceding the accident.
The copilot's first class medical certificate was issued in January 2004.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane, serial number 1058, was manufactured in 1988.  
The airplane was maintained under a continuous airworthiness maintenance program.  The 
most recent phase inspection was completed on July 14, 2004.  At that time, the airplane had 
accumulated 7,207.10 hours of operation.  At the time of the accident, the airplane had 
accumulated 7,452.58 hours of operation.  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather reported at TEB, at 1651, was:  wind from 290 degrees at 16 knots, gusting to 25 
knots, with a peak wind from 300 degrees at 32 knots; visibility 10 miles; few clouds at 6,000 
feet; temperature 52 degrees F.; dew point 34 degrees F.; altimeter 29.62 inches Hg.  
FLIGHT RECORDERS
Cockpit Voice Recorder
The airplane was equipped with a Fairchild model A-100 cockpit voice recorder (CVR).  The 
CVR was transported to the NTSB Office of Research and Engineering on December 6, 2004.  
A CVR group convened on December 8, 2004, and a transcript was prepared of 7 minutes 44 
seconds of the approximate 33-minute recording.  The transcript started as the aircraft was 
being vectored for the approach, and continued until the accident.  
The CVR was not damaged during the accident.  The recording consisted of two channels of 
"fair to good" quality audio information.
The data on the CVR was consistent with the flightcrew's recollection of the approach up to the 
point of touchdown.
The CVR revealed that during the approach, at 1622:20, a "cavalry charge" sound was 
recorded, consistent with an auto throttle disconnect tone.  
At 1623:17, the CVR recorded a sound consistent with aircraft touchdown.  
At 1623:21, the CVR recorded a "triple chime" sound consistent with a configuration master 
warning.  
During the landing roll, the CVR recorded several "double chime" and "triple chime" sounds.  
At 1623:43, the CVR recorded a sound consistent with an impact, followed by another impact 
at 1623:53.     
Flight Data Recorder
Page 5 of 12NYC05FA026
The airplane was equipped with a L3-Communications (Fairchild) Model FA2100 flight data 
recorder (FDR).  The FDR was transported to the NTSB Office of Research and Engineering on 
December 6, 2004, and a readout was performed.  
The FDR recorded data in a digital format using solid-state Flash Memory as the recording 
medium.  The FDR was not damaged in the accident, and the timing of the data was correlated 
to air traffic control and CVR timing.  A total of 127.4 hours was recorded.  
The FDR data revealed that the airplane's auto throttle and autopilot were disengaged during 
the approach.  Specifically, the auto throttle disengaged about 570 feet agl, at a calibrated 
airspeed of approximately 140 knots.  Prior to touchdown, the auto throttle re-engaged about 
38 feet agl, at a calibrated airspeed of approximately 150 knots.  The auto throttle remained 
engaged for approximately 22 seconds.  After a majority of the landing roll, the auto throttle 
eventually disengaged at a calibrated airspeed of approximately 110 knots.  At touchdown, a 
red and amber configuration warning activated.  
After touchdown, the engine pressure ratio (EPR) increased to about 1.3, then 1.35 during the 
landing roll.  The ground spoilers and outboard spoilers deployed approximately 13 seconds 
after the weight on wheels (WOW) switches were in the ground mode.  The auto-throttle 
disengaged about 3 seconds after the spoilers deployed.  
The FDR did not record power lever angle.      
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
During the impact, the outboard one-third of the left wing was severed, and the nose section 
was crushed inward approximately 7 feet.  A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector 
followed the tire marks from the accident airplane, to the approach end of Runway 24.  He 
observed that tire marks originated about 1,900 feet beyond the approach end of the runway, 
consistent with the left main gear touching down about 12 feet right of runway centerline.  
About 2,900 feet, the tire marks were consistent with anti-skid action.  All four main gear tire 
marks were observed at 3,504 feet, and heavier marks at 4,550 feet.  The inspector also 
observed wavy tire marks and metal, consistent with a blown right main tire at 4,756 feet.  
About 5,072 feet, the nose gear tire marks crossed the right main gear tire marks, and both 
main gear tire marks then veered right.  The tire marks departed the right side of the runway 
about 5,450 feet.  
Examination of the wreckage revealed that the right main gear inboard tire had partially 
separated, and the left main gear inboard tire completely separated.  The flaps were in the full-
extended position, and the emergency brake was pulled to its limit.  The ground spoilers were 
selected to "ARM," and the speed-brake handle was near the fully extended position.  Further 
examination of the wreckage revealed that the right side number five and six emergency 
window exits had been unlatched, but could not be removed.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Airplane
Review of the aircraft system logic revealed that upon touchdown, thrust reverser and ground 
spoiler deployment required the power levers (throttle levers) in the idle position, and the main 
landing gear WOW switches to be in the ground mode.  
Auto throttle System
Page 6 of 12NYC05FA026
The airplane was equipped with an auto throttle system controlled by an auto throttle ARM 
pushbutton located on the GP-820 Flight Guidance Controller.  The system included two auto 
throttle Engage/Disengage paddle switches, located on the aft side, about 4 inches below the 
top of each power lever.  The paddle switches were not equipped with any switch guard.  The 
Engage/Disengage paddle switches were designed to remain in the down (resting) position.  An 
upward force was required to move either switch up, engaging the auto throttle, and a spring 
would return the switch to its resting position.  The switch would then have to be pushed up 
again to disengage the auto throttle.  In addition, the system included two auto throttle Quick 
Disconnect switches, located on the front of each power lever handle.  A Takeoff/Go-around 
button was located on the side of each power lever handle.  
The following was required to engage the auto throttle in the air:
Auto throttle armed
A speed target displayed in the GP-820 speed window (for speed mode only)
An EPR limit rating selected for display on the Display Controller
Bleed air isolation valve must be closed
N1 cannot be split by more than 20 percent
No engine out condition
A valid preselector
There were several ways to disconnect the auto throttle:
Pressing either Quick Disconnect switch
Pressing either Engage/Disengage paddle switch
Moving the power levers (15 to 32 pounds of applied force)
If a fault was detected in the auto throttle system or a system providing required inputs
Auto throttle disengagement provided and audible tone.  Auto throttle engagement did not 
provide a tone, but displayed a CAS message.
The auto throttle system utilized two identical Honeywell PZ-800 performance auto throttle 
computers.  Although the FDR did not record power lever angle, the auto throttle computers 
did.  On March 24, 2005, the non volatile memory was downloaded from both computers at a 
Honeywell facility in Arizona, under the supervision of two FAA inspectors.  The computers 
recorded the last nine engagement/disengagement events (not flights).  The non volatile 
memory data revealed that the last auto throttle engagement occurred about 57 feet agl, and 
was a commanded engagement through one of the Engage/Disengage paddle switches.  At the 
time, the airplane's speed was approximately 151 knots, with a selected target speed of 138 
knots, and the power levers were near idle.  The last auto throttle disengagement occurred on 
the ground, and was uncommanded, but possibly the result of force applied to the power 
levers.  At the time, the airplane's speed was approximately 123 knots, with a selected target 
speed of 138 knots.  The power levers were near the mid-range position at the time of auto 
throttle disengagement.    
Testing of the auto throttle computers revealed that one computer had no failures, while the 
other computer had four separate failures.  The computer with four failures was equipped with 
Page 7 of 12NYC05FA026
three separate batteries.  The first failure was recorded as one of the three batteries was not 
providing power, but the batteries served no purpose when the aircraft was powered.  The 
second failure occurred during the Monitor Valid Test.  The test called for the voltage to be in 
the range of 2.5 volts, plus or minus .038 volts.  The measured value was 2.463 volts.  The 
value was within range, on the lower threshold limit, and could not be determined why it was 
identified as a failure.  The third failure occurred during the D/A (digital to analog) Calibration 
Check.  During the check, the D/A was tested at several points along a range of positive 10 volts 
to negative 10 volts.  At two points the calibration was off by .002 volts and .0001 volts.  The 
fourth failure occurred during the Battery Load test, as a result of the dead battery.  There was 
no evidence that the failures affected the accident flight.      
Thrust Reversers and Ground Spoilers
A re-examination of the wreckage was conducted on December 21, 2005.  During the re-
examination, the electrical continuity of the power levers, thrust reverser levers, and ground 
spoilers was checked with an ohmmeter.  The test did not reveal any discrepancies.
A flight demonstration was conducted in a Gulfstream IV simulator on January 20, 2005.  
During the simulation, the auto throttles were engaged prior to touchdown, while the power 
levers were near idle and the airplane was approximately 150 knots.  After touchdown, as the 
airplane decelerated, the power levers slowly advanced to maintain the pre-selected target 
airspeed of 138 knots.  Attempts to pull up on the thrust reverser levers created an upward 
force on the power levers, but did not create enough rearward force (15 to 32 pounds) to move 
the power levers aft and disengage the auto throttle.  In addition, without the power levers at 
the idle stop, the upward force on the thrust reverser levers did not deploy the thrust reversers.    
Auto Throttle Switches
Further examination of the wreckage was conducted on January 21, 2005.  During the 
examination, all cockpit pedal switches were checked, including the auto throttle switches.  The 
check was successfully conducted with an ohmmeter and "break-out-box."  One minor 
discrepancy was noted as the left thrust reverser switch "S4" was slightly out-of-adjustment; 
however, the "S4" switch controlled the thrust reverser stowing, not deploying.  
During the examination, the two fault warning computers were downloaded.  The data revealed 
that the computers had stopped recording on July 30, 2004, and September 24, 2004. 
The auto throttle Engage/Disengage paddle switches were then removed from the airplane and 
forwarded to the Safety Board's Materials Laboratory for further examination.  The 
examination included an electrical continuity check, disassembly, and a visual inspection.  The 
examination did not reveal any discrepancies with either of the two switches.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The airplane was equipped with four emergency window exits, with two on the right side and 
two on the left side.  The forward window exits were located at the number five windows on 
each side, and the aft window exits were located at the number six windows on each side.  Each 
window exit was designed to be released, pulled into the cabin, and allow a portal for egress.    
The airplane came to rest with trees against the main cabin door.  The copilot reported that he 
was unable to open the main door.  The copilot then went aft, and attempted to open the right 
forward window exit.  The exit release handle moved, and the exit became loose in the opening, 
but would not free from the airplane.  The copilot attempted the aft right window exit with the 
Page 8 of 12NYC05FA026
same result.  The exit release handle moved, and the exit became loose in the opening, but 
would not free from the airplane.  The copilot then went to the left forward window exit, and 
with the help of passengers, was able to remove the exit.  
Examination of the wreckage revealed that all three remaining window exit release handles had 
been pulled.  The three remaining windows were loose in the openings, but could not be 
removed.  The rectangular decorative interior trim panels attached to the exit hatches, 
extended behind the passenger service unit (PSU) panels that ran longitudinally down the 
fuselage, above the window exit panels, and prevented normal operation of the three window 
exits.  The examination did not reveal any evidence of distortion or displacement of the cabin 
as a result of the impact.  
The accident airplane underwent various modifications to the passenger cabin, including 
installation of the PSU, side panels, and decorative panels on the window exits during July 
2004.  Savannah Air Center (SAC), an FAA-certificated repair station in Savannah, Georgia, 
performed the work.  At the time the interior was installed, the airplane's registration was held 
in Bermuda, and following the refurbishment, the airplane's registration was transferred to the 
United Kingdom.  A representative of the British Civil Aviation Authority (CAA) examined the 
completed airplane at SAC prior to the issuance of a CAA certificate of airworthiness.  
On June 14, 2004, prior to the work being performed, FAA Form 8110-3, Statement of 
Compliance was issued, which approved the master drawing list (MDL) for the proposed work.  
On July 17, 2004, FAA Form 337, Major Repair and Alteration was completed, signifying that 
all work was done in accordance with the MDL, and that the airplane was approved to return to 
service.  Savannah Air Center records indicated that on July 19, 2004, a successful operational 
test of the emergency windows was accomplished.  On a June 9, 2005 a representative of the 
British CAA stated that he observed a successful operational test of the window exits during an 
inspection of the airplane at SAC prior to transferring the airplane to U.K. registration.  
A representative of Savannah Air Center stated that the interior installed on the accident 
airplane was the "only one of its kind;" SAC had not installed a similar PSU/decorative panel 
combination on any other airplane.  He stated that he knew of no guidance that specified the 
sizes of the decorative panels, and that he did not know whether Gulfstream provided guidance 
to interior shops regarding tolerances around the exits.  He also said that operational tests of 
window exits "are always done" following installation of new interior components.  He added 
that employees who were familiar with the operation of the exits typically performed the 
operational tests.  
In a May 3, 2005 email message to the Survival Factors Group Chairman, the Chief of Quality 
at Savannah Air Center stated:
"The PSU design used on G-IV-1058 will no longer be used by Savannah Air Center."
In a June 2, 2005 email message, the SAC Chief of Quality stated:
"Savannah Air Center has implemented a policy that all emergency window release operational 
checks be performed by personnel unfamiliar with the procedure, using the manufactures 
maintenance procedures under the supervision of an A&P mechanic and Quality Control 
Inspector.  Savannah Air Center will ensure a sufficient minimum gap of a quarter of inch 
(1/4") is provided between the bottom of the PSU and top of emergency window close out 
panel.  All PSU clearance around emergency window exits will be checked on installation."
Page 9 of 12NYC05FA026
Gulfstream document GIV-GER-023, Outfitting Interface Specification, provided guidance to 
airplane owners and maintenance facilities regarding installation of  equipment and 
furnishings into Gulfstream airplanes.  The document stated:
"Owners who choose to have their Gulfstream IV's outfitted by a non-Gulfstream facility must 
ensure that the said facility achieves compliance with the requirements contained in this 
document when performing outfitting of the airplane.  Failure to do so could adversely impact 
systems provided by Gulfstream with the basic airplane and affect warranty responsibility on 
them."
Section 8.17 of GIV-GER-023, Emergency Exit Access, stated:
"The Gulfstream IV is equipped with one forward auxiliary and four (two on each side) 
overwing Type IV emergency exits.  It is the outfitter's responsibility to provide for access to 
these emergency exits that are in compliance with FAR's 25.813 and 25.815.  It is also the 
outfitter's responsibility to install emergency exit markings, exit signs, and emergency lighting 
that are in compliance with FAR's 25.811, 25.812, and 25.813.  The outfitter must not perform 
any modifications that interfere with the operation of these emergency exits from both inside 
and outside the airplane."
In May of 2005, Gulfstream amended Section 8.17, adding the following
sentence:
"The guidelines set forth in these paragraphs must be followed to achieve ease of removal in an 
emergency situation for an untrained passenger."
The Gulfstream Computerized Maintenance Program (CMP), Chapter 56, Windows, calls for 
an operational test of the window exits to be conducted every 24 months.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The wreckage was released to a representative of the owner on December 4, 2004.
 
 
Page 10 of 12NYC05FA026
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
08/01/2004
Flight Time:
10000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1000 hours (Total, this make and model)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport
Age:
36, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Helicopter; Instrument Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/01/2004
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/01/2004
Flight Time:
8000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Gulfstream Aerospace
Registration:
G-GMAC
Model/Series:
G-IV 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Transport
Serial Number:
1058
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
18
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/01/2004, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
75000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
245 Hours
Engines:
2 Turbo Fan
Airframe Total Time:
7452 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Rolls-Royce
ELT:
Not installed
Engine Model/Series:
TAY 611R
Registered Owner:
Gama Aviation Ltd.
Rated Power:
12850 lbs
Operator:
Gama Aviation Ltd.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 11 of 12NYC05FA026
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
TEB, 9 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1651 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 6000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
16 knots / 25 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.62 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
11°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Luton (EGGW)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
Teterboro, NJ (TEB)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
0823 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Teterboro Airport (TEB)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
9 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
24
IFR Approach:
Circling; ILS
Runway Length/Width:
6013 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Straight-in
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
6 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
9 None
Latitude, Longitude:
40.850000, -74.060833
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert J Gretz
Adopted Date:
05/30/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Tony Acosta; FAA FSDO-25; Teterboro, NJ
Jerry Runyon; Gulfstream Aerospace; Savannah, GA
Hoss Motlagh; Savannah Air Center; Savannah, GA
Paul Hannant; Air Accidents Investigation Branch; United Kingdom,
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 12 of 12NYC05FA026
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
