National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Bountiful, UT
Accident Number: WPR13LA109
Date & Time: 02/01/2013, 1330 MST
Registration: N8554W
Aircraft: PIPER PA-28-235
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot reported that, following an uneventful takeoff, he initiated a right turn to the crosswind leg of the traffic pattern when the engine lost power.
He continued to turn the airplane right toward the departure runway while switching to the right fuel tank, but there was no change in engine power.
Unable to make it to the runway, he initiated a forced landing into an open, snow-covered field.
During the landing roll, the right main landing gear submerged in the snow, the airplane veered to the right, and the left wing struck the ground.
A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation.
Findings Environmental issues Snowy/icy terrain - Not specified Not determined Not determined - Unknown/Not determined (Cause) Factual Information On February 1, 2013, about 1330 mountain standard time, a Piper PA-28-235, N8554W, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing near Skypark Airport (BTF), Bountiful, Utah.
The airplane was registered to private individuals and operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The private pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local flight, which originated from BTF about 10 minutes prior to the accident.
In a written statement, the pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) that he departed runway 34, and remained within the airport traffic pattern for a series of tough-and-go landings.
The pilot stated that following an uneventful touch-and-go landing, he departed runway 34.
As he initiated a right turn to the crosswind leg of the traffic pattern, the engine lost power.
The pilot continued to turn right towards the departure runway while switching to the right fuel tank with no change in engine power noted.
The pilot further stated that he realized he was unable to make it to the runway, and initiated a forced landing into an open snow covered field.
During the landing roll, the right main landing gear submerged within the snow, and the airplane veered to the right and the left wing struck the ground.
Examination of the recovered airframe by the NTSB IIC and an FAA inspector revealed that the left wing was mostly separated from the fuselage.
Fuel was observed in both the left and right inboard and outboard fuel tanks.
Control continuity was established from the carburetor heat, throttle, and mixture controls to their respective linkages on the engine and air box.
The airframe fuel pump was actuated, and could be heard functioning.
However, due to the attitude the fuselage was positioned, fuel was not transferred to the fuel pump.
Examination of the recovered Lycoming O-540-B2B5 engine, serial number L-6650-40, revealed that it remained attached to the fuselage via its mounts.
The top spark plugs, carburetor, and propeller were removed from the engine, and the magneto P leads were disconnected from the left and right magnetos.
The crankshaft was rotated by hand, and mechanical continuity was established throughout the engine and valve train.
Thumb compression was obtained on all six cylinders.
Both the left and right magnetos produced a blue colored spark on all ignition leads when the crankshaft was rotated.
The carburetor throttle and mixture levers moved from stop to stop by hand.
When the throttle control arm was moved, the accelerator pump functioned and expelled liquid.
The fuel inlet screen contained a slight amount of debris, however, it was mostly unobstructed.
The carburetor was disassembled and examined internally.
Both metal floats were intact and undamaged.
The carburetor float bowl contained a liquid consistent with fuel.
The liquid was tested with water finding paste with negative results.
The top spark plugs exhibited signatures consistent with normal operation with dark gray deposits within the electrode area.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin, entitled Carburetor Icing Prevention, the temperature and dew point were conducive to the formation of icing at glide and cruise power.
