National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Boise, ID
Accident Number: WPR13LA111
Date & Time: 02/02/2013, 1924 MST
Registration: N8465L
Aircraft: CESSNA T210L
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Abnormal runway contact
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Other Work Use
 Analysis The pilot had been with the company about 2 weeks, and a pilot-rated passenger was on board the airplane to instruct the pilot on the use of the equipment associated with aerial survey work.
The pilot had not previously flown this make/model airplane, so the passenger was also facilitating the pilot™s understanding of the airplane and its individual characteristics.
The pilot completed about 3 hours of survey work and then proceeded to the airport for an instrument landing system approach.
The pilot reported that, as the airplane neared the decision height, he observed lights on the ground, which he believed were part of the airport environment, so he continued the approach.
When he subsequently determined that the approach was unstable, it was too late to execute a missed approach, and he landed the airplane short of the runway.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage.
The pilot and passenger safely exited the airplane.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain a proper glidepath and stabilized approach, which resulted in the airplane touching down short of the runway.
Findings Aircraft Descent/approach/glide path - Not attained/maintained (Cause) Personnel issues Incorrect action performance - Pilot (Cause) Environmental issues Runway/taxi/approach light - Effect on personnel Factual Information On February 2, 2013, about 1924 mountain standard time, a Cessna T210L, N8465L, collided with terrain at Boise Air Terminal, Boise, Idaho.
Mat-Tech Engineering LLC was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
The commercial pilot and one pilot-rated passenger sustained minor injuries; the airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage from impact forces.
The cross-country aerial survey flight departed Twin Falls, Idaho, about 1530, with a planned destination of Boise.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed.
The pilot had been with the company about 2 weeks, and the passenger was on board to instruct the pilot on the use of the equipment associated with aerial survey work.
The pilot had not flown this airplane so the passenger was also facilitating understanding of the airplane and its individual characteristics.
The pilot reported that the airplane had a full tank of fuel at departure, and the plan was to complete 3.5 hours of survey work; the work took about 3 hours.
The pilot-rated passenger was to perform the radio calls.
In addition to the automated terminal information system airport weather, the pilot asked approach control about the conditions at the airport.
The pilot had apprehension about the weather, but proceeded to Boise for lack of a more suitable airport nearby that reported weather.
The pilot reported that he received an IFR clearance, and was on an instrument landing system approach to runway 10R.
As he neared decision height, he observed a light, which he believed was part of the airport environment, so he continued the approach.
However, when he determined that the approach was unstable, it was too late to execute a missed approach, and the landing was short of the runway.
The pilot and passenger exited the airplane safely under their own power.
The pilot did not complete the National Transportation Safety Board Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report Form 6120.1.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=86125
