During initial climb from a 3,500-foot mean sea level plateau, the helicopter's skid collided 
with a 3-foot-high bush.  The helicopter yawed and impacted the ground.  The pilot reported 
that the collision occurred after he had increased the helicopter's collective pitch and 
accelerated to about 20 knots, thereby starting to acquire effective translational lift.  
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate obstruction clearance during initial climb, which 
resulted in a collision with vegetation.
On November 2, 2002, about 0910 Pacific standard time, a Bell 47G-2, N2616B, collided with a 
bush and terrain during an attempted takeoff from a plateau near Pollock Pines, California.  
The helicopter was substantially damaged.  The commercial pilot and one passenger were not 
injured.  The second passenger received a minor injury.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The helicopter was operated for hire on a photography 
flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, by D. C. Rotor & Wing, Rancho Murieta, 
California.  The flight originated from Rancho Murieta about 0810.
The pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that he flew to the 
plateau and landed.  The two passengers exited the helicopter to take pictures.  The helicopter's 
engine was kept running.  Thereafter, the passengers reboarded the helicopter to continue their 
flight.  The pilot stated that because of the ambient conditions, including the 3,500-foot mean 
sea level elevation and estimated 40-degree Fahrenheit temperature, the helicopter did not 
have adequate power to make a normal departure from a hover.  However, the pilot indicated 
that he believed there was sufficient clear area over the rocky terrain to perform a running 
takeoff. 
According to the pilot, during the accident sequence he increased the helicopter's collective 
pitch and accelerated to about 20 knots thereby starting to acquire effective translational lift.  
During this initial climb a skid collided with a 3-foot-tall bush.  The helicopter suddenly yawed 
and impacted the ground.  
In the pilot's completed "Aircraft Accident Report" he stated that "...the purpose of the flight 
was to encourage [one of the passengers] to resume her flight training with D.C. Rotor."
