The gear in transient light remained illuminated during the initial climb.  After recycling the 
gear and observing the light was still on, the pilot visually checked to ensure that the gear was 
retracted.  After leveling off at 16,000 feet the pilot noticed the ball was not centered and added 
rudder trim to compensate.  Two minutes later the airplane began to yaw and shake violently, 
followed by an uncommanded roll to the left of about 70 degrees with about a 10 to 15 degree 
pitch down attitude.  The pilot manually disconnected the autopilot and reduced power.  After 
losing 1,000 feet, control of the airplane was regained.  Power was added and the airplane 
climbed back to 16,000 feet.  After leveling off the pilot tentatively put pressure on each flight 
control to assess the problem and stability of the airplane.  No adverse reactions to control 
inputs were noted, with the exception of a slight buffet approaching 200 to 210 knots.  Power 
was then reduced to maintain a cruise speed below 200 knots.  During the descent the airplane 
was slipping badly and the ball was all the way to the right, but the pilot was able to 
compensate with roll input.  After a normal landing the pilot noticed the rudder horn and 
approximately 18 inches of the trailing rudder had separated from the aircraft.  The rear of the 
fuselage was wrinkled on both sides of the horizontal stabilizer, and the vertical stabilizer was 
wrinkled.  The forward one-half of the left nose gear door was bent aft approximately 90 
degrees.  A subsequent search for the missing top 18 inches of the trailing rudder proved 
unsuccessful.  The top 24 inches of the remaining rudder was sectioned and sent to the NTSB 
Materials Laboratory Division, Washington, D.C., for examination.  The Senior Metallurgist 
noted that the fracture surfaces observed were consistent with overstress separations.  No 
evidence of pre-existing damage such as corrosion or fatigue was found.
The in-flight separation of the top of the rudder assembly for undetermined reasons.
On November 1, 2002, approximately 1550 central standard time, a Rockwell 690B twin-
engine airplane, N77UA, sustained substantial damage after the top portion of the airplane's 
rudder separated during cruise flight approximately 7 nautical miles north-northwest of New 
Braunfels, Texas. The airplane was registered to and operated by the University of Arkansas, of 
Fayetteville, Arkansas. The two commercial pilots and their sole passenger were not injured. 
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was filed for the 14 CFR Part 
91 corporate flight. The cross-country flight originated from the Austin-Bergstron International 
Airport, Austin, Texas, at 1530, and was destined for the Corpus Christi International Airport, 
Corpus Christi, Texas.
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB form 6120.1/2), the right seat 
pilot (pilot in command) reported the co-pilot was flying the airplane from the left seat.  The 
pilot stated that after taking off he noticed the gear in transient light was still illuminated.  He 
visually checked that the gear was retracted and then recycled it, but noticed the light was still 
on.  He again visually checked to ensure the gear was retracted.  The pilot stated that after 
leveling off at 16,000 feet "I noticed the ball [slip/skid indicator] was not centered and 
trimmed rudder to compensate."  The pilot further stated that approximately two minutes later 
a violent yawing and shaking occurred, followed by an abrupt and uncommanded roll to the 
left of about 70 degrees with about a 10 to 15 degree pitch down.  The pilot reported that he 
manually disconnected the autopilot due to excessive force, while simultaneously reducing 
power due to the nose down condition.  The pilot further stated that after regaining control and 
adding power, he climbed back to 16,000 feet after having lost 1,000 feet.  After leveling off 
and in straight and level flight, the pilot reported that he "tentatively" put pressure on each 
flight control to try and assess the problem and stability of the airplane.  The pilot reported no 
adverse reaction to control inputs in level flight with the exception of a slight buffet 
approaching 200 to 210 knots.  The pilot said he then decided to reduce power and maintain 
cruise below 200 knots.  The pilot reported "during our descent the airplane was slipping 
badly, the ball was all the way to the right, but I was able to compensate with roll input."  The 
pilot reported that the landing at Corpus Christi was normal, and that after parking he noticed 
the rudder horn and approximately 18 inches of the trailing rudder had separated from the 
airplane.  He also reported wrinkling of the rear fuselage skin on both sides forward of the 
horizontal stabilizer and slight wrinkling of the vertical stabilizer.  The pilot also stated the 
front left nose gear door was bent "with no idea of what might have happened to it."
During a subsequent interview with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors, the 
pilot advised them that the rudder had sustained previous damage caused by striking the top of 
a hangar door opening.  Aircraft maintenance records indicate that the top of the rudder was 
repaired on February 13, 2001. 
A team of FAA inspectors, accompanied by two representatives from Twin Commander of 
Arlington, Washington, inspected the entire airplane in Corpus Christi on November 25, 2002.  
The team conducted a detailed inspection of the rudder, which had been previously removed 
from the aircraft.  The inspection team concluded that without the missing portion of the 
rudder, it would be very difficult to evaluate the cause of the failure.  The team also agreed that 
the damage to the nose gear door was not likely related to the cause of the accident.
On February 22, 2003, a search was conducted by volunteers from the San Marcos, Texas, Civil 
Air Patrol to aid in locating the separated rudder.  The search was conducted in a thick, dense, 
heavily wooded area.  The result of the search effort proved unsuccessful.   
The top 24 inches of the remaining rudder was sectioned and sent to the NTSB Materials 
Laboratory Division, Washington, D.C., for examination.  Results of the examination indicated 
that all of the fracture surfaces observed were clean and oriented on slant planes with a slightly 
rough texture, consistent with overstress separations.  No evidence of pre-existing damage 
such as corrosion or fatigue was found.  
