Following an unstabilized approach, the private pilot landed the airplane hard in a nose low 
attitude and bounced.  Thereafter, the pilot was unsuccessful in his recovery efforts and lost 
control of the airplane as it bounced again.  The airplane swerved off the runway overloading 
the landing gear until it collapsed.  The pilot was a ground school instructor, did not hold a 
certified flight instructor certificate, and was flying from the right seat.  The airplane's owner, 
who also held a private pilot certificate, occupied the left seat.  The owner indicated that his 
ground school instructor's handling of the airplane's controls from the right seat was 
problematic, and he almost lost control of the airplane during takeoff.  During a subsequent 
approach for landing, the instructor flew the airplane a little low and fast.  Upon touchdown 
the airplane veered to the right with the right edge of the runway well under the right wing.  
The instructor applied left rudder while pulling the nose up.  The stall warning buzzer 
activated, and the instructor lowered the nose abruptly, striking the runway with the nose 
wheel.  The airplane bounced and veered off the runway.  A professional pilot, who witnessed 
the accident airplane's final approach, reported that the approach looked unusual and was not 
stabilized.  The airplane appeared to dive toward the runway and was descending fast.  The 
wings rocked and the airplane yawed.  The airplane contacted the runway with its nose and 
right main wheels first.  It then bounced about 20 feet into the air and yawed right.  Then it 
yawed left and contacted the runway with its left main wheel and nose wheel.  It bounced again 
and continued turning left.  The airplane contacted the ground for the third and last time while 
in a left wing low attitude.
The pilot's misjudged landing flare.  Also causal were the pilot's improper bounced landing 
recovery procedures and inadvertent swerve, resulting in the landing gear collapsing from 
overload.
On November 1, 2002, about 1730 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-24-180, N5129P, 
experienced a hard bounced landing at the Corona Municipal Airport, Corona, California.  
Thereafter, the private pilot lost control of the airplane, it veered off runway 25, and its landing 
gear collapsed.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  Neither the private pilot nor the 
airplane owner (passenger), who also held a private pilot certificate, was injured.  The airplane 
was being operated on a personal flight under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.  The flight originated 
from Corona about 1725.
According to the airplane's owner, he had purchased the airplane on October 23, 2002.  The 
owner reported that while he was attending a ground school class at a local community college, 
his ground school instructor offered to show him how to fly the airplane at no charge.  The 
instructor reportedly stated that after the student was proficient flying the airplane, he could go 
to a certified flight instructor and obtain a complex airplane logbook endorsement.  
On November 1, the two pilots met at the Corona Airport, and the owner proceeded to fly the 
airplane around the traffic pattern from the left seat.  The ground school instructor monitored 
the owner's performance from the right seat.  Upon completion of four full stop landings, the 
owner offered to let the instructor fly his airplane.
The ground school instructor, who did not hold a certified flight instructor certificate, 
proceeded to fly the airplane from the right seat.  The instructor subsequently reported having 
1 hour of flying experience in this model of airplane.
The airplane's owner provided the National Transportation Safety Board investigator with the 
following (summarized) account of the instructor's performance from commencement of their 
flight to the accident:
The ground school instructor took control of the airplane and proceeded to taxi to runway 25.  
He applied full power, rotated too soon, and almost lost control on takeoff.  The instructor 
regained control and executed a touch-and-go with little to no problems.  His second attempt 
was better, and everything was fine while in the pattern.  As he was setting up for his second 
touch-and-go, he was a little low and fast on final while adjusting his speed.  He contacted the 
ground and started to veer to the right with the right edge of the runway well under the right 
wing.  He applied left rudder while pulling the nose up and turning the aileron to the left.  The 
stall warning buzzer went off and he lowered the nose abruptly, striking the runway with the 
nose wheel and bouncing as the airplane was turning left.  The airplane crossed the runway to 
the left at a sharp angle and bounced around until the airplane came to a stop.  
At the time of the accident, a professional pilot was taxiing toward runway 25 for a planned 
departure.  The professional pilot reported to the Safety Board investigator that the accident 
airplane's approach looked unusual and was not stabilized.  The airplane appeared to dive 
toward the runway and was descending fast.  The wings rocked and the airplane yawed.  The 
airplane contacted the runway with its nose and right main wheels first.  It then bounced about 
20 feet into the air and yawed right.  Then it yawed left and contacted the runway with its left 
main wheel and nose wheel.  It bounced up and continued turning left.  It hit the ground for 
the third and last time while in a left wing low attitude.  
Under the direction of the Safety Board investigator, the airplane was examined by the 
proprietor of the Eastman Aircraft Company, Corona, following its recovery from the accident 
site.  According to the proprietor, the examination revealed airframe damage consistent with 
an airplane having landed diagonally to the runway with the right wing forward.  This damage 
is also consistent with excessive side load to the nose gear and the right main landing gear.  
The ground school instructor subsequently acknowledged that, at the time of the accident, he 
had been the pilot handling the flight controls.  In his written statement to the Safety Board 
investigator he did not describe his approach, but he did state that the accident landing was 
normal.  He reported that after a short rollout of about 100 to 150 feet, the airplane turned 
right.  According to the instructor, he had applied full left pedal and the airplane responded 
slowly.  When the airplane was realigned with the runway, power was applied for stability.  The 
airplane moved left, still aligned with the runway, and then the gear failed.
