A Douglas DC-3 airplane was landing at a privately owned airstrip.  The operator's general 
manager reported that during a prelanding inspection of the airstrip, both pilots noticed a large 
tractor parked alongside the approach end of the airstrip, and planned to fly an approach 
accordingly.  As the approach phase of the landing continued, the flight encountered a slight 
downdraft as the airplane passed over the approach end of airstrip.  During the slight descent, 
just before touchdown, the airplane's left wing struck a 25-foot high iron mast that was 
attached to the parked tractor, severing about 14 feet of the airplane's outboard left wing.  After 
the collision, the crew was able to complete the landing.  Both flight crew members reported 
that they were unaware the 25-foot high iron mast was attached to the tractor. 
The flightcrew's failure to maintain clearance while landing, which resulted in an in-flight 
collision with a 25-foot high iron mast.  Contributing factors were a downdraft, and a 25-foot 
high iron mast attached to a tractor.
On November 3, 2002, about 1310 Alaska Standard Time, a Douglas DC-3 airplane, N32TN, 
sustained substantial damage when it struck an object while landing at a privately owned 
airstrip located at Port Alsworth, Alaska.  The airplane was being operated as a visual flight 
rules (VFR) cargo flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.  The 
airplane was operated as Flight 1028 by TransNorthern, LLC., Anchorage, Alaska.  The 
commercial certificated captain, airline transport certificated first officer, and one passenger, 
were not injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company flight-following 
procedures were in effect.  The flight originated at the Ted Stevens Anchorage International 
Airport, Anchorage, about 1205.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on November 4, the operator's general manager reported that the airplane was being 
utilized to transport building materials to Port Alsworth.  The general manager said that the 
crew told her that during a prelanding inspection of the Port Alsworth airstrip, both crew 
members noticed a large tractor that was parked alongside the approach end of the airstrip.  
She said that the crew planned to fly an approach that would avoid the tractor.  She said as the 
approach phase of the landing continued, the crew encountered a slight downdraft as the 
airplane passed over the approach end of runway 05L.  During the slight descent, just before 
touchdown, the airplane's left wing struck a 25-foot high iron mast that was attached to the 
parked tractor.  After the collision, the crew was able to complete the landing.  A postaccident 
inspection of the airplane revealed that 14 feet of the airplane's left wing was severed from the 
airplane during the collision.  Additionally, the left elevator was damaged.     
The captain reported to the general manager that he, as well as the first officer, were unaware 
the 25-foot high iron mast was attached to the tractor. 
