According to the pilot, he flared a little high on his landing attempt, and, "The minute the plane 
hit the ground, it shot off to the left". Despite his using right rudder to retain control, the 
airplane exited the runway off the left edge, into the grass, and encountered a ditch. The 
landing gear were sheared off, and the airplane sustained a propeller strike. The FAA inspector 
stated that postcrash investigation of the accident revealed no malfunctions with any airplane 
components or systems. Reported winds in the area were from 30 degrees left of runway 
heading at 6 knots.
The pilot's failure to maintain directional control following landing touchdown, resulting in a 
runway excursion and collision with a ditch off the left side of the runway.
On November 2, 2002, about 1530 central standard time, a Bellanca BL-17-30A Viking, 
N9558E, registered to Burrus and Associates, Inc., operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal 
flight, sustained a runway excursion during landing at St. Cloud County Airport, Pell City, 
Alabama. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane 
received substantial damage, and the private-rated pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured. 
The flight originated from the same airport about 30 minutes before the accident. 
According to the pilot, he made a normal approach at St. Cloud County Airport. He stated he, 
"Flared plane out a little high. Pulled back on yoke and it settled down. The minute the plane 
hit the ground, it shot off to the left. Pushed in right rudder to get control. At that time I was in 
the grass and the rudder had no control. I ran across a ditch. This is when landing gear and 
prop were damaged."
According to an FAA inspector, the pilot was landing on runway 02, lost directional control, 
and the aircraft exited the runway to the left, into the grass, and continued on, through a ditch, 
which sheared off the nose and main landing gear. His examination of the airplane revealed 
that there was no mechanical failure of the aircraft components or systems, and that the pilot 
failed to control the airplane on the active runway.  Reported surface winds at 1553 for the 
Birmingham area were from 350 degrees at 6 knots.
