The solo commercial pilot was landing a wheel-equipped airplane on a paved, dry runway.  The 
pilot reported that just after touchdown, he was requested by the tower controller to use, if 
possible, the first available exit off of the active runway.  The pilot said that when he applied 
the airplane's toe brakes, the wheels stopped turning, and the airplane nosed over.  The 
airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings, fuselage, and empennage.   An FAA 
inspector examined the airplane and reported no preaccident mechanical anomalies.
The pilot's excessive use of brakes during the landing roll, which resulted in the nose over of 
the airplane.
On November 3, 2002, about 1038 Alaska standard time, a wheel-equipped Luscombe 8A 
airplane, N1933B, sustained substantial damage when it nosed over while landing on a paved, 
dry runway, at the Fairbanks International Airport, Fairbanks, Alaska.  The airplane was being 
operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under Title 14, CFR Part 91, when the 
accident occurred. The solo commercial pilot was not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight originated about 1030, from the 
Chena Marina Airport, Fairbanks.       
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge on November 4, the pilot reported that just after touchdown on runway 
1R, he was requested by the Fairbanks Air Traffic Control Tower local controller to use, if 
possible, the first available exit off of the active runway.  The pilot said that when he applied 
the airplane's toe brakes, the wheels stopped turning, and the airplane nosed over.  The 
airplane sustained substantial damage to both wings, fuselage, and empennage.   
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations inspector, Fairbanks Flight Standards 
District Office, inspected the airplane.  He reported that there no preaccident mechanical 
anomalies noted with the accident airplane.  
The pilot did not submit an NTSB Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120. 
1). 
