Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Riverside, CA
Accident Number:
LAX04LA199
Date & Time:
05/01/2004, 0955 PDT 
Registration:
N195AF
Aircraft:
Cessna 195
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane veered off the runway and impacted a ditch during the landing roll.  The pilot had 
completed 10 three-point practice touch-and-go takeoff and landings without mishap, and was 
attempting his last landing of the day.  During the landing roll, the airplane drifted off the 
centerline to the right.  The pilot attempted to counteract the drift by applying left rudder 
pressure.  The airplane continued to veer in a right arc off the side of the runway and 
encountered a ditch.  The airplane impacted terrain, pushing the engine into the firewall and 
forcing the cockpit floor upward.  The pilot reported no mechanical malfunctions with the 
airplane prior to impact.  Later, the pilot stated that the factors that he thought contributed to 
the accident were a quartering right tailwind, lack of left tail wheel steering, impeded rudder 
control, pilot error/lack of experience for not attempting to steer via the use of differential 
braking, and the presence of a ditch in close proximity to the runway.  He reported that there 
was a 4-knot right quartering tailwind from 070 degrees.  A Federal Aviation Administration 
inspector examined the airplane and found no evidence of a malfunction or failure with the 
brake, control, or ground steering systems.  The accident flight was the pilot's first solo flight in 
the make and model, although he had previously accumulated about 140 hours in the same 
make and model.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's failure to maintain directional control, resulting in a veer off the runway and 
collision with terrain.
Page 2 of 6LAX04LA199
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
1. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. GROUND LOOP/SWERVE - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
3. TERRAIN CONDITION - DITCH
Page 3 of 6LAX04LA199
Factual Information
On May 1, 2004, about 0955 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 195, N195AF, veered off the 
runway and impacted a ditch during the landing roll at the Riverside Municipal Airport, 
Riverside, California.  The pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 
91.  The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured; the airplane sustained substantial 
damage.  The local flight departed Riverside about 0745.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and a flight plan had not been filed.
During a telephone interview with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-
charge (IIC), the pilot stated he was executing practice touch-and-go takeoffs and landings on 
runway 27 [100 feet wide].  He had completed 10 three-point landings without mishap, and 
was attempting his last landing of the day.  During the landing roll out, the airplane drifted off 
the centerline to the right.  The pilot attempted to counteract the drift by applying left rudder 
pressure.  The airplane continued to veer in a right arc off the side of the runway and 
encountered a ditch.  The airplane impacted terrain, pushing the engine into the firewall and 
forcing the cockpit floor upward.  The pilot reported no mechanical malfunctions with the 
airplane prior to impact.
In a written statement, the pilot reported that he thought there could have possibly be a 
problem with the right brake and/or tail wheel.  He disassembled and examined the right brake 
and tail wheel, finding no evidence of mechanical malfunction of the brake and locking tail 
wheel assembly.  He did find that, with the tail wheel strut oleo in the midrange position, the 
steering cables appeared to be misadjusted.  He thought that the cable used to turn the tail 
wheel to the right was the proper length and tension, but the cable used to turn the tail wheel 
left was loose, and hanging with excess slack.  He also noted that the rudder control was 
impeded in traveling left, due to a tab on the tail cone fairing being bent upward.  He did not 
notice this impediment in flight and stated that the airplane turned to the left normally.
The pilot further stated that the factors that he thought contributed to the accident were a 
quartering right tailwind, lack of left tail wheel steering, impeded rudder control, pilot 
error/lack of experience for not attempting to steer via the use of differential braking, and the 
presence of a ditch in close proximity to the runway.  He reported that there was a 4-knot right 
quartering tailwind from 070 degrees.
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane after the accident 
occurred.  He stated that he found no evidence of preexisting mechanical malfunction or 
anomaly.  He noted that the brakes and tires were in good condition, with no evidence of 
excessive wear or bald spots.  He reported that this was the pilot's first solo flight in the make 
and model, although he had previously accumulated about 140 hours in the same make and 
model.
Page 4 of 6LAX04LA199
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/24/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/17/2003
Flight Time:
195 hours (Total, all aircraft), 143 hours (Total, this make and model), 17 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 3 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N195AF
Model/Series:
195 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
7651
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/01/2003, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3350 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
4 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4800 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Jacobs
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
R755-B2
Registered Owner:
Tandem Flight LLC
Rated Power:
275 hp
Operator:
Frederick W. Murdock III
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX04LA199
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
RAL, 818 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.07 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 5°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Riverside, CA (RAL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Riverside, CA (RAL)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
0745 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Riverside Municipal Airport (KRAL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
818 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
27
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5401 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.951667, -117.445000
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jeff Rich
Adopted Date:
04/28/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Eric Jackson; Federal Aviation Administration; Riverside, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX04LA199
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
