This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Escanaba, MI
Accident Number: CEN18LA307
Date & Time: 08/02/2018, 1900 EDT
Registration: N142NV
Aircraft: Gerald Dan Coppock Bade-E
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On August 02, 2018, about 1900 eastern daylight time, a Gerald Dan Coppock BABE-E 
homebuilt experimental airplane, N142NV, registered to the pilot/builder, sustained 
substantial damage during a runway excursion following a loss of directional control while 
landing at the Delta County Airport (ESC), Escanaba, Michigan. The pilot, who was the sole 
occupant, was not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not 
filed. The local personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of 
Federal Code of 
Regulations Part 91
. The flight originated from ESC about 1830..
According to the pilot, he was landing on runway 01 at ESC and the airplane touched down 
normally. During the rollout, the airplane veered to the left once the tailwheel contacted the 
runway. Both wingtips contacted the runway surface and the airplane ground-looped. The 
airplane came to rest, nose down and the pilot exited the airplane. According to ESC METAR 
weather, reported winds about the time of the accident were 330 at 5 knots.
Inspection of the airplane after the accident revealed that the right steering cable chain was 
broken and hanging from the tailwheel. It is undetermined if the cable break was caused prior 
to or during the accident sequence. 
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: Gerald Dan Coppock
Registration: N142NV
Model/Series: Bade-E
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: Yes
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: ESC, 609 ft msl
Observation Time: 1856 EDT
Distance from Accident Site: 0 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 19°C / 14°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 5 knots / , 330°
Lowest Ceiling: Broken / 4000 ft agl
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.99 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: Escanaba, MI (ESC)
Destination: Escanaba, MI (ESC)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 None
Latitude, Longitude: 45.722778, -87.093611 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Alexander Lemishko
Additional Participating Persons: Mike Mattews; FAA FSDO; Grand Rapids, MI
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
