National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Bartow, FL
Accident Number: MIA05CA068
Date & Time: 03/02/2005, 1225 EST
Registration: N54550
Aircraft: Cessna 305A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated this was his first flight in this specific airplane and after a orientation flight, they returned to the Bartow Municipal Airport to land.
Upon making a three point landing, the airplane seemed normal, but it then began to swerve to the left.
The pilot corrected with rudder, but passed through the center line of the runway.
The airplane then began to bounce traveling perpendicular to the centerline.
The right main wheel separated from the spring shank and at this point it dug into the runway spinning aircraft to the right.
The plane settled down on its belly, right wing low.
The pilot-rated passenger stated that the preflight, takeoff, taxi, flight, and landing approach were all normal, until touchdown, when the airplane ground- looped.
During the landing roll an uncontrolled turn to the left commenced,  then it tightened up, damaging the landing gear and causing the wing tip to drag, followed by the propeller striking the runway.
The aircraft came to rest after spinning 270-degrees, and stopped at the edge of the runway.
The pilots stated there were no mechanical failures or malfunctions to the airplane or any of its systems prior to the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilots failure to maintain directional control resulting in the airplane ground-looping.
A factor in the accident was the pilots lack of total experience in the airplane make and model.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(F) LACK OF TOTAL EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
: 1614 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 12 Hours Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 1448 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-470 Registered Owner: Raley-Strang Aviation, Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
