National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Del Norte, CO
Accident Number: DEN05LA060
Date & Time: 03/01/2005, 0925 MST
Registration: N9091
Aircraft: Piel Emeraude CP-305
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis Shortly after departure, the airplane impacted near the base of a 300-foot butte.
According to a witness, the pilot and passenger departed the airport to the west and he then lost sight of the airplane behind rising terrain adjacent to the airport.
The witness reported the engine sounded normal during departure.
Another witness, located in his residence, heard the airplane and a few minutes later heard a "pop."
The witness observed a fire on a hillside.
Examination of the accident site revealed the airplane impacted the terrain and came to rest approximately 167 feet from the initial impact.
The airplane was destroyed by fire.
The propeller blades displayed leading edge gouging, chordwise scratches, and were twisted in the direction of rotation.
Flight control continuity was established from the cockpit to the flight control surfaces.
The pilot had accumulated approximately 900 total flight hours.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain clearance with the terrain for undetermined reasons.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING Findings 1.
(C) CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On March 1, 2005, approximately 0925 mountain standard time, a Piel Emeraude CP-305 single-engine homebuilt airplane, N9091, piloted by a private pilot, was destroyed when it impacted terrain while maneuvering near Del Norte, Colorado.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The personal flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 without a flight plan.
The private pilot, who was the owner of the airplane, and pilot-rated passenger sustained fatal injuries.
The flight originated from Del Norte Municipal and County Airport (8V1), Del Norte, Colorado, approximately 0920.
According to local authorities, the pilot and passenger were flying to South Park, Colorado, to look at a radio for the passenger.
A witness observed the accident airplane depart 8V1 on runway 26, and within a few minutes, the witness lost sight of the airplane behind rising terrain adjacent to the airport.
The witness stated the "engine sounded normal" during the takeoff.
Another witness, who was located in his residence, stated he heard an airplane, and a few minutes later, he heard a "pop."
The witness observed a fire on a hillside and responded to the accident site.
At 0925, the local authorities received a 911 call reporting a fire on the north side of a 300-foot butte, approximately 2 miles northwest of Del Norte.
Approximately 0945, the local authorities confirmed an aircraft wreckage at the location of the fire.
According to the pilot's most recent medical application, he had accumulated a total of 900 total flight hours.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate and was issued a third class medical certificate on December 30, 2003, with a limitation for corrective lenses.
The airplane was registered to the pilot and a co-owner on January 16, 2003, and was based at 8V1.
The accident site was located approximately 1 mile southwest of 8V1 near the base of a 300 foot tall hill.
According to local authorities, the airplane impacted the terrain and came to rest approximately 167 feet from the initial impact.
The airplane was destroyed by fire.
Examination of the accident site by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed the propeller blades displayed leading edge gouging, chordwise scratches, and were twisted in the direction of rotation.
Flight control continuity was established from the cockpit to the flight control surfaces.
The calculated density altitude was 7,559 feet msl.
: 1500 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: O-235-C Registered Owner: Robert A.
Brunette Rated Power: 108 hp Operator: Robert A.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
