The aircraft was observed conducting aerobatics over Lake Michigan near a beach at Union 
Pier, Michigan.  During the fifth successive 'hammerhead turn' the airplane departed 
controlled flight and impacted the surface of the lake.  A post accident examination of the 
airplane revealed no pre-impact anomalies. 
the pilot not obtaining/maintaining altitude/clearance.  Factors were the pilot not maintaining 
aircraft control and intentional aerobatics. 
 On September 1, 1996 at 1621 eastern daylight time, a Karr Titan Tornado, N238PW, was 
destroyed during impact with the surface of Lake Michigan (terrain) following a intentional low 
level aerobatic maneuver.  The surviving passenger stated that the pilot was performing the 
fifth consecutive "hammerhead turn" when the accident occurred.  The pilot sustained fatal 
injuries and the passenger minor injuries.  The personal 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in 
visual meteorological conditions.  No flight plan was on file.  The flight departed Valpariso, 
Indiana, about 1521, on a local flight.
Witnesses at the scene confirmed the passenger's description of the accident, indicating that 
they observed the airplane doing low level aerobatic maneuvers at the time of the accident.
The Federal Aviation Administration inspector determined that the pilot was holder of a 
student pilot's certificate and a third class medical certificate dated March 30, 1995.  On the 
application for that medical the pilot stated that he had a total pilot time of 36 hours.
A post accident examination of the airplane failed to reveal any mechanical anomalies.  The 
passenger reported no mechanical problems.
The post mortem examination of the deceased pilot indicated he was afflicted with "Acute Viral 
Hepatitis B."  There is no indication from the medical examiner's report that the disease had 
the potential of incapacitation for the pilot.  The cause of death was indicated as from 
drowning.
The aircraft wreckage was released to representatives of the owner on September 5, 1996.
