The airplane was on a flight from Questa, New Mexico, to Moriarty, New Mexico. After 
departing Questa, an intermediate stop was made at Taos Municipal Airport, Taos, New 
Mexico, for fuel; however, there was no fuel available. Approximately 24 minutes after 
departing Taos, while in cruise flight at 9,500 feet MSL, the engine lost power. A forced landing 
was made in an open field, and during the landing roll, the airplane 'flipped over the nose.'  A 
witness reported hearing the airplane's engine 'stop,' and observed the airplane in a 'glide.'  The 
witness also heard the engine 'start and stop' several times. An examination of the fuel system 
revealed that the expansion fuel cap had separated during ground impact, and the only 
evidence of fuel was a slight odor. The pilot reported that there was no fuel visible on the clear 
plastic tube, which served as a fuel quantity gauge at the time the engine lost power. 
the pilot's improper planning/decision, which resulted in fuel exhaustion due to an inadequate 
supply of fuel.  The lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing was a related factor. 
 On September 1, 1996, at 1808 mountain daylight time, a Jackson Sonerai I, N103HJ, 
registered to and operated by a private owner as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing, following a loss of power near Santa Fe, New 
Mexico.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and a flight plan was not filed.  The 
commercial pilot, the sole occupant, sustained minor injuries.  The flight originated from 
Questa, New Mexico, about 1723, and was en route to Moriarty, New Mexico.
The pilot reported the following information to the FAA inspector.  The first leg of the flight 
from Moriarty to Questa took approximately one hour.  After arriving at Questa he was unable 
to start the aircraft for the second leg of the flight.  Both engine magnetos were replaced.  After 
departing Questa, an intermediate stop was made at Taos Municipal Airport, Taos, New 
Mexico, for fuel.  However, there was no fuel available.  Approximately 24 minutes after 
departing Taos, while in cruise flight at 9,500 feet MSL, the engine lost power.  A forced 
landing was initiated to an open field, and during the landing roll, the aircraft "flipped over the 
nose."  
A witness reported in a written statement observing and hearing the following information.  
The airplane appeared to be attempting to land at the Santa Fe Airport.  At approximately 
1,000 feet AGL the airplane's engine lost total power.  While the airplane was in a "glide," he 
heard the engine try to restart several times; however, each time it only "sputtered and quit."
An examination of the airplane by the FAA inspector revealed damage to the rudder, the 
landing gear, both wing tips, and the fuselage.  An examination of the fuel system revealed that 
the expansion fuel cap had separated during ground impact, and the only evidence of fuel was a 
slight odor.  The pilot reported to the FAA inspector that there was no fuel visible on the clear 
plastic tube which serves as a fuel quantity gauge, at the time the engine lost power.
