According to the operator, the pilot requested to rent a helicopter.  He showed the operator his 
pilot certificate and flight log book; however, the operator did not record this information nor 
obtain a current address and telephone number.  The pilot was not given a check out in the 
helicopter prior to the accident flight.  The operator observed the pilot hover the helicopter, 
takeoff and depart the traffic pattern.  The operator subsequently received a telephone call 
from the pilot stating he had landed the helicopter 'hard' at the North Dallas Jetport, which 
was under construction, and requested to be pick up.  When the operator arrived at the North 
Dallas Jetport, he found the helicopter on its side, and the pilot could not be located.  Injury is 
presumed.  There were no reported eye witnesses to this accident.  The FAA has no record of 
the named pilot having either an airman or a medical certificate.  . 
The pilot's improper touchdown procedure. 
 On September 1, 1996, about 1730 central daylight time, a Hughes 269B helicopter, N9558F, 
registered to C and J Communications Inc., and operated by Addison Helicopters as a Title 14 
CFR Part 91 personal flight, was substantially damaged during a hard landing near Frisco, 
Texas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed.  The pilot 
was reported as not injured.  The local flight originated from Addison Airport, Dallas, Texas, 
about 30 minutes before the accident.
According to the operator, the pilot requested to rent a helicopter.  He showed the operator his 
pilot certificate and flight log book; however, the operator did not record this information nor 
obtain a current address and telephone number.  The pilot was not given a check out in the 
helicopter prior to the accident flight; however, the operator observed the pilot hover the 
helicopter, takeoff and depart the traffic pattern.  The operator received a telephone call from 
the pilot stating he had landed the helicopter "hard" at the North Dallas Jetport, which was 
under construction, and requested to be pick up.  When the operator arrived at the North 
Dallas Jetport, he found the helicopter on its side, and the pilot could not be located.  There 
were no reported eye witnesses to this accident.
Examination of the helicopter by a FAA inspector on September 5, 1996, at the Wills Point 
Airport revealed that all main rotor blades were damaged, the skid tubes and their fuselage 
attaching mounts were fractured, the tail rotor drive shaft was twisted nearly 180 degrees, and 
the tail rotor was damaged.
The FAA has no record of the named pilot having either an airman or a medical certificate.
