The air taxi pilot initiated flight over an extensive field of glaciers. The passengers described a 
gray, overcast sky, with a snow field below and snow on the surrounding mountains. They 
estimated the cruise altitude was between 100 and 500 feet above the glacier. The flight 
encountered a fog bank in the direction of travel; before reaching the fog, the pilot elected to 
turn around. During the turn, the airplane descended and collided with the glacier. 
Postaccident inspection disclosed no evidence of any preexisting mechanical anomaly with the 
airplane. 
the pilot's inadvertent flight into instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) failure to 
maintain adequate altitude/clearance from terrain, while maneuvering to reverse the direction 
of flight.  Factors associated with the accident were: the pilot's inadequate weather evaluation; 
and the terrain and weather, which resulted in a whiteout condition. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 1996, about 1756 Alaska daylight time, a wheel equipped Piper PA-32 
airplane, N2181Z, registered to and operated by LAB Flying Service, sustained substantial 
damage when it collided with a glacier approximately 11 miles southwest of Haines, Alaska.  
The commercial certificated pilot and three of the five passengers aboard received serious 
injuries; the remaining two passengers received minor injuries.  The 14 CFR Part 135 scheduled 
commuter flight, Flight 514, operated in visual meteorological conditions.  The flight originated 
at Gustavus, Alaska, about 1740, and the destination was Haines.
The route of flight from Gustavus was principally northward  along the eastern coastline of  
Glacier Bay, into Muir Inlet, and then northeast over the Casement Glacier towards the Davis 
Glacier and Haines.  The airplane collided with the Davis Glacier while in a descending turn to 
reverse direction.
The pilot reported in his written statement to the NTSB that he had previously flown the same 
route from Gustavus to Haines earlier that day, and thus was familiar with the terrain and 
weather conditions in the vicinity.  He estimated the sky conditions as approximately 6,000 
feet overcast, with visibility about 12 to 15 miles.  As he approached the Davidson Glacier, the 
pilot said he could see a fog bank near Sullivan Mountain, which was near his intended route of 
flight.  He said he elected to fly closer to the fog bank to see if  he could see through the 
adjacent pass which would lead him to the Chilkat Inlet and Haines.  Approximately 3 to 5 
miles from the fog, he decided he could not see through the pass, and began a left turn to 
reverse direction.  His intent was to fly to the south and find another pass.  Approximately 150 
degrees through the turn, the pilot wrote: "...I felt the airplane get pushed downward.  It felt 
like a negative "G".  I glanced down at my VSI (vertical speed indicator)  and it was pegged at a 
2500 fpm descent.  Before and during the turn I was at 5300 feet msl.  I immediately firewalled 
the controls, decreased my bank angle, and tried to outclimb the downdraft.  Within seconds 
we were forced on the glacier at approximately 4700 feet.  I believe the accident was caused by 
unforecasted, unforeseen, weather phenomena, (downdraft), and possibly the engine's inability 
to reach full power to outclimb the downdraft.  2181Z had numerous problems beforehand, and 
when I firewalled the controls, I didn't feel or hear the engine power increase."
The pilot's written statement to the NTSB differs, in part,  from information and statements 
credited to the pilot by Federal Aviation Administration inspectors and an Alaska State 
Trooper who interviewed the pilot prior to the preparation of the pilot's written statement to 
the NTSB.
The pilot was interviewed by Alaska State Trooper Donald E. Otis, on September 1, at 2115.  
Trooper Otis met the pilot at the Haines Heliport, which is where the pilot was taken 
immediately after leaving the accident site.  According to Trooper Otis' report (attached), the 
pilot said words to the effect:  " I was coming through at about 4200 feet. There was a little bit 
of fog layer right before goat wall which is a mountainside, so I started to turn around.  It was a 
standard procedure turn, everything was fine, nice and smooth, lot of airspeed.  For some 
reason I couldn't hold altitude.  Airplane started descending so I added full prop and throttle 
and started pulling back but airplane kept descending.  I couldn't hold it up, it was smooth, I 
don't know if there was a downdraft off the mountain.  I think the engine was working fine but 
I just couldn't hold the altitude and as I came around I came upon the ice, skinned the top of it 
and hit the ice.  It was more of  a crash than a controlled landing."
The pilot was also interviewed by two FAA inspectors from the Juneau Flight Standards 
District Office.  Their interview was conducted in Haines, on September 4.  A copy of the 
transcript from that interview is appended.  A review of the interview transcript did not reveal 
any comment by the pilot that the airplane was not airworthy, or that there was any in-flight, 
preimpact mechanical malfunction.  The transcript also indicates the pilot began his turn away 
from the fog bank about 3/4 of a mile away.
Another LAB airplane closely followed the accident flight.  This airplane carried the accident 
airplane's passenger baggage. The second airplane's pilot flew over the accident site almost 
continuously until rescuers arrived. According to FAA inspector Robert Kolvig, he interviewed 
the pilot of the second airplane soon after the accident.  Inspector Kolvig asked the pilot if he 
experienced any turbulence or downdrafts in the vicinity of the accident site.  The pilot 
reported that he had not.
The NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC) spoke with the pilot of  a Coastal Airways helicopter that 
was sent to the accident site to assist in the rescue.  The pilot characterized the weather as calm 
winds, stable air, and foggy.  He said some areas were in a "white out" condition because of the 
fog, snow, and overcast sky, and that in places it was difficult to discern the horizon.  He also 
said the pilot apparently turned to the north, into the rising glacier, instead of going down 
slope.  The helicopter pilot estimated the crash site's elevation to be between 4,700 and 4,800 
feet msl. 
PASSENGER STATEMENTS
The NTSB IIC had telephonic interviews with three of the passengers,  Janice Larkin, John 
Bemben, and David Gagne, on  April 24, March 21, and March 20, respectively. 
Janice Larkin was seated in the left rear of the airplane.  She said that she does not have total 
recollection of the flight and the events just preceding the accident, due to her injuries and the 
aftermath of the accident itself.  She said she is not a pilot, but has had some glider pilot 
training.  She described the departure weather from Gustavus as 6,000 to 8,000 feet overcast, 
in light to moderate rain.  The pilot originally told the passengers that they could not go by the 
glacier route due to weather, but at some point changed his mind and went over the glacier 
anyway.  She thought they were flying at 500 feet above the ground, or lower.  She, and a 
couple of the other passengers, were taking pictures outside during much of the flight.  Just 
before the accident, she recalls a cloud bank ahead of the flight, and then a turn, or roll to the 
right, and then a turn (she believes) to the left.  She thinks there was also some "squirrely" air 
motions just before impact.  She does not recall the pilot making any comments immediately 
before the crash.    
John Bemben was seated directly behind the pilot.  He said he noticed the pilot flying lower 
over the glacier, possibly because of a lowering overcast.  Just prior to the accident, he 
estimated the height over the glacier as about 100 feet.  He said the airplane turned to the left, 
and the pilot made no comment about any impending crash.  He said he was taken totally by 
surprise at the impact.  He also said he was unaware of any turbulence or surface winds, 
although the pilot had been turning the airplane frequently so that they could take pictures.
David Gagne was seated on the right side of the airplane behind the front seat passenger.  He 
characterized the weather as overcast, gray, raining, and white ice below.  He said he could not 
estimate their height above the glacier because there was "no scale to anything."  He did not 
recall any turbulence or winds.  He said the pilot had been turning the airplane fairly 
frequently to allow picture taking.  Just prior to the crash, he said the pilot turned to the right 
and then back to the left.  He said the pilot made no pre crash comments, and that the accident 
impact took him by surprise.   
DAMAGE TO AIRCRAFT
The airplane was damaged beyond economical repair.  
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest weather reporting site to the accident is Haines, located approximately 11 miles 
northeast of the accident site.  The weather observations are taken by a contract employee of 
the National Weather Service.  The weather observation closest to the time of the accident was 
taken at 1845, and reported:  Sky, 2,500 feet overcast; Wind, 020 degrees at 3 knots; 
Temperature, 52 F; Dewpoint, 51 F.   
Skagway is another reporting site, and it is located approximately 28 miles northeast of the 
accident site.  At 1753, Skagway reported:  Sky, 6000 feet overcast; Wind, calm; Temperature, 
53 F; Dewpoint, 49 F.
The pilot's weather observation at the time of the accident, as noted in his report to the NTSB, 
is:  Sky, (about) 6,000 feet overcast; Wind, 270  degrees at 12 knots; Temperature, 45 F.  The 
pilot also noted the formation of a fog bank to the east of the accident site.  At the request of  
FAA inspectors who interviewed him, the pilot drew the approximate route of flight on a 
Juneau Sectional Chart.  In his hand drawn depiction, he indicated the wind was from the east, 
not the west, as he indicated in his report to the NTSB.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
An on-site inspection of the crash area and airplane was conducted on September 4, by FAA 
inspectors from the Juneau Flight Standards Distort Office. 
The airplane came to rest on the Davidson Glacier, upright and facing in an easterly direction.  
The elevation of the accident site was approximately 4,800 feet msl, and the geographic 
coordinates were 59.05 north, 135.35 west.  The surface of the glacier was rough and 
undulating, with many crevasses. 
All major components of the airplane were present at the crash site.  
Virtually every surface of the airframe exhibited some degree of  buckling, compression, 
twisting or other  distortion.  The floor of the cabin had been displaced upwards, and all the 
passenger seats were  displaced and distorted.  The forward portion of the fuselage, inclusive of 
the cabin floor, instrument panel, firewall and engine, was displaced downward and several 
feet to the airplane's left. 
The engine remained attached to the engine mounts, and the three propeller blades remained 
in their respective hubs.   All three propeller blades exhibited aft bending and torsional 
twisting. 
Both main landing gear separated from the airplane upon impact.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The engine was examined by a representative of the engine manufacturer (Lycoming), on 
September 9.  The manufacturer's representative discovered no preimpact mechanical 
anomalies with the engine.  A portion of the engine manufacturer's report is attached.   
The NTSB did not take custody of the wreckage, and no portion of the airplane was retained by 
the NTSB.
