Witnesses near the accident site reported they heard an airplane flying low over the 
neighborhood prior to the approximate time of the accident. Shortly after hearing the low 
flying airplane, an explosion was heard. Witnesses discovered a nearby home engulfed in 
flames, and confirmed that a small airplane had collided with the home. Witnesses reported 
the weather conditions were foggy and very dark at the time of the accident. Lakeland Regional 
Airport, located 16 nautical miles southeast of Zephyrhills Airport, 0650 weather observation, 
reported winds calm, sky conditions scattered at 200 feet above ground level (AGL), visibility 1 
statue mile, mist, temperature 25 celsius, dewpoint 25 celsius, and the altimeter setting was 
30.02. The Vandenberg Airport, weather observation located 16 nautical miles southwest of 
Zephyrhills Airport, reported at 0552, winds 050 degrees and 5 knots, overcast sky at 500 feet 
AGL, visibility 1.5 statue miles, with mist, temperature 25 Celsius, and dewpoint 25 Celsius. 
There was no record of the pilot receiving a weather briefing before departure. 
The pilots continued visual flight into instrument conditions (fog), and subsequent collision 
with a tree and a residence.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 2002, at 0635 eastern daylight time, an unregistered Grumman American 
AA-5B, N81189, operated by a private pilot collided with trees and a family home while on 
approach to Zephyrhills Municipal Airport, Zephyrhills, Florida. The personal flight operated 
under the provisions of Title 14 CFR part 91 with no flight plan filed. Instrument 
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The airplane was destroyed, 
and the private pilot and passenger were fatally injured. The flight departed Zephyrhills 
Municipal Airport, Zephyrhills, Florida, September 1, 2002, at an undetermined time.
Witnesses near the accident site reported they heard an airplane flying low over the 
neighborhood prior to the approximate time of the accident. Shortly after hearing the low 
flying airplane, an explosion was heard. Witnesses discovered a nearby home engulfed in 
flames, and confirmed that a small airplane had collided with the home. Witnesses reported 
the weather conditions were foggy and dark night  light conditions existed at the time of the 
accident.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION  
Review of the information on file with the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Airman's 
Certification Division, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, revealed the pilot was issued a private pilot 
certificate on January 18, 1996, with a single engine land rating. The pilots total flight time was 
approximately 185 hours. The pilot's flight time in the Grumman AA-5B was not determined. 
The pilot held a third class medical certificate, dated May 18, 2001, valid when wearing 
corrective glasses for near vision. The pilot's logbooks were not recovered for examination.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
Review of records revealed the current pilot purchased the airplane on September 21, 2001. A 
review of the FAA aircraft records revealed that the airplane was not registered to the new 
owner. The airplanes' logbooks were not recovered for examination. 
METEORLOGICAL INFORMATION
Lakeland Regional Airport, located 16 nautical miles southeast of Zephyrhills Airport, 0650 
weather observation, reported winds calm, sky conditions scattered at 200 feet above ground 
level (AGL), visibility 1 statue mile, mist, temperature 25 Celsius, dew point 25 Celsius, and the 
altimeter setting was 30.02. The Landenberg Airport, weather observation located 16 nautical 
miles southwest of Zephyrhills Airport, reported at 0552, winds 050 degrees and 5 knots, 
overcast sky at 500 feet AGL, visibility 1.5 statue miles, with mist, temperature 25 Celsius, and 
dew point 25 Celsius. There was no record of the pilot receiving a weather briefing before 
departure. 
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Zephyrhills Municipal Airport has a field elevation of 90 feet MSL. It has two runways, 36-18 
and 04-22. The airport has no air traffic control tower, with no instrument approach 
procedures. At the time of the accident the airplane was maneuvering.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the wreckage path revealed it was 350 feet in length on a 180-degree magnetic 
heading. Examination of the accident site revealed freshly broken tree branches at the top of a 
50-foot tree at the beginning of the wreckage path. The right aileron was located at the base of 
the first stand of trees. The right wing tip was located approximately 50 feet from the aileron 
along the wreckage debris path. The left wing tip was located approximately 20 feet above the 
ground along the wreckage debris path in a tree. The first ground scar was 200 feet from the 
first freshly broken tree. The foliage in the area of the ground scar showed signs of intense heat. 
The engine was located 30 feet from the ground scar resting against a severely fire damaged 
house. The main fuselage was located in the rear of the home.  
Examination of the right wing revealed the right aileron was separated from the wing at the 
attachment points, with chordwise buckling. The right flap was separated from the wing at the 
attachment points with chordwise buckling. The right elevator was fire damaged. The left wing 
was shattered, and a three-foot section of the wing tip displayed crush damage. The left 
elevator displayed chordwise buckling, and heavy fire damage. The cabin and fuselage were 
consumed by fire. The horizontal stabilizer displayed heavy crush and fire damage. All flight 
control cables were located within the airplane. The cable system was traced from the 
attachment points on the flight controls to the control surface attachment points. The cables 
were cut for extraction purposes.
Examination of the engine revealed crush and fire damage. The propeller was separated from 
the engine, and the propeller hub remained attached to the crankshaft flange. Both propeller 
blades exhibited twisting and chordwise scoring. The fuel system was heavily fire damaged. 
The right magneto produced ignition sparks from all lead towers when rotated. The left 
magneto was fire damaged. All spark plug electrodes were dry and tan in color. The oil pump 
was intact and there was no evidence of debris in the pressure screen. The crankshaft rotated 
and compression and suction was noted on all cylinders. Internal gear and valve train 
continuity was confirmed. The examination of the airframe and engine failed to disclose 
evidence of pre-impact failure or malfunction.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Pasco & Pinellas County medical examiner, Largo, Florida, preformed the postmortem 
examination on the private pilot on September 1, 2002. The cause of death was multiple blunt 
trauma. The toxicological examinations were negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, drugs and 
alcohol. Traces of Propranolol were detected in the blood, kidney, liver and urine. Propranolol 
decreases cardiac rate and output, reduces blood pressure, and is effective in the prophylaxis of 
migraine.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was released to CTC Services Aviation (LAD Inc.) on September 11, 
2002.
