The private certificated pilot departed a remote lake in a float-equipped airplane, en route to 
another lake.  The route of flight crossed a mountain saddle about 5 miles from the point of 
departure.  After takeoff, the pilot reported that he gained sufficient altitude to clear the 
mountain saddle.  The pilot said that as he crossed the saddle, the airplane encountered a 
violent downdraft that unexpectedly resulted in a loss of several hundred feet of altitude.  He 
said he was unable to arrest the airplane's descent, and maneuvered the airplane to avoid a low 
hill.  The airplane collided with tree-covered terrain on the side of the mountain, and then 
nosed over.  The pilot indicated he did not obtain a weather briefing.  He reported that the 
weather conditions included unlimited visibility, a temperature of 50 degrees F, a wind of 3 to 
5 knots from the north, no precipitation, no turbulence, and little to no wind at the departure 
point.  The area forecast indicated no significant turbulence.  The closest official weather 
observation station was 14 miles away, and a METAR was reporting in part: Wind, calm; 
visibility, 20 statute miles in light rain; clouds and sky condition, 3,000 feet broken, 5,500 feet 
overcast; altimeter, 29.91 inHg.
The pilot's inadequate evaluation of the area weather conditions, and his subsequent inability 
to maintain terrain clearance upon encountering a downdraft, which resulted in an in-flight 
collision with tree-covered mountainous terrain.   A factor in the accident was a downdraft.
On September 1, 2002, about 0900 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Cessna 185 airplane, 
N185CF, sustained substantial damage during a collision with tree-covered terrain, about 14 
miles southwest of Port Alsworth, Alaska. The airplane was being operated as a Title 14, CFR 
Part 91, visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight when the accident occurred.  The 
airplane was operated by the pilot.  The private certificated pilot, and the two passengers, 
received serious injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  The flight originated 
from Keyes Point, Lake Clark, Alaska, located about 5 miles southeast of the accident site, at 
0850, and was en route to Long Lake.  No flight plan was filed.
During an interview with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-
charge (IIC), on September 1, the pilot reported that he just departed Lake Clark, and had 
leveled the airplane about 1,000 feet above the ground. As the airplane crossed over a small 
ridge, the pilot said he encountered a severe downdraft.  The airplane began to descend, and he 
banked the airplane to the left to avoid a low hill.  He applied full engine power, but the 
airplane continued to descend.  The pilot said he could not maintain altitude, and the airplane 
collided with the ground and nosed over.
In the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the 
pilot, the pilot indicated he did not obtain a weather briefing.  He reported that the weather 
conditions included unlimited visibility, a temperature of 50 degrees F, a wind of 3 to 5 knots 
from the north, no precipitation, and no turbulence.  In the narrative portion of the report, the 
pilot indicated that there was little to no wind at the departure point.  After takeoff, he gained 
sufficient altitude to clear a mountain saddle along the route of flight.  He stated that the 
airplane suddenly encountered a violent downdraft that unexpectedly caused the airplane to 
lose several hundred feet of altitude.  He was unable to arrest the airplane's descent, and the 
airplane collided with a tree on the side of the mountain and nosed over.
The area forecast for Bristol Bay, issued on September 1, 2002, at 0545, and valid until 1800, 
stated, in part:  Clouds and weather; AIRMET for mountain obscuration, Alaska Range 
occasionally obscured in clouds and precipitation, improving.  Clouds, 2,500 feet scattered, 
4,000 feet broken, 6,000 feet broken, tops at 8,000 feet, scattered conditions in light rain 
showers.  Coast/offshore, occasionally 2,500 feet broken.  Outlook, valid from 1800 to 1200 on 
September 2, 2002, coast/offshore, marginal VFR conditions with ceilings due to mist; inland, 
VFR conditions.  Turbulence, none significant.  Icing and freezing level, none significant, 
freezing level, 5,000 feet.
The closest official weather observation station is Port Alsworth, Alaska.  At 0848, an Aviation 
Routine Weather Report (METAR) was reporting in part:  Wind, calm; visibility, 20 statute 
miles in light rain; clouds and sky condition, 3,000 feet broken, 5,500 feet overcast; altimeter, 
29.91 inHg.
