Witnesses reported observing the pilot repeatedly trying to start the engine for several minutes, 
and stated that after at least 5 minutes the engine started but immediately ceased operating. 
The witnesses further stated that the pilot then exited the airplane, did something to the 
engine, and then got back in the airplane and it started. It would not idle normally and 
required a higher power setting in order for it to remain operating. A witness said that the pilot 
maintained a high power setting to keep the engine operating, and taxied for takeoff. The 
witness further stated that he was about 50 to 75 feet away and he could hear the engine 
"struggling" to operate.  During initial climb after takeoff, other witnesses reported hearing the 
airplane and stated that they heard three loud noises, each sounding  like a "backfire", and 
after the last backfire there was silence. One witness reported looking up and seeing the 
propeller not rotating, and all witnesses said they saw the airplane enter a turn. They said there 
was no engine noise, and the airplane glided while turning as if to return to land at the airport, 
but they last sight of it as it descended below the trees. After the airplane disappeared from 
sight below the trees the witnesses stated that there was a loud "boom" and they saw smoke 
billow up in the air.  Examination of the accident scene showed that the airplane struck trees 
and descended, impacting the ground, about 0.5 mile from the center of the airport, north of 
the departure end of runway 05. The airplane had come apart as it impacted the trees and the 
ground and a postcrash fire had ensued. The pilot received fatal injuries. Examination of the 
airframe, the flight controls and the engine did not reveal any pre-accident anomalies.
A loss of engine power for undetermined reasons and the pilot's decision to continue flight with 
a known equipment deficiency.  Also causal was the pilot's failure to maintain airspeed which 
resulted in a stall.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 1, 2002, about 1650 eastern daylight time, a Gulfstream American AA-5A, 
N9807U, registered to and operated by a private individual, as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal 
flight, crashed shortly after takeoff at Greeneville, Tennessee. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The private-rated pilot received fatal injuries, and the 
airplane was destroyed. The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The accident airplane struck trees and impacted the ground about 0.5 mile from the center of 
the airport, north of the departure end of runway 05, and a postcrash fire ensued.
A witness stated that she was in her back yard, and heard three loud noises each sounding like 
a "backfire", and she looked up and saw an airplane over a road near her home. The witness 
further stated that the engine was not operating, and it appeared that the airplane was gliding 
towards the airport, and it descended in a wooded area, followed by the sound of a loud 
"boom", after which she saw smoke.
Another witness stated that she was sitting outside and she heard an airplane engine "sputter', 
and the propeller was observed to have stopped turning. She said that when the engine 
'sputtered", the airplane turned toward the airport, and from that point on she did not hear the 
engine operating. She said the airplane started descending, and she heard a loud " boom" and 
saw smoke.
 A third witness, a flight instructor, stated that he and his student were getting into a Cessna 
172 for an instructional flight, and he heard the accident airplane being started. He said it 
sounded a little rough and was having a difficult time maintaining idle rpm. He stated that he 
focused on teaching his student and did not observe the accident airplane take off, and was 
next aware of the airplane when a crash was reported.
A fourth witness , a person working at the airport, stated that he observed the pilot/owner 
attempting to start the engine several times. He stated that the engine finally started then 
stopped, and the pilot/owner got out and "worked on the front of the aircraft" then got back in 
the aircraft. The witness said he then returned to his previous duties and did not observe 
anything else. 
A fifth witness, a pilot, stated that he  was performing preflight checks on his airplane in 
preparation of a flight, and he noticed a man trying to start another airplane. The witness 
further stated that it took the man at least 5 minutes to get the engine started, and when the 
engine started, immediately it ceased operating. He said he observed the person again trying to 
start the airplane and the same result happened a few times more. After a little while he said 
the man got out of the airplane and did something to the engine, got back in the airplane and  
was able to start the engine. He said that the engine was then operated at a high power setting, 
because when reduced it sounded as if it was going to cease operating.  The witness said that he 
was about 50 to 75 feet away and he could hear the engine "struggling", but the pilot still 
maintained a high power setting and taxied the airplane for takeoff.
PERSONEL INFORMATION 
The pilot held an FAA private pilot certificate, last issued on March 24, 1999, with airplane 
single engine land and instrument ratings. He also held an FAA Class 3 medical with the stated 
limitation , "must possess corrective lenses for near vision while exercising privileges of this 
certificate", issued on February 18, 2000. At the time of the accident, based on information 
obtained from the pilot's flight log, the  pilot had accumulated about  695 total flying hours,  of 
which about 280 flight hours in the same make and model airplane,  about 7.0 flight hours 
were obtained in the last 90 days, and about 3.5 flight hours were obtained in the last 30 days.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane was a Gulfstream American, Model  AA-5A Cheetah, serial number AA-5A-0207, 
Manufactured in 1976. It was equipped with a Textron Lycoming O-320-E2G, 150 horsepower 
engine, serial number L-45412-27A. 
No tachometer or hour meter was recovered at the wreckage site, but a review of records did 
show that both an annual and 100-hour inspection had been completed on May 4, 2002, at 
which time the engine log showed that the recording tachometer reading was 3687.8 hours. 
Airplane records also indicated that the airplane was equipped with a two-bladed metal 
McCauley model 1C172-BTM7359 fixed pitch propeller, whose serial number was M1007.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
According to a county official it had rained heavily, with about 4 inches of rain having fallen the 
day before the day of the accident.  On the day of the accident, visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and the 1700, Greeneville-Greene County Municipal automated surface weather 
observation, was winds light, visibility 10 statute miles, sky clear, temperature 85 degrees F, 
dewpoint temperature 61 degrees F, altimeter setting 30.17  inHg.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane had departed from runway 05 and shortly thereafter struck a tree which was 60 to 
70 feet in height, and located north of the departure end of runway 05. Several other trees were 
stuck at approximately the same height. A section of the right wing lay near the base of the 
fourth impact point, which was approximately 81 feet from the initial point of impact . The 
debris path from the initial impact point  to the main wreckage site lay along a direction of 
approximately  255 degrees with an overall debris path length of about 150 feet. 
The aircraft came to rest in an inverted position, and a postcrash fire had ensued, consuming 
about 90 percent of the airframe. The fuel tanks had been breached and the fuel lines had 
burned. Installed gauges and radios had incurred impact and/or heavy heat damage, and were 
not recognizable or readable. Damaged but readable gauges consisted of the VSI which 
indicated 2,000 feet downward, the suction gauge which indicated zero, and the attitude 
indicator which showed a nose down attitude and that it had tumbled. The fuel selector was 
found in the debris, and it was positioned in the "left" tank position, with the "D" part of the 
shaft  at about the 1 o'clock position as compared with that belonging to a similar airplane. 
Most of the major sections of the airframe were identifiable, and flight control cable routing 
from the cockpit area back to the empennage was confirmed. Aileron flight control routing was 
confirmed for the left wing toward the aileron bellcrank and the right aileron cable system, to 
the wing root area.
One propeller blade had been bent back about 45 degrees, about 9 to 10 inches from the center 
of the hub, and the opposite blade was relatively straight with its face displaying rotational  
scuffing and minor leading edge nicks.
The engine was found in an inverted position, partially attached to the firewall by the engine 
mount and it had some discoloration as a result of the postcrash.  An examination of the engine 
revealed no anomalies. The cylinder case halves, rear accessory housing, and air/oil sump 
housing remained relatively intact, but had sustained impact and fire damage. The carburetor 
upper body had remained attached to the air/oil sump housing. The metal float assembly 
sustained impact damage leaving one float attached to the bracket. The lower body was located 
in the wreckage area and it had sustained impact damage.  A large section of the bowl was 
broken out and a small portion of the flange to the accelerator pump chamber was broken off. 
The main fuel nozzle stem was broken off and the accelerator pump nozzle was intact. The 
carburetor inlet fuel screen was clear of contamination, and the screen material was discolored. 
The throttle plate was in the open position and the mixture arm was in the mid range position.
The magnetos and the engine-driven fuel pump also sustained fire damage, and were removed 
to facilitate the rotation of the crankshaft. The fire had melted both magneto internal plastic 
parts, and they were relatively intact but discolored. The impulse coupling of the left magneto 
could only be rotated until the paws contacted the stop pins. The drive shaft did not rotate due 
to the internal parts of the magneto having melted. The drive shaft of the right magneto had 
similar fire damage and its drive shaft also would not rotate. Spark plug electrodes were intact 
and they displayed a gray color, when compared to Champion chart AV-27. The ignition 
harness had incurred fire damage. 
After the magnetos and engine driven fuel pump were removed, the crankshaft was free to 
rotate, and compression and suction were obtained on all cylinders. There was valve train 
continuity at all eight rocker arms and the rear accessory gears. Oil was present in the rocker 
arm/ valve spring areas. The rear mounted oil cooler was intact and the hose fittings were 
tight. The oil filter element had also sustained heat damage, and when the folds of the element 
were separated, no metal contamination was found. In addition, the oil suction screen was also 
examined and no contamination was found.
Each of the cylinder combustion chambers were visually examined with a borescope, revealing 
that the top of the pistons, the combustion chamber walls and the valve heads were intact and 
coated with a dark tan colored deposit.  The muffler was examined for blockage through the 
exhaust pipe and none were noted.
· 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Postmortem examination of the pilot was performed by a Forensic Pathologist, Johnson City , 
Tennessee, and the cause of death was attributed to multiple injuries, burns and inhalation of 
smoke and superheated gases. No findings which could be considered causal to the accident 
were reported.
The autopsy report noted containers of medications which were received with the body:  One 
container had Altace (Ramipril), 10 mg #30, to be taken one capsule daily, which had been 
filled on August 23, 2002, and had 24 capsules remaining. The other container had Paxil 
(Paroxetine), 20 mg #30, to be taken one tablet each day, and which had been filled on August 
23, 2002, and there were 23 tablets remaining.
Postmortem toxicology studies on specimens obtained from the pilot were performed by the 
FAA Toxicology Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The specimens were tested for carbon 
monoxide, cyanide, volatiles and drugs, and 0.279 (ug/ml, ug/g) paroxetine was detected in 
blood. In addition, paroxetine was detected in urine.   
Paroxetine is a prescription antidepressant, often known by the trade name Paxil. In addition 
to depression, the medication is used to treat  obsessive-compulsive disorder, panic attacks, 
and social anxiety disorder.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The NTSB released the airplane wreckage on September 3, 2002 to Detective Daniel Ricker, 
Greene County Sheriff's Department.
