The pilot was landing the tail-wheeled airplane on runway 3, a 2,770 foot-long, 48 foot-wide, 
asphalt runway.  After touchdown, the airplane began to bounce and veer to the right.  The 
airplane departed the right side of the runway and the pilot applied full power in an attempt to 
climb; however the airplane struck a car parked in an aircraft tie down area.  Winds reported at 
an airport about 11 miles east of the accident site were from 120 degrees at 8 knots. 
The pilot's improper recover from a bounce landing, which resulted in a loss of directional 
control and collision with a vehicle.  A factor in this accident was the crosswind condition.
On September 1, 2002, about 1150 eastern daylight time, a Champion 7ECA, N5091X, was 
substantially damaged when it struck a parked vehicle while landing at the Minute Man Air 
Field (6B6), Stow, Massachusetts.  The certificated private pilot and passenger sustained minor 
injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan had been filed for the 
personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
The tail-wheeled airplane was landing on runway 3, a 2,770 foot-long, 48 foot-wide, asphalt 
runway.
The pilot reported that the approach was normal; however, after touchdown, the airplane 
bounced and began to veer to the right.  The airplane departed the right side of the runway and 
the pilot applied full power in an attempt to climb; however the airplane struck a car parked in 
an aircraft tie down area.
Two witnesses at the airport stated they observed the airplane bouncing after touchdown.  One 
witness said:
"...Once the main gear touched, the tail came down swiftly, touched the surface, and just as 
swiftly went back up.  It appeared that the propeller was about to strike when the tail started 
lowering again and the aircraft went airborne, after which the aircraft porpoised once or twice.  
On what I believe was the second porpoise, the left wing came up first, and the plane veered 
towards the right.  The plane continued on this course, bouncing once on the right main gear in 
the grass, then the tail wheel bounced, but the left main gear did not touch this final time.  The 
plane was headed straight for the line of parked cars and planes..."
The pilot reported 421 hours of total flight experience, which included 35 hours in make and 
model.  He did not report any mechanical malfunctions.
Winds reported at an airport about 11 miles east of 6B6, at 1156, were from 120 degrees at 8 
knots.
