According to the pilot, during cruise flight at 2000 feet, the airplane entered clouds and the 
pilot began to descend to 1200 feet. The pilot requested assistance from air traffic, and was 
cleared to initiate a 180-degree turn. During the 180-degree turn the pilot became disoriented 
and collided with the ground. No mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by 
the non-instrument rated pilot.
The pilot's continued visual flight into instrument meteorological conditions and loss of 
aircraft control, which resulted in an in-flight collision with the ground.
On March 1, 2003, at 0056 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N67524, registered to Aiken 
Air Service and operated by a private pilot, collided with the ground during a 180-degree turn 
near Greenwood County Airport, Greenwood, South Carolina. The personal flight was operated 
under the provision of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and visual flight rules. Instrument meteorological 
conditions prevailed at the time of accident. The airplane sustained substantial damage, and 
the private pilot received minor injuries. The flight originated from Donaldson Center Airport, 
Greenville, South Carolina, on March 1, 2003 at 2350.
According to the pilot, he was in cruise flight at 2000 feet, when he contacted Atlanta Center 
for flight following. Approximately 10 minutes after contacting Atlanta Center, the weather 
began to deteriorate. The pilot reported he entered clouds and was descending to 1200 feet 
were he believed it was clear. The pilot was still in the clouds and requested assistance from 
Atlanta Center. Atlanta Center cleared the pilot to make a 180-degree turn. The pilot reported 
the 180-degree turn, he became disoriented and collided with the ground.
Examination of the airplane revealed, the airplane came to rest in a stand of trees. The main 
fuselage and cabin area were buckled. Both wings of the airplane buckled back towards the 
vertical and horizontal stabilizers. No mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported 
by the pilot prior to the flight.
