The airplane sustained substantial damage when it impacted terrain while on approach to land.   
The pilot stated that he was a little high on final approach, so he reduced the throttle and 
lowered the nose.  He reported that when the airplane was 200 to 300 feet from the end of the 
runway, at a ground speed of 83 knots, the nose of the airplane veered to the left.  The pilot 
reported he was unable to realign the nose of the airplane using the rudder, and then the left 
wing stalled.  He reported he was able to get the wings almost level prior to the airplane 
impacting ground.  The airplane came to rest approximately 50 to 70 feet south of the runway, 
and 50 to 60 feet prior to the approach end of the runway.  Examination of the airplane showed 
control surface continuity.
The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control which resulted in the airplane stalling while on 
final approach.
On March 1, 2003, at 1810 eastern standard time, a Cessna T210L, N123JL, impacted terrain 
following a loss of control while on final approach to runway 25 at the Oakland Southwest 
Airport (Y47), New Hudson, Michigan.  The private pilot received minor injuries.  The airplane 
was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological 
conditions.  An IFR flight plan was filed, but was cancelled prior to the accident.  The flight 
originated from Traverse City, Michigan, at 1645.
The pilot reported that he flew the VOR-A approach, which brought him right over the airport.  
He cancelled his IFR flight plan and circled to land on runway 25.  He stated that he had a 
crosswind from the left, but the winds were light.  The pilot stated that he was a little high on 
final approach, so he reduced the throttle and lowered the nose.  He reported that when the 
airplane was 200 to 300 feet from the end of the runway, at a ground speed of 83 knots, the 
nose of the airplane veered to the left.  The pilot reported he was unable to realign the nose of 
the airplane using the rudder, and then the left wing stalled.  He reported he was able to get the 
wings almost level prior to the airplane impacting ground.  The airplane came to rest 
approximately 50 to 70 feet south of the runway, and 50 to 60 feet prior to the approach end of 
the runway.
A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector conducted an on-scene 
examination of the airplane.  The examination showed control surface continuity.
