The pilot and pilot rated passenger departed with the fuel tanks half-full.  They alternated 
flying duties while performing touch-and-go landings.  After three landings, the pilot 
positioned the fuel selector from the left main fuel tank to the right main fuel tank.  During the 
sixth approach, the pilot rated passenger was manipulating the controls.  While turning onto 
final approach, the pilot rated passenger reduced the throttle to idle and turned the carburetor 
heat off.  While on an approximate 1/2-mile final leg, the airplane flew below the glidepath and 
drifted to the right.  At the time, the pilot was looking out the left side and to the rear of the 
airplane.  The pilot rated passenger input throttle control to correct the descent rate, but the 
engine did not respond.  The pilot rated passenger alerted the pilot to the problem, and the 
pilot took control of the airplane.  He attempted a restart procedure, which included 
positioning the fuel selector to the left main fuel tank, verifying that the fuel pump was on, and 
cycling the ignition and throttle.  The engine did not restart and the pilot subsequently 
performed a forced landing into trees about 500 feet short of the runway.  The pilot rated 
passenger reported that his biannual flight review was expired, he had no flight experience 
within the preceding 12 months, and no flight experience in the make and model accident 
airplane.  Examination of the wreckage by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector did not 
reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.  The inspector stated that there was fuel in 
both main fuel tanks, the fuel selector, and the carburetor bowl.  Review of FAA-H-8083-3, 
Airplane Flying Handbook, revealed:  "The ability to estimate the distance an airplane will 
glide to a landing is the real basis of all power-off accuracy approaches and landings.  This will 
largely determine the amount of maneuvering that may be done from a given altitude.  In 
addition to the ability to estimate distance, it requires the ability to maintain the proper glide 
while maneuvering the airplane." 
The pilot-in-command's delayed remedial action when the airplane flew below the glidepath, 
and a total loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
On March 1, 2003, about 1455 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-235, N8547N, was 
substantially damaged during a collision with trees, while on approach to Westerly State 
Airport (WST), Westerly, Rhode Island.  The certificated private pilot and pilot rated passenger 
sustained minor injuries.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was 
filed for the local personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
During an interview with a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot stated 
that prior to the accident flight, all four fuel tanks were half-full.  He and the pilot rated 
passenger completed five touch-and-go landings to runway 25 at WST, while alternating the 
flying duties.  The pilot initially departed with the fuel selector positioned to the left main fuel 
tank, and after the third landing, he selected the right main fuel tank.  He further stated that 
the pilot rated passenger was manipulating the controls during the sixth approach.   
During an interview with a Westerly police officer, the pilot stated that the engine lost power 
on final approach with the pilot rated passenger at the controls.  The pilot attempted to switch 
fuel tanks and "throttle up," but the airplane struck trees prior to the runway.
During an telephone interview with a Safety Board investigator, the pilot stated that during the 
sixth approach, while on a base leg for runway 25, the engine lost all power.  The pilot then 
took control of the airplane from the pilot rated passenger.  The pilot verified the fuel pump 
was on and switched fuel tanks.  He cycled the throttle and ignition, but the engine did not 
restart.  The pilot subsequently performed a forced landing into trees.  
According to the pilot's written statement, the engine did not respond to throttle input while on 
final approach, about 1/2 mile from the runway.  He applied full throttle, switched from the left 
main fuel tank to the right main fuel tank, verified the fuel pump was on, and cycled the 
ignition key.  The engine did not restart and the pilot performed a forced landing into trees.  
During a subsequent telephone interview with a Safety Board investigator, the pilot stated that 
he could not remember which main fuel tank he switched to after the power loss.  He further 
stated that the tip tanks were not used during the flight, and the fuel selector was always 
positioned to a main fuel tank.
The pilot rated passenger reported to an FAA inspector that while on final approach for the 
sixth landing, he turned the carburetor heat off and reduced the throttle to idle power.  The 
airplane settled below glidepath, and drifted right of centerline.  He attempted to added power, 
but the engine did not respond.  The pilot rated passenger then notified the pilot, and the pilot 
attempted to restart the engine.  The restart attempt included positioning the fuel selector to 
the left main tank.  The pilot rated passenger further stated that his medical certificate had 
expired, he had no flight experience within the preceding 12 months, and no flight experience 
in the make and model accident airplane.  However, the pilot rated passenger listed 15 hours of 
pilot in command experience for the make and model accident airplane on an NTSB 
Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report form.  
A witness to the accident was in an airplane at WST, holding short of runway 25.  He heard the 
pilot of a Piper report base leg, and did not hear any further transmissions from the pilot.   The 
witness then observed the accident airplane on an approximate 1/2-mile final approach to the 
runway.  The accident airplane appeared to be low, and looked like it was going to land in trees.  
The propeller was turning, but the witness could not determine engine power or noise.  
Examination of the wreckage by an FAA inspector did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical 
malfunctions.  The inspector observed the wreckage in a nose down, near vertical attitude, 
approximately 500 feet from the approach end embankment of runway 25.  The left wing tip, 
including tip tank, had separated from the left wing; and the left wing had separated at the 
wing root.  The left main fuel tank contained residual fuel, and there was a fuel spill in the 
vicinity of the wreckage.  The right wing remained attached to the airframe, and fuel flowed 
from the right main fuel tank when the fuel cap was removed.  One propeller blade was bent 
aft, and the other was slightly twisted.  The mixture and propeller controls were found full 
forward.  The throttle was found about 3/4-inch from the full forward position, and the 
carburetor heat was off.  The fuel selector was found positioned to the left main fuel tank.  
Examination of the engine by an FAA inspector revealed that fuel was present in the fuel 
selector and carburetor bowl, and it appeared absent of contamination.  The muffler was bent 
smoothly with no cracks.  The inspector was able to confirm crankshaft and camshaft 
continuity. 
Review of FAA-H-8083-3, Airplane Flying Handbook, revealed:
"The ability to estimate the distance an airplane will glide to a landing is the real basis of all 
power-off accuracy approaches and landings.  This will largely determine the amount of 
maneuvering that may be done from a given altitude.  In addition to the ability to estimate 
distance, it requires the ability to maintain the proper glide while maneuvering the airplane."
The reported weather at WST, at 1453, was:  wind from 200 degrees at 8 knots, visibility 10 
miles, few clouds at 3,200 feet, overcast ceiling at 5,000 feet, temperature 37 degrees F, dew 
point 30 degrees F, altimeter 30.23 inches Hg.
Review of an FAA Carburetor Icing Probability Chart revealed "Serious Icing at Cruise Power" 
for the given temperature and dew point.  
  
