Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Northport, FL
Incident Number:
ERA09FA228
Date & Time:
04/03/2009, 1853 EDT 
Registration:
N509SR
Aircraft:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP SR22
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
Analysis 
About 10 minutes after takeoff, when the airplane was in level cruise flight, the engine lost 
power. The pilot performed a forced landing to a road, which resulted in minor damage to the 
airplane when the right wing impacted a road sign. An initial examination of the engine 
revealed a hole in the upper deck in the vicinity of the Nos. 5 and 6 pistons. Further 
examination revealed that both of the No. 6 connecting rod bolts were fractured. One bolt was 
missing the self-locking nut, and fretting adjacent to the bolt hole on the split-line face of the 
connecting rod indicates that the bolt was probably not tightened with sufficient torque and 
backed off the bolt. The bolt then likely backed out of its hole on the connecting rod, enabling 
the cap to hinge open, and the loading of the other bolt in tension and bending to the point of 
overstress. The connecting rod then separated from the crankshaft and punched a hole in the 
crankcase.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
Inadequate torque on one of the No. 6 connecting rod bolt retaining nuts, which resulted in the 
connecting rod™s separation from the crankshaft and a subsequent total loss of engine power.
Findings
Aircraft
Recip engine power section - Incorrect service/maintenance (Cause)
Personnel issues
Fabrication - Owner/builder (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA09FA228
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 3, 2009, at 1853 eastern daylight time, a Cirrus SR22, N509SR, incurred minor 
damage during a forced landing, following an engine failure, in Northport, Florida. The 
certificated airline transport pilot and the two passengers were not injured. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed. The airplane was operating on an instrument flight rules 
flight plan from Page Field (FMY), Fort Myers, Florida, to St. Petersburg-Clearwater 
International Airport (PIE), St. Petersburg, Florida. The on-demand air taxi flight was 
conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.
According to the pilot, about 10 minutes after takeoff, when the airplane was level at 6,000 
feet, he noticed that the engine oil pressure had dropped to about 28 psi. About 2 minutes 
later, the engine began to run "real rough," and the oil pressure dropped to 10 psi. Shortly after 
that, the engine quit, and the pilot performed a forced landing to a road. During the landing 
rollout, the right wing hit a road sign. 
A download of flight data revealed that the airplane took off about 1841; at 1850, the engine 
failed; and at 1853, the airplane landed. 
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The airplane was powered by a Teledyne Continental Motors (TCM) IO-550-N engine. 
According to maintenance records, total engine time was 1,707.7 hours since new. The build 
date was August 28, 2006. 
The latest phase inspection was completed on March 30, 2009, at 1,695.5 hours since new. 
There was no indication in the maintenance records that the number 6 connecting rod had 
been removed since the engine was new.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION  
An examination of the airplane revealed only minor damage to the right wing leading edge. An 
initial examination of the engine revealed that the upper deck was breached in the vicinity of 
the number 5 and number 6 cylinder positions.
 
The engine was subsequently disassembled and examined under NTSB oversight at the 
manufacturer's facilities. Examination confirmed that the crankcase was breached above the 
number 5 and number 6 cylinder positions. 
The crankshaft and counterweight assembly exhibited lubrication distress, thermal damage, 
and mechanical damage. The number 2 and number 3 crankshaft main bearings exhibited 
thermal discoloration. The number 3, 5 and 6 connecting rods were separated from the 
crankshaft journal, and the number 1 through 5 connecting rod bearings exhibited thermal 
discoloration and damage.
The number 6 connecting rod exhibited mechanical damage and was bent below the pin 
bushing. The connecting rod cap was distorted, and both cap bolts were fractured. The 
connecting rod bearing exhibited some mechanical damage, but no sign of thermal distress. 
One of the cap bolt self locking retaining nuts was missing. 
Page 3 of 5ERA09FA228
The oil galleys and passages in the left and right crankcase halves were clear and unrestricted.
With agreement from the NTSB Materials Laboratory, the number 6 connecting rod, piston, 
piston pin, and connecting rod bolts were submitted to the TCM materials laboratory (M&P 
Laboratory) for analysis. 
According to the laboratory factual report, which was reviewed by the Chief, NTSB Materials 
Laboratory, one bolt exhibited separation consistent with ductile overload below the splitline 
location. The self locking retaining nut was still in its original position on the bolt. 
The fracture surface of the other bolt exhibited "extensive" post-separation damage to the 
fracture surface, which occurred above the split line location on the bolt. There was fretting 
adjacent to the bolt hole on the split line face of the connecting rod, indicating that the rod cap 
and rod were separating and hitting for a period of time. The bolt also showed "extensive" 
thread damage. 
The hardness of each bolt and the one nut conformed to the manufacturing requirements.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
37, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/23/2009
Occupational Pilot:
Yes
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
5077 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1355 hours (Total, this make and model), 4526 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 148 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 60 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ERA09FA228
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CIRRUS DESIGN CORP
Registration:
N509SR
Model/Series:
SR22 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2180
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3400 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1707 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-550-N
Registered Owner:
SATSAIR LLC
Rated Power:
310 hp
Operator:
SATSAIR LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
J4PA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PGD, 26 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
15 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1853 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
110°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
8 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
23°C / 21°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Fort Myers, FL (FMY)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
St. Petersburg, FL (PIE)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
27.097222, -82.233611 (est)
Page 5 of 5
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Paul R Cox
Adopted Date:
03/16/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Robert Blake; FAA/FSDO; Tampa, FL
Jason Lukasik; Teledyne Continental Motors; Mobile, AL
Brannon Mayer; Cirrus Design Corporation; Duluth, MN
Douglas Duncan; SATSair; Greenville, SC
Publish Date:
03/16/2011
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
