This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Taylor, TX
Accident Number: CEN17LA003
Date & Time: 10/01/2016, 0925 CDT
Registration: N9704L
Aircraft: BEECH C23
Injuries: 2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On October 1, 2016, about 0925 central daylight time, a Beechcraft C23 "Sundowner" single-
engine airplane, N9704L, was destroyed after impacting trees and terrain during final 
approach at Taylor Municipal Airport (T74), Taylor, Texas. The pilot and the child passenger 
were seriously injured. The airplane was registered to Hybird, Inc.; Livingston, Texas, and was 
operated by a private individual as a 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight. 
Visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed and a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan 
had not been filed. The airplane was destined for T74 and had departed McCampbell-Porter 
Airport (KTFP), Ingleside, Texas.
Initial reports showed the airplane experienced a complete loss of engine power when about 
one-half mile from the runway. During the accident sequence both wings were impact 
separated at the wing root and the completely separated fuselage came to rest upright about 20 
feet from the initial tree impacts. The airplane was immediately involved in fire. The pilot 
removed the child passenger, exited the airplane, and walked to a nearby rural residence. 
Emergency responders arrived and provided aid to the two victims, who were then transported 
to the hospital.
At 0850 the KGTU Automated Surface Observation System at Georgetown, Texas, about 14 
miles west-northwest from the accident location, reported calm wind, visibility 10 miles, sky 
clear of clouds, temperature 17 degrees Celsius (C), dew point 12 degrees C, with an altimeter 
setting of 30.10 inches of mercury.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: BEECH
Registration: N9704L
Model/Series: C23
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: KGTU, 787 ft msl
Observation Time: 0850 UTC
Distance from Accident Site: 14 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 17°C / 12°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: Calm / ,
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.1 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: INGLESIDE, TX (TFP)
Destination: Taylor, TX (T74)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Serious
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Passenger Injuries: 1 Serious
Aircraft Fire: On-Ground
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: Unknown
Total Injuries: 2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude: 30.562222, -97.442500 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Thomas Latson
Additional Participating Persons: Frank G Fortmann; FAA San Antonio FSDO; San Antonio, TX
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
