National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Laurel, MS
Accident Number: ERA17LA005
Date & Time: 10/01/2016, 1020 CDT
Registration: N499TG
Aircraft: PIPER PA28
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The student pilot departed with full fuel tanks and flew to a nearby airport to practice takeoffs and landings.
In preparation for his first landing, he checked that the mixture was full-rich and that the electric fuel pump and carburetor heat were turned on.
The student pilot reduced power and extended the flaps; however, he realized that the airplane was too high and chose to go around.
The student pilot applied full power, retracted the flaps, and turned off the carburetor heat.
At that point, the engine started running roughly and experienced a total loss of power.
The student pilot turned the carburetor heat back on, rechecked that the electric fuel pump was still on, and switched fuel tanks, but engine power was not restored.
The student pilot made a forced landing to a field adjacent to the airport.
Examination of the airplane revealed the carburetor had flooded and was leaking due to a stuck float, which prevented engine operation.
The carburetor was removed and disassembled.
No anomalies were noted with the float or needle/seat, and the carburetor was reassembled and reinstalled on the engine.
The engine was subsequently started, and it ran with no anomalies noted.
The reason for the stuck carburetor float could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A total loss of engine power due to a stuck carburetor float.
The reason the carburetor float became stuck could not be determined because postaccident examination of the float and needle/seat revealed no anomalies.
The student pilot, who also the registered owner/operator of the airplane was not injured.
No flight plan was filed for the flight that originated at the Hattiesburg-Laurel Regional Airport (PIB), Hattiesburg-Laurel, Mississippi, about 1000.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the personal flight conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
The student pilot stated that he departed with full fuel and flew to LUL to practice takeoffs and landings.
Before attempting the first landing, he checked that the mixture was full-rich, and the electric fuel pump and carburetor heat were turned on.
The student pilot reduced power and extended the flaps; however, he realized the airplane was too high and elected to go-around.
The student pilot applied full power, retracted the flaps and turned off the carburetor heat.
At that point, the engine started running rough and experienced a total loss of power.
The student pilot turned the carburetor heat back on, re-checked that the electric fuel pump was still on, and switched fuel tanks, but engine power was not restored.
The student pilot made a forced landing to a field adjacent to the airport.
During the landing roll, the left main landing gear entered a large hole resulting in substantial damage to the left wing and an engine mount.
The left main landing gear and nose-wheel were also damaged.
Postaccident accident examination of the airplane revealed sufficient fuel in each wing tank.
Fuel samples taken from each wing and gascolator were absent of water and debris.
An attempt was made to start the engine on the airframe utilizing the airplane's own fuel system; however, when the fuel boost pump was turned on to start the engine, it was not registering any pressure and an odor of fuel was noted.
Further examination revealed the carburetor had flooded and was leaking due to a stuck float.
The carburetor was removed and disassembled.
No anomalies were noted with the needle and seat and there were no signs of the float rubbing or binding.
The carburetor was reassembled and reinstalled on the engine.
When the fuel boost pump was turned back on, it registered a pressure of 7 psi.
The engine was then started and ran to a maximum 1,800 rpm due to the broken engine mount.
The magnetos and carburetor heat were tested and no anomalies were noted.
The student pilot reported a total of 90 hours, of which, 60 hours were in the Piper PA-28-140.
His last Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) third-class medical was issued on September 30, 2016.
The student pilot also reported that the engine was manufactured in 1978.
At the time of the accident, the engine and carburetor had been operated for about 1,520 total hours.
Weather reported at the LUL, at 1035, was calm wind, clear skies, and visibility greater than 10 miles.
Investigation Docket: http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=94163
