The commercial certificated pilot was maneuvering to land his ski-equipped airplane on a 
snow-covered lake during a Title 14, CFR Part 91, personal flight.  The pilot reported that he 
and his passenger were scouting the area for a wolf hunt, and decided to land on a remote 
frozen lake.  While making a slight left turn toward the landing area, he said he encountered a 
windshear about 20 feet above the ground.  He said the airplane was configured with 20 
degrees of flaps, and the airspeed was about 45 mph.  The pilot indicated the left wing stalled, 
and the airplane descended, colliding with the surface of the lake.  The airplane received 
structural damage to the left wing, fuselage, and landing gear.  The pilot described the wind 
conditions as light and variable winds, with no gusts.  He also indicated that the wind shifted 
several times after the accident.
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed to preclude a stall while maneuvering, which 
resulted in an uncontrolled descent and subsequent collision with terrain.  Factors contributing 
to the accident were variable wind conditions, and an inadvertent stall.
On February 1, 2007, about 0945 Alaska Standard time, a ski-equipped Piper PA-12 airplane, 
N3233M, sustained substantial damage when it collided with snow-covered terrain while 
maneuvering to land on a remote lake, about 30 miles northwest of Glennallen, Alaska.  The 
airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) local area personal flight under Title 
14, CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.  The airplane was operated in visual 
meteorological conditions by the pilot/owner of Copper Valley Air Service, LLC, Glennallen.  
The commercial certificated pilot was not injured.  The sole passenger received minor injuries.  
The flight originated at the Gulkana Airport, Gulkana, Alaska, about 0920, and no flight plan 
was filed.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), on February 2, the pilot reported that he and the passenger were 
scouting the area for a wolf hunt, and decided to land on a frozen lake.  While making a slight 
left turn toward the landing area, he said he encountered a windshear about 20 feet above the 
ground.  He said the airplane was configured with 20 degrees of flaps, and the airspeed was 
about 45 mph.  The pilot indicated the left wing stalled, and the airplane descended, colliding 
with the surface of the lake.  The airplane received structural damage to the left wing, fuselage, 
and landing gear.
On the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) submitted by the pilot, 
the pilot described the weather conditions as clear, visibility unlimited, a temperature of about 
15 degrees F, light and variable winds, with no gusts.  He also indicated that he observed 
several wind shifts after the accident.
