The airplane received substantial damage when the right main landing gear retracted upon 
landing.  The pilot reported that when he attempted to lower the landing gear during approach, 
both main landing gear indications did not show a down and locked condition. After several 
attempts at recycling the landing gear, the pilot tried to use the emergency gear extension 
method, but both main landing gear indications were not down and locked. The pilot then 
contacted an individual at the airport who informed the pilot that his main gear appeared to be 
down. The pilot then attempted to land the airplane, during which the right main gear 
retracted.  Post accident examination of the landing gear system revealed no anomalies.
The undetermined failure of the emergency landing gear system and the retraction of the right 
main landing gear during landing.
On February 1, 2007, about 1615 mountain standard time, a Cessna 414A, N6631C, piloted by a 
private pilot, received substantial damage when the right main landing gear retracted upon 
landing on runway 25 (4,700 feet by 75 feet, grooved asphalt) at Dickinson - Theodore 
Roosevelt Regional Airport (DIK), Dickinson, North Dakota. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident. The 14 CFR Part 91 business flight was operating on an 
instrument rules flight plan. The pilot was uninjured. The flight originated from Billings Logan 
International Airport, Billings, Montana, about 1445, en route to DIK.
The pilot reported that as he neared DIK, he attempted to lower the landing gear. The pilot 
reported that he received a down and locked indication from the nose gear; however, both 
main landing gear did not show a down and locked indication. After several attempts at 
recycling the landing gear, the pilot tried to use the emergency gear extension method but still 
did not receive a down and locked indication for the main gear.  The pilot then contacted an 
individual at the airport who informed the pilot that his main gear appeared to be down. The 
pilot then landed the airplane, during which the right main gear retracted.
According the Federal Aviation Administration inspector,  an Airframe & Powerplant (A&P) 
mechanic with Inspection Authorization (IA) reported that the airplane was placed on jacks in 
order to cycle the landing gear system. The landing gear system operated normally, no 
anomalies were detected, and no repairs were made to the landing gear system.
