Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
RAYMOND, NE
Accident Number:
CHI00LA035
Date & Time:
12/02/1999, 1045 CST 
Registration:
N1756R
Aircraft:
Cessna A185F
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot performed a local maintenance test flight.  He said he had no intentions of landing on 
the water.  He got closer to the lake where he elected to land and double check the floats.  The 
pilot observed the shoreline through the right window to offset the glassy water conditions.  He 
said that the touch down was smooth, the plane yawed to the right, and the right float felt like 
it was being pulled out from under the airplane.  He stated he felt the right wing go down and 
the nose slam into the water.  The window was broken out and water entered the cabin.  He 
said he may of hit something in the water.  He said, 'If the right float shows no damage then I 
would use an educated guess that Pilot error should be considered.'  The logbook indicated .2 
hours of flight time in the accident type aircraft in the last 90 days and the logbook did not list 
any water landings within the last 90 days.  A Federal Aviation Administration inspector 
examined the airplane, the lake, and said, 'An on scene investigation of the aircraft and crash 
site did not indicate any pre-impact damage to the aircraft or amphibian floats.'  The float's 
landing gear was found retracted. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's lack of recent experience in the type of aircraft and type of operation, and the pilot 
not maintaining directional control.  A finding was the glassy condition of the water. 
Page 2 of 6CHI00LA035
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
1. TERRAIN CONDITION - WATER,GLASSY
2. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OF AIRCRAFT - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. (C) LACK OF RECENT EXPERIENCE IN TYPE OPERATION - PILOT IN COMMAND
Page 3 of 6CHI00LA035
Factual Information
 On December 2, 1999, at 1045 central standard time (All times CST), a Cessna A185F, N1756R, 
piloted by an airline transport pilot, was destroyed during a water landing on Branched Oak 
Lake near Raymond, Nebraska.  The personal flight was operating under 14 CFR Part 91.  
Visual Meteorological Conditions prevailed during the flight.  No flight plan was on file.  The 
pilot and passenger reported no injuries.  The flight originated as a local flight from Lincoln 
Municipal Airport, near Lincoln, Nebraska, at 1027.
In his written statement, the pilot stated that he had performed some maintenance on the 
airplane and decided to perform a local test flight.  He said that he recalled telling an air traffic 
controller that he had no intentions of landing on the water.  As he got closer to the lake, he 
said, "With the past maintenance work, Lake completely abandoned and good water conditions 
I elected to land at the lake and double check floats for leaking, Hydraulic leaking and inspect 
cyl for any possible oil leaks that could be occuring."  The pilot stated that he observed the 
shoreline through the right window to offset the glassy water conditions.  He said, "The touch 
down was smooth but after a short run as I started to reduce power the plane yawed sharply to 
the right followed by a feeling like of the right float being pulled out from under the ship and 
with in a split second I felt the right wing go down and the nose was slamed into the water with 
the window being broken out and a real shot of water entered the cabin."  The pilot said that he 
did not recall the airplane being cartwheeled.  He said, "I truely feel that I might have hit 
something in the water.  It seems that should be impossible in a lake like this but I feel that if 
there is damage to the right float then I am sure that the sharp Yaw to the right should be 
related to that damage.  If the right float shows no damage then I would use an educated guess 
that Pilot error should be considered."
At 1054, the Lincoln Municipal Airport, Lincoln, Nebraska weather was: Wind 220 degrees at 4 
knots; visibility 4 statute miles; present weather mist; sky condition scattered 2,100 feet; 
temperature 9 degrees C; dew point 7 degrees C; altimeter 29.75 inches of mercury.
The passenger said, "The weather conditions throughout the flight were calm, dry and hazy.  
The visibility was good enough that I was able to see across the entire lake and there was no 
wind blowing as we landed or when we were waiting for help to arrive."
A review of the pilot's logbook revealed .2 hours of flight time in the accident type aircraft in 
the last 90 days.  The logbook did not list any water landings within the last 90 days.
A Federal Aviation Administration inspector performed an on-scene examination.  The 
inspector said, "An on scene investigation of the aircraft and crash site did not indicate any 
pre-impact damage to the aircraft or amphibian floats."  The float's landing gear was found 
retracted.
Page 4 of 6CHI00LA035
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight 
Instructor; Commercial
Age:
62, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land; Single-engine Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Helicopter; 
Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/20/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
37000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 250 hours (Total, this make and model), 45 hours (Last 90 
days, all aircraft), 30 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N1756R
Model/Series:
A185F A185F
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
18502476
Landing Gear Type: 
Amphibian
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/11/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3100 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520
Registered Owner:
LAWRENCE W. BAUSCH
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
LAWRENCE W. BAUSCH
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CHI00LA035
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LNK, 1214 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1054 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
130°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 2100 ft agl
Visibility
4 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
220°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
9°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
LINCOLN, NE (LNK)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1027 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
 
Runway Surface Type:
Water
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Water--glassy
Runway Used:
0
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
EDWARD     F MALINOWSKI
Adopted Date:
11/30/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
JOE   HOLLIER; LINCOLN, NE
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CHI00LA035
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
