Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CORNING, AR
Accident Number:
FTW00LA067
Date & Time:
01/02/2000, 1800 CST 
Registration:
N87NF
Aircraft:
Piper PA-46-310P
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
5 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane was cruising at flight level 270 (27,000 feet) in dark night IMC, when the pilot 
heard a 'muffled thump,' from the engine.  He observed an 'immediate loss of power (torque 
0/ng 20%),' declared an emergency to ATC, and was advised of the nearest airport.  He 
attempted one air restart and two electrical restarts, but was unsuccessful. During the ensuing 
forced landing, the airplane entered VFR conditions descending through 5,000 feet, and came 
to rest in a field, in 3-5 feet of standing water, southeast of the airport.  A review of the 
downloaded data from the engine trend monitor and examination of the engine and its 
components by Pratt and Whitney did not reveal any pre-impact anomalies that would have 
precluded normal operation prior to the loss of engine power. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The loss of engine power for an undetermined reason.  A factor was the dark night light 
condition. 
Page 2 of 6FTW00LA067
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. (F) LIGHT CONDITION - DARK NIGHT
Page 3 of 6FTW00LA067
Factual Information
 On January 2, 2000, at 1800 central standard time, a Piper PA-46-310P, N87NF, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing following a total loss of engine power near 
Corning, Arkansas.  The instrument rated private pilot, who was the registered owner of the 
airplane, and his four passengers were not injured.   Dark night visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight, and an 
instrument flight rules flight plan was filed.  The flight originated from the Telluride Municipal 
Airport, Telluride, Colorado, at 1400, and was destined for the Dekalb-Peachtree Airport, 
Atlanta, Georgia.
According to the pilot, the airplane was level at flight level 270 (27,000 feet), in instrument 
meteorological conditions, and he was deviating around weather in northern Arkansas when he 
heard a "muffled thump" from the engine.  He observed an "immediate loss of power (torque 
0/ng 20%)," declared an emergency to ATC, and was advised that the nearest airport was the 
Corning Municipal Airport, near Corning, Arkansas.  He moved the condition lever aft, turned 
the igniter ON, and moved the condition lever forward to attempt an air restart.  The engine 
did not restart and the pilot attempted an electric restart, which was also unsuccessful.  The 
airplane then lost electrical power.  An electric smell was noted and the pilot turned all 
switches OFF.  He then turned the battery ON and attempted electric restart for the second 
time, which resulted in a "significant flame from the right side of the nose of the aircraft."  
Subsequently, he turned the firewall fuel valve to OFF and feathered the propeller.  The 
airplane entered visual conditions while descending through 5,000 feet and a forced landing 
was executed to a field where the airplane came to rest upright, in approximately 3-5 feet of 
standing water, 1.5 miles southeast of Corning, Arkansas.
An FAA inspector examined the airplane and reported that the left wing, including the spar, 
was structurally damaged.  The right main landing gear separated from the airframe.  Fuel was 
observed at the accident site.  The airplane was equipped with a 760-horsepower Pratt and 
Whitney (P&W) PT6A-34 turbine engine, that was installed in accordance with the Jetprop 
DLX conversion and included a Shadin Engine Trend Monitor (part number 913200-X-2).  The 
engine oil filter, engine chip detector, and fuel control unit filter were removed at the accident 
site and appeared clean and free of debris. 
Data from the Shadin engine monitor was downloaded.  The data revealed only one flight for 
January 2, 2000.  The data revealed that three hours and one minute had elapsed from the 
time the engine was started to the time when the engine lost total power.  The data contained 
12 reports during the flight prior to the report indicating the loss of engine power.  Each report 
indicated that the engine was operating within its limitations.  The data also revealed two 
additional reports following the loss of engine power.  The reports indicated that five minutes 
after the loss of engine power the engine restarted, and 10 seconds later failed due to an ITT 
temperature of 974 degrees Celcius (limit is 790 degrees Celcius). 
The engine (serial number RB0015) was examined at the Pratt and Whitney Canada facility 
located in Longueuil, Quebec, Canada, under the supervision of a TSB Canada investigator.  
The engine displayed no evidence of impact damage.  The compressor rotated freely by hand, 
the first stage compressor shroud displayed light circumferential scoring and some organic 
debris.  The compressor turbine shroud displayed circumferential scoring.  The combustion 
chamber displayed no distress and the flame pattern "appeared normal."  The accessory 
Page 4 of 6FTW00LA067
gearbox rotated freely by hand and continuity was confirmed to all accessory drive gears.  The 
ignition leads and plugs were functionally tested and no anomalies were noted.  The fuel 
system components including the heater, pump, control unit, divider, and nozzles were 
damaged as a result of being immersed in water, which precluded functional testing.  Each fuel 
system component was disassembled, examined, and no anomalies were noted.  The engine, 
controls, and accessories displayed no indications of any pre-impact anomalies or distress that 
would have precluded normal operation prior to impact.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/06/1998
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1900 hours (Total, all aircraft), 180 hours (Total, this make and model), 50 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N87NF
Model/Series:
PA-46-310P PA-46-310P
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
4608099
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/01/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
50 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
4300 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
P&W
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6A-34
Registered Owner:
JOHN H.CULBERTSON
Rated Power:
760 lbs
Operator:
JOHN H.CULBERTSON
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6FTW00LA067
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Night/Dark
Observation Facility, Elevation:
ARG, 273 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1820 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 200 ft agl
Visibility
6 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 2700 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
8 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
15°C / 14°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
TELLURIDE, CO (TEX)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
ATLANTA, GA (PDK)
Type of Clearance:
IFR
Departure Time:
1400 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class A
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
4 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
5 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
JASON      A RAGOGNA
Adopted Date:
03/02/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
CALEB   RICE; LITTLE ROCK, AR
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6FTW00LA067
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
