Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
MONTEAGLE, TN
Accident Number:
ATL00FA019
Date & Time:
01/01/2000, 1302 CST 
Registration:
N8821V
Aircraft:
Bellanca BL-17-30A
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Circumstances of the history of flight are not known.  The intended route of flight was not 
determined, a review of the Federal Aviation Administration Flight service system failed to 
disclose that the pilot had received a pre-flight weather briefing for the intended flight. The 
flight was first heard only seconds before the airplane collided with trees. Subsequent to the 
collision, smoke was sighted in the vicinity of the accident site. Upon arriving at the accident 
site, rescue personnel noticed that fog and low clouds were about 20 feet above the ground, 
and the mountain top was obscured. Examination of the engine and airframe failed to disclose 
a mechanical malfunction or the failure of related component assemblies. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to adequately evaluate weather conditions that resulted in the continuation 
of visual flight into instrument weather conditions and the subsequent collision with trees. 
Page 2 of 7ATL00FA019
Findings
Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING
2. (C) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) PREFLIGHT PLANNING/PREPARATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
4. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 7ATL00FA019
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 1, 2000, at 1302 central standard time, a Bellanca BL-17-30A, N8821V, collided 
with trees and burst into flames in a heavily wooded  area near Monteagle, Tennessee. The 
personal flight was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91 with no 
flight plan filed. Instrument weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. The 
airplane was destroyed; the private pilot and his passenger were fatally injured. According to 
the initial report from local law enforcement authorities, the flight departed Asheville, North 
Carolina, at an undetermined time, and the exact route of flight was not known. 
Reportedly, the pilot and his passenger spent the evening prior to the accident at a local hotel 
in Asheville, North Carolina. Circumstances of the history of flight are also not known.  The 
flight departed Asheville, North Carolina, at an undetermined time on the morning of the 
accident. The intended route of flight was not determined, a review of  the Federal Aviation 
Administration Flight service system failed to disclose that the pilot had received a pre-flight 
weather briefing for the intended flight.  
The flight was first heard only seconds before the airplane collided with trees. According to a  
witness near the accident site, he heard the airplane overhead followed by  a high revving 
engine sound and the sound of the airplane colliding with trees. Another witness reported 
hearing an explosion during the sequence of events. Subsequent to the collision, smoke was 
sighted in the vicinity of the accident site.  
Within minutes of the collision, emergency response personnel from surrounding counties 
were on site. According to Monteagle Chief of Police, upon arriving at the accident site, he 
noticed that fog and low clouds were about 20 feet above the ground, and the mountain top 
was obscured.  
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with airplane single-engine land, and instrument 
ratings. A review of pilot information from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), his total 
flight time was 400 hours but the approximately flying time in the Bellanca BL-17-30A was not 
determined. The pilot held a current third class medical certificate, dated August 10, 1999, 
valid with no waivers or limitations.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The four place Bellanca BL-17-30A airplane, N8821V, was owned and operated by  the pilot. 
N8821V was powered by a fuel injected, 300 horse power Continental Motors IO-520-K 
engine. A review of the airplane maintenance logbooks showed that the last annual inspection 
was completed on July 28, 1999. The airframe tachometer was not recovered at the accident 
site, however, according to the airframe maintenance logbook the last entry was recorded on 
December 24 1999, at 1916.5 hours. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A review of weather data from reporting facilities in the vicinity of the accident site showed the 
following observations:  The Chattanooga 1353 weather observation reported broken clouds at 
300 feet with 1.75 miles visibility: the altimeter setting was 30.15 inches of mercury. The winds 
Page 4 of 7ATL00FA019
were  light and variable. 
The area forecast for middle Tennessee at the approximate time of the accident called for 
broken cloud conditions between 2000 and 3000 feet, and visibility under the cloud layer 
between 3 and 5 miles. Marginal visual flight rule weather conditions were also forecasted for 
middle Tennessee.  
A review of the FAA flight service files failed to show that the pilot had received a preflight or 
inflight weather briefing.  
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site disclosed that wreckage debris was scattered over an area 
approximately 800 feet long and 60 feet wide. Wreckage debris was orientated on a 
northwesterly magnetic heading. Several freshly broken trees were scattered along the 
wreckage path. Fire damage was confined to the last third of the wreckage path. The main 
wreckage, which consisted of the cockpit and center section of the airframe, was heavily fire 
damaged. Further examination of the airframe disclosed that the airplane rested inverted at 
the accident site. Several pieces of the airframe including engine cowling were torn from the 
airplane and were scattered throughout the length of the wreckage path. Other wreckage debris 
was lodged in trees along the wreckage path. 
The engine assembly was located approximately 100 feet northwest of the main wreckage. 
Examination of the engine assembly revealed that many externally installed components were 
torn from their normally installed positions. Further examination of the engine showed a large 
hole on the top and front portions of engine case halves. 
The three propeller blades separated from the engine assembly. One propeller blade rested 48 
feet northwest of the main wreckage the second and third propeller blades remained attached 
to the hub assembly and was 39 feet east of the main wreckage. Examination of the propeller 
blades showed twisting and chordwise scraping  on each blade. 
The examination of the engine failed to disclose a system malfunction or a component failure.  
Examination of the remainder of the airframe also failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction 
or the failure of related component assemblies.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On January 3, 2000, a limited postmortem examination of the pilot was performed by Dr. 
Charles Harlan at the office of the Forensic Pathology Association in Nashville, Tennessee, The 
toxicology examinations were performed by the FAA Toxicology  and Accident Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The tests were  negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, 
drugs and alcohol. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was released on August 30, 2000  to Mr. Kevin Twist, an insurance 
adjuster, Atlanta, Georgia.
Page 5 of 7ATL00FA019
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/10/1999
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
400 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Bellanca
Registration:
N8821V
Model/Series:
BL-17-30A BL-17-30A
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
30345
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
07/28/1999, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3325 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
26 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1888 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-520-K
Registered Owner:
JOHN R. JACKSON
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
JOHN R. JACKSON
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7ATL00FA019
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
CHA, 682 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
30 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
300°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Unknown / 0 ft agl
Visibility
1.75 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 300 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
ASHEVILLE, NC (AVL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
JACKSON, IN 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1300 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
PHILLIP      POWELL
Adopted Date:
04/19/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
HAL   CUTLER; NASHVILLE, TN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7ATL00FA019
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
