Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Page, AZ
Accident Number:
WPR09LA480
Date & Time:
07/01/2009, 0930 MST 
Registration:
N1055V
Aircraft:
CESSNA R172K
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Abnormal runway contact
Injuries:
3 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that during a landing, the airplane touched down hard and bounced about 
10 feet into the air. During the second bounce, the airplane flew in a nose-high pitch attitude 
until the airspeed bled off, then the airplane touched down hard a third time. The pilot taxied 
to the ramp and requested that a local mechanic inspect the airplane for obvious evidence of 
external damage. The mechanic accomplished an external inspection without looking inside 
the airplane or removing the engine's cowling and reported no obvious external damage. The 
pilot continued her cross-country flight and, a few days later, concluded the flight and returned 
the airplane to the fixed base operator. Several days after that, it was determined that the 
firewall had been substantially damaged, consistent with a hard landing accident.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper landing flare and inadequate recovery from a bounced landing.
Findings
Aircraft
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6WPR09LA480
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On July 1, 2009, about 0930 mountain standard time, a Cessna R172K, N1055V, made a hard 
bounced landing at the Page Municipal Airport, Page, Arizona. The airplane was substantially 
damaged. Neither the private pilot nor the two passengers were injured. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a visual flight rules flight plan had been filed for the personal flight. 
The airplane was operated by Spitfire Aviation, Santa Barbara, California. The flight was 
performed under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91, and it originated 
from Kingman, Arizona, about 0700. 
The pilot reported to the National Transportation Safety Board investigator that Spitfire 
Aviation's management had authorized her to rent N1055V for the several day duration round-
robin cross-country flight. The pilot had previously rented airplanes from this flight school, 
where she had taken lessons from its owner and learned to fly.
In the pilot's completed Safety Board "Aircraft Accident Report," form 6120.1, the pilot 
reported that she had departed from Santa Barbara on June 30, 2009, with two passengers. En 
route to Nevada, the pilot's first landing was at Kingman, where she completely refueled the 
airplane. The following morning, July 1, the pilot continued the flight and flew to Page, where 
she made a hard landing. 
Regarding the landing, the pilot stated that no crosswind existed during the traffic pattern 
approach and touchdown. The airplane touched down on its main landing gear and then 
bounced 10 feet into the air. The pilot further reported that during the second bounce, she 
recalled that the airplane was in a nose high attitude before it bounced the third (final) time. 
The last impact on the runway was the hardest, and the pilot stated that she was shaken up by 
the experience. 
Following the hard landing event, the pilot communicated with a certified flight instructor 
(CFI) employed by Spitfire Aviation, the flight school from whom she had rented the airplane. 
The pilot requested guidance from the CFI regarding possible reasons for her hard landing and 
follow-up action regarding the airplane. The CFI provided the pilot with the requested 
information and guidance. 
The pilot requested that a local airplane mechanic look at the airplane before she departed 
Page to continue her cross-country flight. The Safety Board investigator interviewed the 
airplane mechanic. The mechanic reported that he performed a brief visual "walk-around" 
inspection of the airplane. His work was performed for the pilot on a gratuitous basis. The 
mechanic stated that he did not remove the engine cowling, and no work order was opened. 
The mechanic reported he informed the pilot that he did not observe any obvious external 
structural damage. However, he did notice that oil had been leaking from the engine 
compartment, and the airplane's belly was dirty. 
On July 4, the pilot concluded the flight upon returning the airplane to Spitfire Aviation's Santa 
Barbara fixed base operation. 
Wreckage Information
The aforementioned CFI reported to the Safety Board investigator that on July 13, he went to 
Spitfire's maintenance hangar where N1055V was located. The airplane's engine cowling had 
Page 3 of 6WPR09LA480
been removed. The airplane's firewall was found bent so badly that it had twisted some of the 
airplane's instrument housings.
According to the Spitfire mechanic who performed the initial structural examination for 
damage, major wrinkles in a "V" shape were noted on both the left and right side of the cockpit 
floor near the center pedestal, and sheet metal on the floor was deformed. The left and right 
side of the lower firewall was bent. The mechanic reported to the Safety Board investigator that 
the damage "was consistent with a hard landing event." The Safety Board investigator's 
subsequent review of Spitfire's records showed that replacement parts were ordered. The 
airplane had undergone a major structural repair that included repair of the firewall.  
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Airplane Operation and Repair
After the accident pilot returned the airplane to Spitfire Aviation on July 4, the operator placed 
the substantially damaged airplane back on its rental flight line. The airplane was subsequently 
rented.  
The Safety Board investigator interviewed the aforementioned CFI. The CFI stated that on July 
11 he had detected binding of the airplane's elevator control system but elected to fly the 
airplane with a student/passenger. After completing the flight, the CFI alerted management of 
his observations, and the airplane was removed from service to undergo maintenance. 
Spitfire's "Daily Schedule" and rental records indicated that N1055V was listed as being 
continuously in maintenance from at least July 13, 2009, through September 7, 2009.  There 
were no reports of other accidents or incidents involving N1055V between July 4 and July 13 
when N1055V entered maintenance. 
Contrary to a written insurance loss statement signed by the pilot on August 17, which asserted 
that the bounced landing event had occurred upon landing in Santa Barbara on August 12, the 
pilot informed the Safety Board investigator that she had not flown N1055V since returning the 
airplane to Santa Barbara on July 4. The pilot verbally acknowledged to the Safety Board 
investigator that the hard landing had, in fact, occurred in Page on July 1, and that the FBO's 
owner had required her to report that the accident had occurred on a subsequent date. (See the 
Safety Board's docket for additional information regarding the pilot's first reported date for the 
landing mishap, airplane rental records, mechanic's statements and ordered parts.) 
Accident Notification and Documentation
The National Transportation Safety Board did not receive notification of the accident pursuant 
to 49 CFR Part 830 from either personnel at Spitfire Aviation who observed the airplane's 
damaged condition, or from the accident pilot who had been informed of its damage. 
On October 20, 2009, Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) personnel received initial 
information from a former Spitfire Aviation employee that disclosed an accident had occurred 
that had not been reported. FAA personnel communicated relevant information about the 
suspected event to the Safety Board investigator. 
Spitfire Aviation's owner and its chief airplane mechanic refused to disclose to the Safety Board 
investigator information about the mishap. They refused access to airplane operation and 
maintenance records. As a result and after repeated requests for records, on January 22, 2010, 
the Safety Board issued Spitfire Aviation's owner a subpoena duces tecum.
Page 4 of 6WPR09LA480
History of Flight
Landing-flare/touchdown
Abnormal runway contact (Defining event)
Hard landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
33, Female
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/07/2006
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
07/26/2008
Flight Time:
194 hours (Total, all aircraft), 21 hours (Total, this make and model), 36 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 22 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 12 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 5 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N1055V
Model/Series:
R172K 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
R1722095
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/13/2009, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
57 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7464 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-K
Registered Owner:
WARNER AERO INC
Rated Power:
195 hp
Operator:
Spitfire Aviation, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6WPR09LA480
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PGA, 4316 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
31°C / 3°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Kingman, AZ (IGM)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR
Destination: 
Page, AZ (PGA)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0700 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Page Municipal (PGA)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4316 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
15
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5950 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
3 None
Latitude, Longitude:
36.926111, -111.448333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Wayne R Pollack
Adopted Date:
06/28/2012
Additional Participating Persons:
David T Voelker; Federal Aviation Administration; Van Nuys, CA
Publish Date:
06/28/2012
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75132
Page 6 of 6WPR09LA480
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
