National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Cloudcroft, NM
Accident Number: DEN04LA017
Date & Time: 11/01/2003, 1157 MST
Registration: N9864F
Aircraft: Cessna 172R
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane was flying through a valley when the pilot unexpectedly encountered rapidly rising terrain.
The valley that the accident airplane went through, gains approximately 3,000 feet over 5 statute miles.
The pilot was forced to turn sharp to the right and could not maintain altitude.
The airplane impacted into a heavily forested area, destroying the airplane and causing serious injury to the pilot receiving instruction and the flight instructor on board.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: the dual student's failure to maintain clearance from the terrain.
Also causal was the flight instructor's inadequate supervision.
Low altitude flight and rising terrain are contributing factors.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) ALTITUDE/CLEARANCE - NOT MAINTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 2.
(F) LOW ALTITUDE FLIGHT/MANEUVER 3.
(F) SUPERVISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) 4.
CLIMB - NOT ATTAINED - DUAL STUDENT 5.
(F) OBJECT - TREE(S) 6.
TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY Factual Information On November 1, 2003, at approximately 1157 mountain standard time, a Cessna 172R, N9864F, operated by Hesston College, was destroyed following impact with terrain during climb near Cloudcroft, New Mexico.
The commercial certificated flight instructor and private pilot receiving instruction were seriously injured, and a private pilot passenger received minor injuries.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The mountain flying training flight was being conducted under the provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91.
The flight originated from Las Cruces, New Mexico, at approximately 1100 and was en route to Roswell, New Mexico.
The airplane was one of three airplanes participating in a mountain flying training program.
According to the accident report submitted by the college, the flight was proceeding through a valley, en route to Roswell.
The terrain "rose up unexpectedly."
The valley that the accident airplane was in, rises approximately 3,000 feet in 5 statute miles.
According to the college, the airplane was unable to climb fast enough to clear the rising terrain.
The airplane turned sharp to the right but was unable to maintain terrain separation.
The airplane made a forced landing in a heavily forested area in Lincoln National Forest.
During the forced landing, the airplane impacted several trees, separating both wings and the left horizontal stabilizer.
The airplane came to rest inverted.
The calculated density altitude at the accident site was approximately 10,380 feet.
According to the Cessna Pilot Operating Handbook, the service ceiling of the C172R is 13,500.
The maximum gross weight is 2,450 pounds and the actual weight of the accident airplane was calculated to be 2,424 pounds.
Based on these conditions, the maximum rate of climb was 200 feet per minute.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
