National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Quantico, VA
Accident Number: NYC04LA025
Date & Time: 11/01/2003, 1415 EST
Registration: N41977
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-151
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot touched down on runway 02, which was 4,279 feet long, 200 feet wide, with an asphalt surface, about 500 feet beyond the approach end of the runway.
As he applied the brakes, the right brake "seemed to pull harder than the left," and he immediately released the brake pressure.
The pilot applied left rudder to compensate for the situation, and the airplane began to "fishtail" down the runway.
The airplane traveled off the right side of the runway, and impacted a concrete block, shearing off the right landing gear and damaging the right wing.
Examination of the airplane revealed no pre-impact mechanical deficiencies with the airplane, and no skid marks were observed on the runway.
The winds were reported to be from 190 degrees at 6 knots.
The pilot reported 89 hours of total flight experience, 5 of which were in make and model.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control during landing.
A factor was the tail wind.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND 2.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 3.
OBJECT - WALL/BARRICADE Factual Information On November 1, 2003, at 1415 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-28-151, N41977, was substantially damaged while landing at the Quantico Marine Corps Airfield/Turner Field (NYG), Quantico, Virginia.
The certificated private pilot was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the flight which originated at the Middle Peninsula Regional Airport (FYJ), West Point, Virginia.
The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to the pilot, he touched down on runway 02, about 500 feet beyond the approach end of the runway.
As he applied the brakes, the right brake "seemed to pull harder than the left," and he immediately released the brake pressure.
The pilot applied left rudder to compensate for the situation, and the airplane began to "fishtail" down the runway.
The airplane traveled off the right side of the runway, and impacted a concrete block, shearing off the right landing gear and damaging the right wing.
The airplane was examined by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector and substantial damage was noted to the right wing spar.
The inspector was unable to examine the right brake, due to the extensive impact damage to the right landing gear.
However, according to the inspector, no skid marks were observed on the runway.
Runway 02 was 4,279 feet long, 200 feet wide, with an asphalt surface.
The pilot reported 89 hours of total flight experience, 5 of which were in make and model.
Weather reported at the time of the accident included a few clouds at 20,000 feet, 7 miles visibility, and wind from 190 degrees at 6 knots.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 43, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
