National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lawrenceburg, TN
Accident Number: ATL04LA032
Date & Time: 11/01/2003, 1300 CST
Registration: N9929C
Aircraft: Luscombe 8F
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated he entered the traffic pattern for runway 17 at Lawrence County Airport, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
The prevailing winds were calm as the pilot made a 3-point landing on the runway.
On the landing roll out, a gust of wind picked up the left wing and the airplane veered to the right.
He put in opposite rudder correction but lost directional control of the airplane.
The airplane continued to the right, collapsed the left main landing gear with a side load, and the left wing collided with the runway.
No wind gusts were being reported at the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain directional control on landing rollout resulting in the airplane veering to the right and collapsing the left main landing gear with a side load.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: GEAR COLLAPSED Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
LANDING GEAR,MAIN GEAR - OVERLOAD Factual Information On November 1, 2003, at 1300 central standard time, a Luscombe 8F, N9929C, registered to a private owner, operating as a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, collapsed the left main landing gear on landing roll at Lawrence County Airport, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The airplane received substantial damage.
The private pilot and private pilot rated passenger reported no injuries.
The flight originated from Lewisburg, Tennessee, on November 1, 2003, at 1230.
The pilot stated he entered the traffic pattern for runway 17 at Lawrence County Airport, Lawrenceburg, Tennessee.
The winds were calm and he made a 3-point landing to the runway.
On the landing roll out, a gust of wind lifted the left wing up and the airplane started veering to the right.
The put in opposite rudder correction and lost directional control of the airplane.
The airplane continued to the right, collapsed the left main landing gear with a side load, and the left wing collided with the runway.
The airplane came to a stop.
The pilot and the passenger exited the airplane and observed the left wing spar had been bent upward.
The nearest weather reporting facility at the time of the accident was Nashville International Airport, Nashville, Tennessee.
No gust were being reported at the time of the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 54, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: Yes Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
