The pilot/owner's girlfriend stated that the purpose of the flight was to test the speed brake 
installed in the amateur-built airplane. She quoted the pilot as saying that during the first hour 
he owned the airplane, he tried the speed brake and it really scared him. He had since 
accumulated 70 total hours in the airplane and was going to try the speed brake again. 
Witnesses described watching the accident airplane taxi from its hangar and then listening to 
the pilot announce the takeoff, crosswind, and downwind legs of the traffic pattern over the 
Unicom frequency. Seconds later, the witnesses heard a voice transmit cries for help. Other 
witnesses were traveling southbound along a divided highway, adjacent to the airport, in their 
car. They noticed the airplane flying erratically, at low altitude, as it paralleled their course on 
the west side of the highway. The airplane then crossed the roadway in front of their vehicle at 
low altitude, and circled back towards them before striking the ground on the east side of the 
roadway, scattering debris across all four lanes in a westerly direction. The witnesses' vehicle 
drove through and over wreckage as their vehicle was struck by flying debris. Examination of 
the wreckage and its components revealed no evidence of preimpact anomalies. The airplane's 
builder assisted the pilot/owner with a complete disassembly and annual inspection of the 
airplane about 1 year prior to the accident, with no mechanical, performance, or handling 
deficiencies noted with the speed brake stowed or deployed. The pilot/owner did not express 
any concerns to the builder about the speed brake, nor the handling characteristics of the 
airplane with the speed brake deployed.
A loss of control in flight for undetermined reasons. 
On October 3, 2007, about 1818 eastern daylight time, an amateur-built Varieze, N8VE, was 
destroyed during collision with terrain after takeoff from Chesapeake Regional Airport (CPK), 
Chesapeake, Virginia. The certificated private pilot/owner was killed. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed for the local personal flight that was 
conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91.
In an interview, the pilot's girlfriend stated that the purpose of the flight was to test the speed 
brake installed in the airplane. She quoted the pilot as saying that during the first hour he 
owned the airplane, he tried the speed brake and it really scared him. He had since 
accumulated 70 total hours in the airplane and was going to try the speed brake again. 
In a written statement, one witness described watching the accident airplane taxi from its 
hangar to runway 5, then listening to the pilot announce the takeoff, crosswind, and downwind 
legs of the traffic pattern over the Unicom frequency. Seconds later, the witness heard a voice 
transmit cries for help.
In a telephone interview and written statement, a flight instructor stated he and a student 
joined the traffic pattern in their airplane, and heard the accident airplane announce takeoff 
and the subsequent legs of the traffic pattern, before he heard "panicked" cries for help over the 
radio. No further transmissions were heard from the accident airplane.
Another witness and his family were traveling southbound along a divided highway in their car, 
when they noticed the airplane flying erratically, at low altitude, as it paralleled their course on 
the west side of the highway. The airplane then crossed the roadway in front of their vehicle at 
low altitude, and circled back towards them before striking the ground on the east side of the 
roadway, scattering debris across all four lanes. The witnesses' vehicle drove through and over 
wreckage as their vehicle was struck by flying debris.
Examination of photographs from a news gathering helicopter revealed that the wreckage path 
was oriented westerly, and was about 300 feet long. The airplane and its components were 
scattered across the roadway, but the majority of the wreckage came to rest in a field on the 
west side of the highway. The Virginia State Police recovered the wreckage and moved it to a 
hangar on the airport, where Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors examined it on 
October 4, 2007.
According to the inspectors, control continuity was established from the cockpit area out to 
cable breaks, and from the breaks to their respective control surfaces. The cable breaks were 
consistent with overload. However, examination of some cables revealed flat spots, chafing, 
kinks, and looped strands. The cables were harvested and forwarded to the National 
Transportation Safety Board Materials Laboratory in Washington, DC, for examination.
Examination of the engine revealed that the wooden propeller blades were broken off near the 
hub, and the fractures were splintered opposite the direction of rotation. The engine was 
rotated by hand at the propeller, and continuity was established through the drive train and 
valve train to the accessory section. Compression was confirmed using the thumb method. 
Ignition spark could not be established due to impact damage to the electronic ignition system 
and the one magneto.
The pilot/owner held a private pilot certificate, with a rating for airplane single-engine land. 
His most recent second-class medical certificate was issued April 18, 2006. The pilot reported 
526 total hours of flight experience on that date. A cursory examination of his logbook revealed 
570 total hours of flight experience.
According to FAA records and maintenance records, the airplane was manufactured in 1986, 
and had accrued approximately 1,547.7 total aircraft hours. The airplane's most recent 
condition inspection was completed on June 27, 2007, at 1,544.7 aircraft hours. 
At 1819, the reported weather at Chesapeake Regional Airport included clear skies and wind 
from 110 degrees at 4 knots.
In addition to flight control cables, the propeller, fuel selector control, fuel selector valve, speed 
brake handle with cables, and the airspeed indicator were forwarded to the Safety Board 
Materials Laboratory, Washington, DC, for examination.
Examination of all components revealed no preimpact failures or anomalies. The propeller 
fractures were consistent with overstress. All cable fractures were consistent with overload. The 
fuel selector control and valve displayed no abnormal wear, and fractures were consistent with 
overload. Examination of the airspeed indicator did not provide definitive evidence of airspeed 
at ground contact.
The speed brake was described in the Varieze Owner's Manual as a "drag device" designed to 
increase the descent angle, and to slow the airplane during the landing flare. The speed range 
for deployment was 90 knots and slower. Above 95 knots, the speed brake panel would 
automatically close.
In a written statement, the airplane's designer explained that deployment of the speed brake 
initiates a low-intensity rumbling vibration, but does not affect the handling characteristics of 
the airplane. The speed brake creates only direct drag, due to its position on the belly of the 
airplane, and does not affect the airflow over any of the lifting or control surfaces. He added 
that a speed brake panel stuck in the deployed position above 95 knots would not adversely 
affect handling. He further stated that the airplane would climb with the panel deployed, but 
that a climb in this configuration required more power, and adversely affected engine cooling. 
The designer concluded that no owners or builders reported any problems or handling 
deficiencies associated with the speed brake.
The builder of the accident airplane accrued 1,500 hours of flight experience in it, before he 
sold it. He assisted the accident pilot in a complete disassembly and annual inspection of the 
airplane in June 2006. The builder then flew the airplane for about 30 minutes, and he noted 
no deficiencies in the performance and handling of the airplane, with the speed brake deployed 
or stowed. Further, at no time did the accident pilot express any concerns, or ask any questions 
about the speed brake, its deployment, or the handling characteristics of the airplane with the 
speed brake deployed, of the builder.
