During cruise flight, the engine suddenly started to run rough and backfire periodically.  The 
pilot attempted to troubleshoot the rough-running engine without success and decided to 
initiate a precautionary landing to a nearby road.  During the landing roll, the airplane struck 
two road signs and a barbwire fence, substantially damaging the left and right wings.  
Examination of the engine revealed that the number three cylinder exhaust rocker arm was 
disconnected from the cylinder due to the rocker arm hold down nut backing off.
The loss of engine power due to the separation of the number three cylinder exhaust rocker 
arm.
On October 2, 2007, at 1030 mountain standard time, a Cessna 172N, N6291D, sustained 
substantial damage during a precautionary landing subsequent to a partial loss of engine 
power near Green Valley, Arizona.  The two occupants, the private pilot and passenger, were 
not injured.  The aircraft was operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal flight under the 
provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91.  The airplane was owned by Tucson Aeroservice Center of 
Marina, Arizona.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.  The 
local flight originated from Marana Regional Airport, Tucson, Arizona, approximately 30 
minutes prior to the accident. 
In a written statement, the pilot reported that during cruise flight, the engine began to run 
rough and periodically backfire.  The pilot attempted to troubleshoot the rough running engine 
without success and initiate a precautionary landing to a nearby road.  The airplane struck two 
road signs and a barbwire fence during the landing rollout.  
Examination of the engine, by the Operator and a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
Inspector, revealed that the number three cylinder exhaust rocker arm was disconnected from 
the cylinder due to the rocker arm hold down nut backing off.  Review of aircraft maintenance 
records showed that 13.4 hours prior to the accident, the number one and three cylinders were 
removed to facilitate repairs to the cylinder hold down studs.
