Page 1 of 10
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
SEDONA, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX93GA195
Date & Time:
05/01/1993, 1115 MST 
Registration:
N201GK
Aircraft:
MOONEY M20J
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Public Aircraft
Analysis 
THE AIRPLANE WAS OBSERVED ABOUT 3/4 MI FROM THE APPROACH END OF THE 
RUNWAY WITH ITS WING ROLLED 90 DEG FROM HORIZONTAL. THE NOSE DROPPED 
AND THE AIRPLANE DROPPED VERTICALLY. THE AIRPLANE RECOVERED, APPEARED 
TO CLIMB, BANK SWIFTLY TO THE LEFT, ROLLED INVERTED, AND IMPACT THE 
GROUND. EXAMINATION OF THE ROLL SERVO REVEALED THAT THE AUTOPILOT WAS 
ENGAGED AT THE TIME OF IMPACT. THE AUTOPILOT CONTROL PANEL WAS 
DESTROYED. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
UNDETERMINED. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Page 2 of 10LAX93GA195
Factual Information
 History of the Flight
On May 1, 1993, at about 1115 hours Mountain standard time, a Mooney M20J, N201GK, lost 
control on final approach and collided with terrain short of the approach end of Runway 3 at 
the Sedona Airport, Sedona, Arizona. The airplane was destroyed by impact forces.  The 
certificated commercial pilot/owner and his passenger, a certificated commercial pilot, were 
fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time.  The pilot filed and 
activated an instrument flight rules flight plan to Sedona, Arizona.  The flight departed March 
AFB at 0857 hours.  The pilot later canceled the flight plan and continued to Sedona under 
visual flight rules.
About 1115 hours, a pilot of another airplane witnessed the accident. The pilot/witness was 
flying from Phoenix, Arizona, intending to enter the airport traffic pattern and land at the 
Sedona Airport.  At an altitude of 6,000 feet msl and approximately 1.5 miles south of the 
Sedona Airport, the pilot/witness heard the accident airplane transmit its position over the 
common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF).  The pilot/witness was looking for the aircraft in 
the traffic pattern when he twice saw an airplane with its wing rolled 90 degrees from 
horizontal about 3/4 to 1/2 mile west of the approach end of Runway 3.
The pilot/witness estimated the accident airplane's altitude at that moment to have been 
approximately 5,000 feet msl.  The pilot/witness described his recollection of the accident 
airplane's movement after he first visually acquired it, "like slow motion."  The pilot/witness 
stated,  "The nose dropped and the aircraft dropped vertically toward the earth, still in a slow 
motion state."
The pilot/witness further stated, " Just above the ground, the aircraft pulled out and started 
moving like lightning;  at this moment it was angling toward the base of [the] airport mesa.  
The wings banked rapidly to the right and appeared to be climbing, now paralleling the base of 
the mesa and still moving rapidly.  The wings then banked swiftly to the left, rolled inverted, 
and then split-S straight into the ground."  The pilot/witness indicated that he saw no dust 
cloud nor smoke.
The pilot/witness estimated the accident airplane's maneuver took 6 to 10 seconds.  The 
pilot/witness described that the motion of the accident airplane was so rapid in the last few 
seconds that it looked like a radio controlled model airplane.  The pilot/witness then made a 
transmission on the CTAF and flew over the accident site.
Pilot Information
First Pilot
The first pilot held a commercial pilot certificate which was issued on December 1, 1986, and 
was based on military competency.  The first pilot was an active duty member of the United 
States Air Force stationed at March AFB.  The first pilot performed duties as a 
standardization/evaluation pilot in C-12F (a Beech 200) aircraft. The most recent second class 
medical certificate was issued to the pilot on October 17, 1991, and contained no limitations.  
The first pilot's last military flight physical was on October 28, 1992.
Review of the first pilot's most recent military flight record closeout revealed his total military 
aeronautical experience consisted of 3228.8 hours, of which 86.5 hours were in the last 90 
Page 3 of 10LAX93GA195
days.  According to the U.S. Air Force, the first pilot's most recent pilot proficiency check was 
accomplished in a C-12 simulator on May 15, 1992, at Flight Safety International, Wichita, 
Kansas.  Also according to the U.S. Air Force, the flight proficiency check includes a review of 
high density altitude training.
According to the first pilot's civilian pilot logbook, his total civil aeronautical experience 
consists of about 297.2 hours, of which 131.7 hours were accrued in the Mooney M20J.  In the 
preceding 90 and 30 days before the accident, the logbook lists a total of 25 and 13.9 hours, 
respectively, flown in the accident airplane.
In the preceding six months, the pilot had logged 6.1 hours of instrument flight experience in 
the Mooney M20J.  The first pilot's civilian logbook lists eight flights since March 29, 1992, of 
which he flew four flights under instrument flight rules (IFR) logging all of the 6.1 flight hours.  
This does not include the accident flight where the first pilot filed IFR from March AFB.  The 
first pilot's spouse indicated during an interview that it was common practice for her husband 
to file IFR and practice using the aircraft systems.  When specifically asked about the autopilot, 
the spouse indicated, "He would use it, too."
The first pilot's log book also indicated that he had flown to the Sedona Airport on three 
previous occasions, twice in the accident airplane.  The most recent flight before the accident 
was on August 11, 1992, during a personal flight that originated from Flagstaff, Arizona.
Second Pilot
The second pilot held a commercial pilot certificate which was issued on August 17, 1990, also 
based on military competency.  The second pilot was also an active duty member of the United 
States Air Force stationed at March AFB.  The second pilot performed duties as a military pilot 
in C-12F aircraft.
Review of the second pilot's most recent military flight record closeout revealed his total 
military aeronautical experience consisted of 1,161.8 hours, of which 80.5 hours were in the last 
90 days. According to the U.S. Air Force, the first pilot's most recent pilot proficiency check 
was accomplished in a C-12 simulator on October 30, 1992, at Flight Safety International, 
Wichita, Kansas.
Aircraft Information
The airplane, a Mooney M20J, was manufactured in June 1977 and accrued about 2,394.6 
hours.  The weight and balance data for the airplane lists an Edo-Acre Mitchell Century IIB 
autopilot system, serial number 2B-1331, which was installed under a Supplemental Type 
Certificate (STC) at the time of airframe manufacture.
The STC requires an FAA approved airplane flight manual supplement, Part Number 68S424-
1, dated April 15, 1977, for Mooney M20J owners. The manual supplement outlines the 
procedures to operate the autopilot system.
The manual supplement indicates an autopilot runaway could result in an uncontrolled bank 
and loss in altitude.  The manual states, "An autopilot runaway, with a 1 second delay in the 
initiation of recovery, during an approach operation, coupled or uncoupled, could result in a 20 
degree bank and 40 foot attitude loss."  This equates to an average roll rate of approximately 
20 degrees per second and an average rate of descent of approximately 2,400 feet per minute.
In this circumstance, the pilot must electrically disconnect the system by either pulling the 
Page 4 of 10LAX93GA195
circuit breaker or pushing the roll ON-OFF rocker switch located on the lower instrument 
panel to the OFF position.
The manual supplement indicated the autopilot can be overpowered at either control wheel.  
According to the autopilot manufacturer, a friction clutch in the roll servo is set to slip at thirty 
two pounds of pull, plus or minus four pounds, allowing the pilot to overpower the electrically 
engaged roll servo.  (The pilot would have to continue to manually overpower the system under 
the electrical power was interrupted.)  The autopilot installation specifications do not require a 
control wheel mounted electrical interrupt switch.
The clutch friction is set by the autopilot manufacturer at the time of manufacture or when 
returned to the factory for maintenance.  According to the manufacturer, setting the friction of 
the clutch is only authorized to be performed at the factory.  Accordingly, the autopilot 
manufacturer does not publish the friction specifications in the autopilot maintenance manual 
used by repair stations.
Examination of the maintenance records revealed that the most recent annual inspection was 
accomplished on the airplane on April 2, 1993.  The accident flight was the fifth trip flown since 
the annual inspection, with the airplane accruing about 14 flight hours.  Review of the annual 
inspection checklist revealed the autopilot system was inspected, and a post inspection 
operational flight check was accomplished.  Additional maintenance was performed on the 
airplane's pitch trim switch and the stall warning horn was replaced.  There was no evidence 
found in the airplane's maintenance records to indicate that the roll servo had been repaired or 
replaced since the airplane's manufacture.
Meteorological Information
The closest official weather observation station is at the Sedona Airport.  At 1125 hours, a 
special surface observation reported in part:  Sky condition and ceiling, clear;  visibility, 50 
statute miles; temperature, 76 degrees fahrenheit;  dewpoint, 13 degrees fahrenheit; winds, 
330 degrees at 10 knots;  altimeter, 30.04" inHg.
Aerodrome and Ground Facilities
The Sedona Airport is owned and operated by the County of Yavapai.  The published elevation 
of the airport is 4,827 feet MSL.  The Airport Facility Directory lists the airport traffic pattern 
altitude at 1000 feet above the airport elevation with standard left turns.
The airport has a single surfaced runway on a 030 degree and 210 degree magnetic orientation.  
Runway 3 is 5,131 feet long by 75 feet wide, and is equipped with a visual approach slope 
indicator system (VASI).  The VASI consists of a two light box system installed on the left side 
of the runway.  The lights are pilot activated over the CTAF.  The VASI approach angle is set at 
3 degrees with a threshold crossing height of 53 feet.  The elevation of Runway 3 at the 
approach end of the runway is 4,733 feet MSL.
Wreckage and Impact Information
The accident site was located on the southwest slope of Table Top Mountain about 500 feet 
short of Runway 3, and about 300 feet to the right of the runway centerline.  The elevation of 
the accident site is about 150 feet below the elevation of the threshold of Runway 3. The 
airplane impacted the ground in a nose down attitude on an approximate 200 degree magnetic 
heading.  A six-foot wide by eight-foot long by one-foot deep crater marked the initial impact 
point of the fuselage. Shattered plexiglass was found down slope from the crater.  A linear 
Page 5 of 10LAX93GA195
ground scar on an 110 degree bearing from the upslope edge of the crater disrupted the soil for 
about fifteen feet.  Fragments of red position light glass were found at the end of the ground 
scar.  The linear ground scar was bordered within inches by trees or bushes along its 
longitudinal axis.  There was no evidence of damage to the upper branches of the vegetation.  
The lower branches directly above the linear ground scar were cut in a vertical plane.
The wreckage came to rest about fifty feet on a 220 degree magnetic bearing from the fuselage 
crater.  The engine was nose down pinning the propeller against the ground.  The fiberglass 
upper nose cowling separated from the fuselage at the firewall.  The fiberglass exhibited 
compression type impact damage to the forward left side of the airplane.
The propeller exhibited leading edge gouges in both blades that continued chordwise across the 
propeller chambered surface.  The propeller blades were twisted and displayed forward 
bending at the tips.
The fuselage was bent up about ninety degrees at the instrument panel. The empennage was 
bent to the left about 15 degrees just aft of the cabin rear bulkhead.  The nose gear was partially 
extended.
All fixed and moveable empennage control surfaces remained attached at their normal 
positions.  There was impact damage to the leading edge of the left horizontal stabilizer.  
Elevator and rudder control system continuity was traced from the control surfaces to the 
cockpit.
The pilot's instrument panel was destroyed.  The attitude indicator was detached from the 
panel leaving broken instrument glass and the attitude reference indicator face plates;  the 
altitude indicator housing was not fund.  The autopilot control panel was destroyed.  The turn 
coordinator was intact on the panel and indicated an inverted roll attitude.  The wings of the 
turn coordinators reference airplane were rolled left about 155 degrees.
Both wings exhibited impact damage to their respective wing tip leading edges.  The right wing 
remained attached to the fuselage and the left wing was separated.  Fuel was found in both 
wing tanks.
The right wing came to rest in a vertical position with the leading edge pointing up.  Fuel 
leaked from the fuel cap when it was loosened. The aileron panel and flap panel were attached 
to the wing.  The main landing gear was partially extended.
The left wing came to rest, inverted, with the leading edge facing upslope.  The flap panel and 
aileron separated from the wing.  The landing gear was found retracted in the gear well.  Fuel 
was observed in the wing when a fuel tank inspection panel was removed.  There was evidence 
on the ground that the left fuel tank had leaked some fuel, but about one quarter of the tank 
remained.
The flap actuator jack screw was extended, exposing about 3.5 inches of the jack screw.  Two 
limit switches were found intact about 3 inches apart.  The jack screw actuator had tripped the 
full down flap limit switch.  The flap actuator was connected to a torque bar which rotated 
moving lever arm connected to two control rods attached to the flap panels inboard by the 
fuselage.  The left flap control rod was broken consistent with the separation of the left wing.  
The right flap control system was continuous.  The right flap control rod exhibited compression 
bending.
Examination of the aileron control tubes from the fuselage to the aileron bellcranks at wing 
Page 6 of 10LAX93GA195
station 147.75 indicated both tubes were pulled along the wing's longitudinal axis.
The right wing aileron bellcrank was fractured separating the control rods from the bellcrank 
hinge point.  The portion of the right aileron bellcrank with the control tubes was pulled 
inboard through a sheet metal wing former.
The left wing exhibited leading edge damage along its entire span. There were two splits along 
rivet lines perpendicular to the wings longitudinal axis.  The first split was the first seam 
inboard from the tip.  The leading edge was open with the opening converging at the wings 
trailing edge.  The wing spar was exposed but continuous through the opening.  Diagonal 
buckling in the wing skin was noted to transcend the opening from the wing tip to 
approximately wing station 170. The second split was at wing station 148.  The opening was 
wider at the trailing edge than the leading edge.  The wing spar was separated.  The wing 
remained attached by stringers.
The left wing aileron bellcrank remained intact.  The two rod end bearings to the aileron 
control tubes were broken.  The two bellcrank stop screws were intact.  The autopilot roll servo 
pushrod remained attached to the aileron bellcrank by a 3/16 diameter steel bolt and was 
visible through the split in the wing.
The roll servo remained attached to the left wing by two metal brackets.  The brackets were 
bent as well as the base plate that provides the roll servos primary structure for attachment of 
the electrical components and drive mechanism.  The roll servo capstan was found rotated 
from the neutral position to an outboard position that corresponded to a full left turn limits of 
the capstan movement.
The pushrod was disconnected from the servo where it attaches to the roll servo capstan.  A 
3/16 diameter steel bolt that attaches the pushrod to the capstan was found broken.  The bolt 
remained attached to the capstan by safety wire.  There was no evidence of impact damage to 
the head of the broken bolt.  Marks on the face of the capstan indicated the bolt was bent 
inboard.
There was no evidence to indicate the roll servo pushrod was over center when the bolt was 
bent.  The nut, cotter pin and the end of the threaded shaft that attached the capstan to the roll 
servo gear train were not damaged.  It should be noted that the nut serves as the adjustment of 
the clutch friction.  A red paint stripe across the bolt and the threaded shaft in the center of the 
capstan was intact.  There was no evidence that the nut had loosened since the paint strip was 
applied.
There were rub marks on the face of the capstan and corresponding rub marks on the pushrod 
that indicated the pushrod was pulled inboard. The geometry of the marks corresponded to the 
direction the bolt was bent and to a full left aileron position when the pushrod was pulled 
inboard.  There was no evidence that indicated the friction clutch had slipped when the inboard 
pulling forces were applied.
A machine screw that holds an inspection access plate to the bottom of the wing was found 
touching the roll servo capstan's outer circumference edge.  Scratches were generally parallel to 
the capstans center shaft indicating the capstan had not rotated after the machine screw 
touched the capstan.
The roll servo was removed from the wing.  The capstan could not be rotated by hand.
Examination of the roll servo revealed that the gear train that transmits motion from the roll 
Page 7 of 10LAX93GA195
servo electrical motor to the capstan was engaged.  There was no damage found to any of the 
teeth of the gear train.  The engagement mechanism was traced to an electrical solenoid, which 
electrically engages the gear train.  The engagement mechanism incorporated a metal lever 
which was spring loaded to mechanically disengage the gear train.  The metal lever was found 
pinned in the engaged position by the bent metal base plate.  The disengagement spring on the 
metal lever was not damaged and was capable of operation. The base plate was marked by the 
metal lever indicating the levers position when the base plate was bent.
The metal lever was released from its pinned position and the spring mechanism pulled the 
lever to the disengage position.  The roll servo capstan then rotated freely.
Medical and Pathological Information
Post mortem examinations for both pilots were conducted by the Yavapai County Medical 
Examiner's Office on May 3, 1993, with specimens retained for toxicological examination.  
According to the Medical Examiner's report, the cause of death for both pilots was attributed to 
massive blunt trauma.  The post mortem examination indicated that there were no fractures to 
the hands of either pilot.
The results of the toxicological analysis for both revealed negative findings for routine drug and 
alcohol tests.
Tests and Research
Components of the airplane's aileron control system and roll servo were sent to the Safety 
Board's materials laboratory for analysis.  The metallurgist's report documented capstan 
damage and the fracture to the roll servo push rod bolt that attaches the push rod to the 
capstan. According to the metallurgist's report, the bolt "revealed fracture features and 
deformation typical of a bending stress separation."  The report also listed the direction of the 
bolt bending inboard relative to the capstan's installation in the wing and position found in the 
airplanes wreckage.  A copy of the Safety Board's metallurgist's report is included as part of this 
report.
Century II Maintenance Manual
The maintenance manual describes the basic operation for the autopilot system and lists the 
maintenance and troubleshooting procedures.  The manual indicated that the system controls 
both heading and roll. According to the manual, "The roll (aileron) engagement incorporates a 
fail-safe electrical engage and disengage mechanism in the roll servo which is operated by an 
ON-OFF switch in the console.  When this switch is only engaged, the autopilot is responsive to 
only roll axis outputs of the attitude gyro and the commands of the console roll/turn control."
The airplane's artificial horizon provides the roll reference signal for the system.  A console-
amplifier supplies reference signals to the artificial horizon which in turn supplies the autopilot 
system information concerning the airplane's roll attitude.  The manual indicated that this 
signal is the most important in the autopilot system.
The maintenance manual indicates loss of the roll reference signal from the artificial horizon 
will immediately be noted by the pilot.  The manual states, "In the roll mode full rotation of the 
Roll Command Knob causes the aircraft to roll in the direction of the command and establish 
and maintain a 30 degree bank angle.  However, without a roll reference signal the command 
would cause the aircraft to continue rolling until it was upside-down if the pilot did not stop it."
Page 8 of 10LAX93GA195
The manual further states, "Basically, the aircraft could still be flown with only the Roll 
Command Knob but it would require continuous manipulation since returning the Roll 
Command Knob to the center position would not return the aircraft ailerons to neutral.  
Remember, the Century II autopilot is an open loop system.  The only reference the autopilot 
has as to the position of the aircraft's controls is the attitude in which the aircraft is flying.
Loss of the Artificial Horizon roll reference signal can be narrowed down to four causes: 
defective Artificial Horizon; defective wiring (CD-18 to amplifier); defective Console Amplifier; 
or a defective Roll Signal Filter."
Additional Information
Wreckage Release
The wreckage was released to the representatives of the owner on September 21, 1993.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial; Military
Age:
33, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/17/1991
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
3526 hours (Total, all aircraft), 132 hours (Total, this make and model), 2154 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 111 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 49 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 2 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 9 of 10LAX93GA195
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
MOONEY
Registration:
N201GK
Model/Series:
M20J M20J
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
24-0218
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
04/02/1993, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2740 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
14 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2395 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-360-A3B6D
Registered Owner:
OLSON, RICHARD E.
Rated Power:
200 hp
Operator:
OLSON, RICHARD E.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SEZ, 4827 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1125 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
35°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
50 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 10 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
330°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / -11°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
RIVERSIDE, CA (RIV)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
IFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0857 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
SEDONA (SEZ)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
4827 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
3
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5131 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop
Page 10 of 10LAX93GA195
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
THOMAS     H WILCOX
Adopted Date:
12/02/1994
Additional Participating Persons:
GREGORY   ERICKSON; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
ROBERT L CPT CUSHING; GLENDALE, AZ
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
