Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lakeland, FL
Accident Number:
MIA03LA089
Date & Time:
04/01/2003, 1630 EST 
Registration:
N2652W
Aircraft:
Mooney M20C
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated he landed on runway 9 left and taxied west on taxiway "D". As he approached 
the intersection of taxiway "D" and runway 5-23, he encountered a ground marshaller waving 2 
orange wands. The ground marshaller was standing such that the left wingtip would clear him 
by 18 inches. The marshaller, who was facing east, began waving his wands and back stepping 
to the west. As the marshaller was positioned at the airplanes 10:30 position, he, the 
marshaller, turned 180 degrees toward the west and bent down from the waist. His back was 
toward the wing and his face was down toward the pavement. The marshaller continued 
walking toward the west and turned his head to face another marshaller. The pilot turned to 
face the direction the airplane was taxing. He then heard a loud bang and the airplane rotated 
to the left about 15 degrees. He immediately countered with right rudder and turned left onto 
runway 5-23 and stopped. He looked back and saw the ground marshaller on the ground 
parallel to runway 5-23, with his head facing the approach end of runway 5.The ground 
marshaller stated N2652W approached the point he was working, runway 5-23 and taxiway 
"D". The sign on the airplane indicated the pilot was going to aircraft camping. He signaled him 
through the intersection, straight ahead. He had eye contact with the pilot and the pilot 
acknowledged his signal. The ground marshaller stated he turned 110-130 degrees to signal the 
motorcycle rider that the aircraft was going to aircraft camping. At this point, he was struck 
and became unconscious. A witness stated the airplane was moving at a normal taxi speed as it 
approached the intersection of runway 5-23 and taxiway "D". The ground marshaller made 
signal contact with the pilot and determined the pilot's destination. The marshaller made a 90-
degree turn to tell the witness, who was on a motorcycle, where to lead the airplane. The 
ground marshaller's back was to the airplanes outboard left wing. As the airplane continued 
taxiing, the left wing struck the ground marshaller in the back, knocking him forward. The left 
wing then struck the ground marshaller in the back of the head, knocking him to the ground. 
Another witness stated the marshaller read the sign on the windshield on N2652W to verify the 
airplanes destination and then flagged the airplane on by. She heard the pilot give the engine 
excess throttle and then the airplane appeared to veer to the left. The marshaller had already 
began to turn and walk away when the left wing of the airplane hit him on his right side from 
the back. He was sent tumbling across runway 5-23.
Page 2 of 6MIA03LA089
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The inadequate visual lookout of the pilot and the ground marshaller resulting in the ground 
marshaller being struck by the wing of the taxiing airplane and receiving serious injury.
Findings
Occurrence #1: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: TAXI - FROM LANDING
Findings
1. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) VISUAL LOOKOUT - INADEQUATE - GROUND PERSONNEL
Page 3 of 6MIA03LA089
Factual Information
On April 1, 2003, about 1630 eastern standard time, a Mooney M20C, N2652W, registered to 
an individual, collided with a ground marshaller during taxi from landing at Lakeland Linder 
Regional Airport, Lakeland, Florida, while on a 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The airplane received minor 
damage and the private-rated pilot was not injured. The ground marshaller received serious 
injury. The flight originated from Sarasota, Florida, the same day, about 1545.
The pilot stated he landed on runway 9 left and taxied west on taxiway "D". As he approached 
the intersection of taxiway "D" and runway 5-23, he encountered a ground marshaller waving 2 
orange wands. The ground marshaller was standing such that the left wingtip would clear him 
by 18 inches. The marshaller, who was facing east, began waving his wands and back stepping 
to the west. As the marshaller was positioned at the airplanes 10:30 position, he, the 
marshaller, turned 180 degrees toward the west and bent down from the waist. His back was 
toward the wing and his face was down toward the pavement. The marshaller continued 
walking toward the west and turned his head to face another marshaller. The pilot turned to 
face the direction the airplane was taxing. He then heard a loud bang and the airplane rotated 
to the left about 15 degrees. He immediately countered with right rudder and turned left onto 
runway 5-23 and stopped. He looked back and saw the ground marshaller on the ground 
parallel to runway 5-23, with his head facing the approach end of runway 5.
The ground marshaller stated N2652W approached the point he was working, runway 5-23 and 
taxiway "D". The sign on the airplane indicated the pilot was going to aircraft camping. He 
signaled him through the intersection, straight ahead. He had eye contact with the pilot and the 
pilot acknowledged his signal. The ground marshaller stated he turned 110-130 degrees to 
signal the motorcycle rider that the aircraft was going to aircraft camping. At this point, he was 
struck and became unconscious.  
A witness stated the airplane was moving at a normal taxi speed as it approached the 
intersection of runway 5-23 and taxiway "D". The ground marshaller made signal contact with 
the pilot and determined the pilot's destination. The marshaller made a 90-degree turn to tell 
the witness, who was on a motorcycle, where to lead the airplane. The ground marshaller's 
back was to the airplanes outboard left wing. As the airplane continued taxiing, the left wing 
struck the ground marshaller in the back, knocking him forward. The left wing then struck the 
ground marshaller in the back of the head, knocking him to the ground.
Another witness stated the marshaller read the sign on the windshield on N2652W to verify the 
airplanes destination and then flagged the airplane on by. She heard the pilot give the engine 
excess throttle and then the airplane appeared to veer to the left. The marshaller had already 
began to turn and walk away when the left wing of the airplane hit him on his right side from 
the back. He was sent tumbling across runway 5-23.
Page 4 of 6MIA03LA089
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
48, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/22/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/20/2002
Flight Time:
1935 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1835 hours (Total, this make and model), 1759 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Mooney
Registration:
N2652W
Model/Series:
M20C 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3308
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2575 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-AID
Registered Owner:
On file
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA03LA089
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LAL, 142 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
1 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1650 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
360°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
25 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
50°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.32 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Sarasota, FL (SRQ)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Lakeland, FL (LAL)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1545 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
LAKELAND LINDER REGIONAL (LAL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
142 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
9L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
8500 ft / 50 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Minor
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
27.988889, -82.018611
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jeffrey L Kennedy
Adopted Date:
08/26/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Larry Enlow; FAA FSDO; Orlando, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA03LA089
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
