Witnesses reported that the airplane accelerated down the runway, and immediately after 
takeoff the nose pitched up, and the airplane stalled, rolled, pitched down, and impacted the 
ground nose first. A postaccident examination of the flight control surfaces revealed no 
evidence of mechanical malfunctions or failures that would have precluded normal operation. 
The forensic pathologist who performed the postmortem examination of the pilot reported that 
the pilot experienced a sudden cardiac event as a result of coronary artery atherosclerosis while 
piloting the airplane. The cardiac event is commonly associated with sudden unexpected death 
and would have resulted in incapacitation.
 
 
 
 
 
The pilot's inability to maintain airplane control during takeoff due to an incapacitating cardiac 
event. 
 
 
 
HISTORY OF THE FLIGHT 
On June 1, 2012, at 1059 Pacific daylight time, an experimental Westcott Prowler Jaguar, 
N125CW, impacted terrain immediately after takeoff at the Salinas Municipal Airport, Salinas, 
California. The airplane was registered to, and operated by, the owner/builder under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. The airline transport pilot was fatally 
injured. The airplane was destroyed and involved in a post-accident fire. Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and a flight plan had not been filed. 
According to the Monterey County Sheriff, witnesses reported observing the airplane accelerate 
down runway 26. Immediately after takeoff the nose pitched up, the airplane stalled, rolled, 
and pitched down, then impacted the ground nose first. A post-crash fire ensued.  Witnesses 
stated that they could audibly hear the engine operating all the way up to ground impact. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION 
The pilot, age 73, held an airline transport pilot certificate with an airplane multiengine land 
rating and commercial privileges for airplane single engine land. He held a third-class medical 
certificate issued February 8, 2012, with the limitation that he wear lenses for distant vision, 
and have glasses for near vision.  The pilot reported on his medical application that his flight 
experience included 20,000 flight hours and 75 hours in the previous 6 months.  The pilot's 
logbook was not located and was not examined by investigators. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION 
The experimental category tandem configured, low wing, airplane with retractable landing 
gear, serial number 0012, was manufactured in 2007. It was powered by a Rodeck V8 350-hp 
engine.  Airplane maintenance records were not located and were not examined by 
investigators. 
WRECKAGE & IMPACT INFORMATION 
The wreckage was located on the south side of runway 26 near taxi way D. A Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA) Inspector examined the wreckage and reported that all flight control 
surfaces were present and that the airplane had been consumed by a post-crash fire. 
Airport surveillance cameras captured the airplane's last few seconds prior to the accident. 
Camera 7 was located on the south side of the runway near the approach end of runway 26. The 
imagery depicted the airplane passing through the upper right corner of the camera's field of 
view at an approximately 30° angle climb at 1058:45, and exiting the frame at 1058:47. The 
airplane reenters the frame at 1058:49 in an extreme nose down attitude, impacts terrain at 
1058:54, and was immediately followed by a fire ball explosion. 
Camera 9, located on a building on the north side of runway 26, views the intersection of taxi 
way D and runway 26/08. The camera imagery depicts the airplane entering the field of view at 
1058:52 in an extreme nose low attitude with the left wing pointing towards the ground. The 
airplane rolls approximately 90° to its left and impacts the terrain inverted nose first 2 seconds 
later.  A fireball explosion immediately follows. 
MEDICAL & PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION 
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on June 4, 2012, by the Monterey County Forensic 
Pathologist, at the Monterey County Coroner Facility, Salinas, California.  The pathologist's 
summary stated that the pilot most likely died  suddenly as a result of coronary artery 
atherosclerosis (heart attack due to hardening and narrowing of arteries that supply the heart 
muscle), commonly associated with sudden unexpected death. No rapidly fatal injuries 
sustained in the airplane crash were observed at autopsy. 
The FAA's Forensic Toxicology Research Team CAMI performed forensic toxicology on 
specimens from the pilot. The following results were reported; no carbon monoxide detected in 
blood, no cyanide detected in blood, no ethanol detected in vitreous, and no listed drugs 
identified in urine.
