The pilot reported that, during an introductory flight, he was conducting a 2-foot hover in the 
helicopter. An airplane started to taxi in front of the helicopter, so the pilot set the helicopter 
back down on the ground, left skid first and then the right. The helicopter drifted right as the 
skid made contact, and the pilot added left cyclic input to remedy the drift as he also lowered 
the collective. As the skids started to settle apart, the pilot noticed a low frequency vibration 
that immediately got worse. He determined that the helicopter was entering ground resonance, 
but the engine and collective parameters were too low to lift the helicopter off of the ground, as 
indicated in the helicopter's operating procedures. The pilot reduced the throttle to idle and 
"within seconds, the helicopter had shaken itself apart." 
Postaccident testing revealed that all four landing gear dampers failed to meet the 
manufacturer's serviceable testing specifications, and two dampers were overcharged. 
Maintenance records indicated that the front dampers had been replaced with overhauled units 
about 10 months and about 534 flight hours before the accident. The aft dampers had been 
replaced with overhauled units about 7 months and about 280 flight hours before the accident. 
A review of the manufacturer's overhaul procedure for the landing gear dampers revealed that 
the procedure used by the overhaul facility did not include functional testing of the dampers 
following overhaul, which would have identified the out-of-specification condition before 
installation. Maintenance procedures required periodic inspection of the landing gear 
dampers, and the operator stated that the 100-hour inspection procedure was accomplished 
about 1 month before the accident. The mechanic who accomplished this inspection reported 
that he used the manufacturer's procedures to complete the inspection. However, the out-of-
specification damper conditions were not detected. 
As a result of this and a similar accident (CEN12LA353), the helicopter manufacturer has 
committed to revising the overhaul manual to include testing procedures and criteria for 
overhauled landing gear dampers.
The inadequately overhauled landing gear dampers that allowed initiation of a ground 
resonance event from which the pilot was unable to recover. Contributing to the accident was 
the overhaul facility's failure to identify the overcharged dampers and a lack of any published 
acceptance testing criteria for the dampers in the manufacturer's overhaul procedure manual, 
resulting in the out-of-specification dampers being provided to the operator. Also contributing 
was the ineffective damper inspection conducted by the operator's maintenance personnel.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 2, 2012, about 1135 mountain daylight time, a Schweizer 269C helicopter, N2196F, 
entered ground resonance when it set down on the ramp at the Rocky Mountain Metropolitan 
Airport (BJC), near Denver, Colorado. The commercial pilot and the passenger were uninjured. 
The helicopter sustained substantial damage to its tail boom during the ground resonance. The 
helicopter was registered to Top Flight Rotors LLC and operated by TYJ Global under the 
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as an instructional flight. Day visual flight 
rules (VFR) conditions prevailed for the flight, which operated on a company VFR flight plan. 
The local flight was originating from BJC at the time of the accident.
The pilot reported that the flight was an introductory discovery flight for his student passenger. 
The pilot indicated that he picked the helicopter up into a two-foot skid height hover. An 
airplane started to taxi in front of the helicopter. The pilot, in part, stated:
To avoid my downwash disturbing the airplane, or his prop wash from 
disturbing me, I set the helicopter back onto the ground as a courtesy. I 
set down the left skid first and then the right, utilizing a two point touch 
down. When the right skid made contact, the helicopter tried to drift to 
the right. I put slight left cyclic input in to keep the helicopter from 
drifting to the right as I lowered collective. As I lowered the collective fully 
and the skids started to settle apart, I noticed a slight low frequency 
vibration. Immediately, the vibration got worse, and I determined the 
helicopter was in the beginning phase of ground resonance. My engine 
RPM was too low, as was my collective, to pick the helicopter up off the 
ground to restore the rotor blades to their correct phase in time. With 
the collective full down, I rolled the throttle to idle to try and get rid of 
ground resonance. Within seconds, the helicopter had shaken itself apart.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) commercial pilot certificate with 
rotorcraft helicopter and instrument helicopter ratings. He also held a Flight Instructor 
certificate with rotorcraft helicopter and instrument helicopter ratings. The pilot was issued a 
second-class FAA airman medical certificate, which listed no limitations, on January 3, 2012. 
The operator reported that the pilot had accumulated 259 hours of total flight time and 212 
hours of flight time in the same make and model as the accident helicopter.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N2196F, was a 1994 Schweizer 269C helicopter with serial number S1647. The helicopter was 
equipped with fixed skids for landing gear and was configured for two occupants. The 
helicopter was powered by a direct drive, horizontally opposed, fuel injected, air-cooled, four-
cylinder engine. The engine was a Lycoming HIO-360-D1A, serial number L-26088-51A, and 
was driving a three-blade main rotor assembly.
The maintenance records noted that the front landing gear struts were replaced at a Hobbs 
time of 1185.6 on August 8, 2011, and the rear landing gear struts were replaced at a Hobbs 
time of 1439.7 on November 14, 2011.
The helicopter manufacturer's maintenance procedures require that the forward and aft 
landing gear dampers are checked for operation, condition, and extension at each 100 hour 
inspection. In the event that the dampers do not meet the extension requirements, the 
dampers must be repaired or recharged.
The helicopter's most recent inspection was a 100-hour inspection, which was completed on 
May 17, 2012. According to the operator, the helicopter had accumulated 1,720 hours of total 
flight time at the time of the accident.
The mechanic who performed the 100-hour inspection stated that the periodic inspection 
procedure specified in maintenance manual was used to complete the inspection of the 
dampers and all measurements were found to be within limits.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
At 1050, the recorded weather at BJC was: wind variable at 4 knots; visibility 50 statute miles; 
sky condition scattered 7,000 feet, scattered 20,000 feet; temperature 23 degrees C; dew point 
4degrees C; altimeter 30.00 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The helicopter came to rest upright, located on a parking pad adjacent to a taxiway at BJC. The 
helicopter sustained damage to the main rotor blades and tail rotor blades. The tail boom 
sustained damage at its aft end consistent with a main rotor strike with it. The main rotor mast 
separated from its upper aft fuselage structure and the mast came to rest behind and to the left 
of the fuselage as viewed from the tail rotor looking forward. A postaccident examination 
conducted by FAA inspectors did not reveal any preimpact mechanical failures or 
malfunctions.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The pilot's postaccident toxicology testing was negative for the tests performed.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
On July 3, 2012, testing was conducted on the landing skid dampers at the manufacturer's 
facilities under supervision of a FAA Rochester Flight Standards District Office representative. 
During testing, a specified load profile is applied to the subject damper and the resulting 
displacement (stoke) is measured. The load vs. displacement profile is compared to a 
specification in order to determine the status of the damper.
The damper identified as left forward, part number 269A3150-19, serial number HT13324-1, 
was intact with minor bending to the upper bearing lug. The load stroke test showed that it was 
out of limits on the compression stroke at the lower pressure test point. It was within the 
ultimate load range.
The damper identified as right forward, part number 269A3150-19, serial number HT13324-2, 
was intact with no obvious damage or leakage. The load stroke test showed that it was out of 
limits on the compression stroke at the lower pressure test point. It was within the ultimate 
load range.
The damper identified as left rear, part number 269A3150-21, serial number HT13443-1, was 
intact. The load stroke test indicated a high out of limits condition at the ultimate load point.
The damper identified as right rear, part number 269A3150-21, serial number HT13443-2, was 
intact and exhibited a dent in the lower barrel. The load stroke test indicated a bulge in the plot 
on the chart consistent with barrel diameter change due to the dent. This damper failed the test 
due to a high ultimate load point.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA Rotorcraft Flying Handbook noted that ground resonance develops when the rotor 
blades move out of phase with each other and cause the rotor disc to become unbalanced. This 
can occur when a helicopter touches down firmly on one corner of the landing gear (skid). This 
condition can lead to a violent, uncontrollable oscillation. In the event that the rotor speed is 
low, the corrective action to stop ground resonance is to close the throttle immediately and 
fully lower the collective to place the blades in low pitch. On the other hand, if the rotor speed 
is in the normal operating range, the helicopter should be brought off the ground into a hover 
to allow the blades to automatically realign.
The helicopter manufacturer issued a safety advisory, dated February 22, 2012, regarding 
ground resonance events. The advisory noted that landing gear dampers act to slow airframe 
rocking motion, which may be initiated by a pronounced ground contact on one landing skid. 
The advisory warned that ground resonance can occur when landing dampers do not meet 
design specifications and that helicopters are to be maintained in accordance with current 
maintenance manuals.
The maintenance manual overhaul procedure for the landing gear dampers, current at the time 
of the accident, provided for the inspection, cleaning, reassembly, and recharging of the 
components. The overhaul procedure did not provide for functional/operational testing of the 
dampers following overhaul. The procedure noted that incorrect fluid levels, improper 
pressure, or inoperable valve function will reduce the effectiveness of the dampers and may 
lead to ground resonance.
A representative of the repair station that overhauled the accident dampers stated that the 
steps and procedures called out in the helicopter's maintenance manuals are what are followed 
when overhauling or repairing these dampers. Every step during the repair/overhaul process is 
monitored by a trained and experienced mechanic and an experienced inspector. He further 
indicated that nowhere within any of the manuals is there a provision, requirement, or any 
instructions, as to performing a "Test" on any overhauled damper.
