The private pilot and one passenger departed from a lake on a personal cross country flight. 
During the pilot™s preflight check, he noted that the right wing fuel tank contained about 32 
gallons of fuel, and the left wing fuel tank contained about 5 gallons of fuel. About 8 miles 
south of the departure lake, at an altitude of about 2,000 feet mean sea level, the airplane™s 
engine lost power. The pilot said that he turned on the fuel boost pump, and the engine rpm 
rose momentarily but dropped again. He stated that he did not recall checking the fuel selector 
valve as part of his emergency restart procedures. He executed a forced landing in a marsh.
The pilot stated that he always operated the airplane with the fuel selector valve in the ﬁBoth 
Tanks Onﬂ position; however, a postaccident inspection of the airplane revealed that the 
airplane™s fuel selector valve was in the ﬁLeft Tank Onlyﬂ position. A postaccident engine run 
revealed no mechanical anomalies with the engine, and it operated normally at all power 
settings. An annual inspection of the airplane was completed on May 20, 2012, and the 
airplane had flown approximately four hours since the inspection.
Both the normal ﬁBefore Takeoffﬂ and the ﬁEmergency Landing without Engine Powerﬂ 
checklists direct the pilot to check the fuel selector valve position. Given the lack of mechanical 
deficiencies with the airplane's engine and the discovery of the fuel selector valve in the ﬁLeft 
Tank Onlyﬂ position, it is likely that the pilot did not check the fuel selector valve either during 
his preflight or after the loss of engine power. Considering the amount of fuel noted in the left 
wing fuel tank during the pilot™s preflight, it is also likely that the engine lost power due to fuel 
starvation.
The pilot's improper fuel management, which resulted in fuel starvation and a total loss of 
engine power in cruise flight. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's failure to follow the 
checklist after the loss of engine power.
On June 1, 2012, about 1600 Alaska daylight time, a float-equipped Cessna A185F airplane, 
N1795R, sustained substantial damage during a forced landing, following a loss of engine 
power, near Skwentna, Alaska. The private pilot and sole passenger were not injured. The flight 
was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) personal cross-country flight under the 
provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 when the accident occurred. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and a VFR flight plan was filed and active. The flight 
originated from a private lake about 1545, and was destined to Anchorage, Alaska.
In a telephone interview with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-
in-charge (IIC), the pilot stated that after departure, about 8 miles south of the lake, at an 
altitude of approximately 2,000 feet mean sea level, the engine RPM began to drop. He turned 
on the auxiliary fuel boost pump, and the engine RPM rose briefly, but then dropped again. 
Unable to restart the engine, he selected an area of sparsely treed marsh, and executed an 
emergency approach and landing. Upon landing, the left wing contacted trees, sustaining 
substantial damage. 
He stated that he did not remember checking the fuel selector valve as part of his emergency 
restart procedures.
The pilot said that during preflight, he noted that the right wing fuel tank contained about 32 
gallons of fuel, and the left wing fuel tank held about 5 gallons. He said that he always flies the 
airplane with the fuel selector valve in the "Both Tanks" position. However, during a 
postaccident inspection by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the fuel selector 
valve was found in the "Left Tank Only" position. No other preaccident mechanical anomalies 
were found during the inspection, and the inspector was able to drain approximately one gallon 
of fuel from the left wing fuel tank.
The manufacturer's published procedures in the Pilot's Operating Handbook, Section I - 
Valve (if installed) -- BOTH ON.ﬂ
The manufacturer™s published procedures in the Pilot's Operating Handbook, Section III - 
POWER checklist states, "If an engine stoppage occurs, establish a flaps up glide at 80 MPH.  If 
time permits, attempt to restart the engine by checking for fuel quantity, proper fuel selector 
valve position, and mixture control setting."  
A postaccident engine run was performed by the pilot's mechanic. The engine was operated 
approximately eight minutes at cruise power, with the fuel still remaining in the airplane's left 
wing fuel tank. The engine ran normally for the entire run. After the engine run, the mechanic 
drained approximately one additional gallon of fuel from the left wing fuel tank.
According to the pilot, the airplane had been flown approximately four hours total since it's last 
annual inspection was completed on May 20.
