This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: Cleveland, OH
Accident Number: CEN18LA094
Date & Time: 02/04/2018, 1924 EST
Registration: N570TM
Aircraft: RAYTHEON AIRCRAFT COMPANY
400A
Injuries: 4 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
On February 4, 2018, about 1924 eastern standard time (EST), a Raytheon (Hawker) 400A 
airplane, N570TM, overran the end of the runway, after landing at the Burke Lakefront Airport 
(KBKL) Cleveland, Ohio. The two airline transport rated pilots and the two passengers were 
not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The airplane was registered to 
Aircraft Holding Company One, LLC, and operated by Traffic Management Company, LLC 
under the provisions of 14 
Code of Federal Regulations
 Part 135 as an on-demand air taxi 
flight. Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and the flight on an 
instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan. The flight originated from the Teterboro Airport 
(KTEB), Teterboro, New Jersey about 1804 EST. 
The pilots reported to the responding Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, that 
they abandoned the first approach to the airport, due to the wind and vectors from the air 
traffic controller. They then conducted a straight in approach to runway 24R and landed in the 
touch down zone. They added that they applied maximum braking, but the airplane did not 
slow down enough, and skidded off the runway into the EMAS (Engineered Material Arresting 
System). An initial damage assessment of the airplane indicated substantial damage to the 
fuselage and a collapsed nose gear.
At 1900, the weather observation facility located at KBKL recorded: wind from 330째at 15 knots 
gusting to 25 knots, 4 miles visibility in mist, an overcast sky at 700 ft, a temperature of 28 
degrees F, dew point 25 degrees F, and an altimeter setting of 29.80.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: RAYTHEON AIRCRAFT
COMPANY
Registration: N570TM
Model/Series: 400A NO SERIES
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: Travel Management, Inc
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: Commuter Air Carrier (135)
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Instrument Conditions
Condition of Light: Dusk
Observation Facility, Elevation: KBKL
Observation Time: 1900 EST
Distance from Accident Site:
Temperature/Dew Point: -2째C / -4째C
Lowest Cloud Condition: 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 15 knots / 25 knots, 330째
Lowest Ceiling: Overcast / 700 ft agl
Visibility: 4 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 29.8 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: IFR
Departure Point: Teterboro, NJ (KTEB)
Destination: Cleveland, OH (KBKL)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 2 None
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Passenger Injuries: 2 None
Aircraft Fire: None
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 4 None
Latitude, Longitude: 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Craig Hatch
Additional Participating Persons: Rob Kaman; FAA FSDO; Cleveland, OH
Note: The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
