Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Philip, SD
Accident Number:
CEN12FA001
Date & Time:
10/01/2011, 1255 MDT 
Registration:
N266CY
Aircraft:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER CO R66
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Unknown or undetermined
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The helicopter was on a cross-country flight when it experienced a separation of the main rotor 
mast 8 inches below the teeter bolt, and the main rotor blade assembly separated from the 
flying helicopter. Subsequently, the helicopter impacted terrain and a postimpact fire ensued. 
Examination of the mast revealed fracture features consistent with overload failure and 
mechanical damage indicative of mast bumping. An examination of the airframe, engine, and 
remaining systems revealed no preimpact anomalies. The reason for the mast bumping event 
could not be determined due to the amount of thermal damage to the wreckage.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The in-flight separation of the main rotor mast following a mast bumping event. The reason for 
the mast bumping event could not be determined due to postaccident damage.
Findings
Aircraft
Main rotor head system - Damaged/degraded (Cause)
Main rotor head system - Failure (Cause)
Page 2 of 8CEN12FA001
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 1, 2011, about 1255 mountain daylight time, a Robinson Helicopter, R66, N266CY, 
was destroyed during an in-flight breakup while in cruise flight near Philip, South Dakota. The 
private pilot, the sole occupant, was fatally injured. The helicopter was registered to and 
operated by P.P. and J. LLC., of Gillette, Wyoming. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
and a flight plan was not filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 personal flight. 
The cross-country flight originated from the Gillette-Campbell County Airport (GCC), around 
1105 and was en route to the Winner Regional Airport (ICR), in Winner, South Dakota.
A friend of the pilot was at GCC when the pilot was preparing for the flight. The friend reported 
that the pilot appeared to be in good health and was excited about the flight. He further 
reported that the pilot had "topped off" the helicopter with fuel before departure. 
Approximately an hour and a half later the pilot called the friend during the flight. The pilot 
reported that he was between Wall, South Dakota, and Philip, South Dakota, and inquired if 
the Philip Airport (PHP), had jet fuel available. The friend called the pilot back a few minutes 
later to report that PHP did not have jet fuel. The friend stated that the pilot did not report any 
anomalies with the helicopter during either conversation. 
An eyewitness located approximately 2 miles northwest of the accident site, observed the 
helicopter flying from west to east, along a river, approximately 1,000 feet above ground level 
(AGL). The eyewitness reported that he heard nothing abnormal as the helicopter flew past 
him. He then observed the helicopter make a turn to the left before it flew out of view behind 
trees. About 20-30 seconds later, he heard a noise that he described as sounding like an 
"exploding propane tank."
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, aged 64, held a private pilot certificate with airplane single and multi-engine land, 
rotorcraft helicopter, and instrument airplane. He was issued a third-class medical on 
November 3, 2009, with the limitation of "Must have available glasses for near vision." 
The pilot's flight logbooks were not recovered during the course of the investigation. On an 
aircraft insurance application dated February 4, 2011, the pilot estimated having logged 3,600 
hours of total flight time with 60 hours in the last 90 days. Of that time, 210 hours had been in 
helicopters and 22 hours had been in the Robinson R66. The pilot also indicated that his last 
biannual flight review had taken place on May 5, 2010.
The NTSB investigator-in-charge (IIC), contacted the two flight instructors who instructed the 
accident pilot. The first instructor reported that he had provided instruction to the accident 
pilot once or twice for an estimated total of 2 hours in the R66. The second instructor reported 
that he had instructed the accident pilot for 1 flight in the R66. Both instructors stated that 
they did not provide a signoff for the accident pilot in the R66; however, a signoff was not 
required. Although the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) had issued SFAR 73-2, Special 
Training and Experience Requirements for the Robinson R-22 and the R-44, the R66 was 
excluded. 
HELICOPTER INFORMATION
The 2011-model Robinson Helicopter Co R66, serial number 0010, was registered with the 
Page 3 of 8CEN12FA001
Federal Aviation Administration standard airworthiness certificate for normal operations. The 
helicopter was powered by a turbo-shaft Rolls-Royce RR300 engine, serial number (SN) 
RRE200013, which drove the two-blade main rotor.
According to the airframe and engine logbooks, the helicopter's most recent 100-hour 
inspection was completed on June 6, 2011, with an airframe and engine total time of 82.6 
hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1255, the automated weather observing system at PHP, located 3 nautical miles northeast 
from the site of the accident, reported wind from 150 degrees at 6 knots, 10 miles visibility, 
clear of clouds, temperature 84 degrees Fahrenheit, dew point 39 degrees Fahrenheit, and a 
barometric pressure setting of 30.00 inches of Mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The helicopter wreckage and debris came to rest on rolling ranch land and was spread out over 
an area approximately 1,520 feet long by 600 feet wide. The main rotor head, with attached 
blades, came to rest 513 feet from the main wreckage. The main wreckage consisted of the 
fuselage, engine, and tail rotor assembly. 
The airframe was severely damaged by fire and impact forces. A few pieces of airframe and 
numerous pieces of Plexiglas were located away from the main wreckage and were not fire 
damaged. Two portions of the right forward door frame exhibited scoring and deformation 
similar to the shape of the main rotor blade leading edge. The right front seat bottom had a 
lateral cut/impact mark near the forward edge and was detached from the helicopter. The 
controls and tunnel structure exhibited what appeared to be a cut/gash in a vertical line, from 
the right side, approximately 5 inches forward of the collective pivot. A section of the door 
frame from the left door exhibited large curved dents, one with paint smearing, on the inside 
surfaces. 
The cabin area was nearly consumed by a post-crash fire. All removable controls were found 
installed. The engine fuel control was found in the full "ON" position. The collective was in a 
full up position, based on the friction slider. The airframe fuel cutoff valve was extended ¼ 
inch from its full down position. The remains of what appeared to be a steel shot bag were 
found beneath the cabin remains. 
The forward 1.5 bays of tailcone were consumed by fire. The remainder of the tailcone was 
intact aftward to the last bay, which was separated at the forward end. The empennage had 
separated from the tail cone and sustained light fire damaged. The small horizontal stabilizer at 
the base of vertical stabilizer was damaged on left side. The tail rotor visual guard separated 
from aircraft and fractured in 4 places. 
Both skid toes and both forward struts separated from the skids. Both rear struts remained 
attached to skids. The forward cross tube was straight in the horizontal plane and bent forward 
at the left end in the longitudinal plane and burned through at left side. The rear cross tube 
destroyed was by fire. The left rear strut exhibited a deep dent on the upper end inboard side.
The fuel system was mostly destroyed by fire. The fuel vent tubes had been consumed and only 
one rollover vent fitting could be located. Investigators were able to blow air through this vent 
in the upright and inverted positions. The fuel bladder was consumed by fire. The finger screen 
was recovered and was clear of any debris. The D205-21 fuel hose was found intact, connected 
Page 4 of 8CEN12FA001
to the F670-1 valve. 
All rod ends for the main rotor flight controls were accounted for and secure to their mounting 
device, other than at components that were destroyed by fire. The disconnects in the push/pull 
tubes were consistent with overload and or thermal damage. The servo to swashplate push/pull 
tubes were bowed. All rod ends for the tail rotor flight controls were accounted for and secure 
to their mounting device, other than at bellcranks that were destroyed by fire. The disconnects 
in the push/pull tubes were consistent with overload and or thermal damage.
The sprag clutch was subjected to fire and did not rotate. The engine output flex coupling was 
intact but bent. The F642-1 engine to main rotor gearbox driveshaft was separated at both ends 
at the yoke weld. The main rotor gearbox input coupling was intact. The main rotor gearbox 
exhibited thermal damage and had two holes in the case. The output shaft could only be 
rotated a few degrees. The main rotor gearbox oil filter was not located. In addition, the 
gearbox rubber mounts were consumed by fire. 
The main rotor had separated approximately 8 inches below the teeter bolt. The main rotor 
hub was intact and both blade roots remained attached to it via the coning bolts. Both droops 
stops were in place. Both elastomeric teeter stops were split horizontally through the middle. 
The droop stop "tusk" for main rotor blade SN 0049 appeared straight while the "tusk" for 
blade SN 0067 was bent down approximately 10 degrees. There were small arc shaped scores 
on the main rotor hub just inboard of both rotor blade pitch change housings. 
Main rotor blade SN 0067 was found intact with an upward and aftward bend approximately 
108 inches from the coning bolt. The lower surface of the blade had a pattern of scratches 
centered on the bend area and compression buckling of the trailing edge. Main rotor blade SN 
0049 was bent downward and afteward, and the skins and honeycomb were separated from 
the spar over the span between 72 inches and 180 inches from the coning bolt. The spar was 
fractured approximately 141 inches and 174 inches from the coning bolt. The most outboard 
portion of spar remained attached to the skins and honeycomb. A swap sample was taken from 
a piece of the separated rotor blade skin and honeycomb and was sent to the Smithsonian 
National Museum of Natural History for DNA and Microscopic analysis.
The engine driveshaft was disconnected at both ends at the flex coupling flanges and 
compressed at both ends. The edges of the shaft at the disconnects were angular and jagged. 
Both flex plates were bent slightly. The forward tail rotor driveshaft was disconnected at the 
intermediate flex coupling flange and compressed at both ends. The edges of the shaft at the 
disconnect were angular and jagged. Both flex plates were bent slightly. The aft tail rotor 
driveshaft was disconnected approximately 4 inches aft of the flex coupling. The edges of the 
forward section of the shaft at the disconnect were angular and jagged. The edges of the aft 
section of the shaft at the disconnect appeared melted. The driveshaft hanger bearing was 
damaged by fire. The damper linkage was exposed to fire and did not rotate. The aft flex plate 
was bent and one arm of the tail rotor gearbox flange was disconnected, and one of the 
flexplate arms was torn. The edges of the disconnect were angular and jagged.
The tail rotor gearbox contained oil and was free to rotate, but rotation was limited by the bent 
input yoke contacting the input cartridge hardware. The output shaft and hub were intact. The 
slider bearing was free to rotate but rotation was limited as described above. Both tail rotor 
blades were damaged by fire and were bent to the left. One tail rotor blade was bent 
approximately 30 degrees to the left, and the other tail rotor blade was bent approximately 90 
Page 5 of 8CEN12FA001
degrees to the left with a separated trailing edge.
The engine was found disconnected from the aircraft structure. The compressor front support, 
engine air inlet, and the first stage compressor were free of visible damage. The compressor 
left-hand compressor scroll arm flange was bent inward. The N1 and N2 rotor system were 
bound. The power turbine governor, fuel pump and filter assembly, and the accessory gearbox 
were consumed in the post-crash fire. The N1 and N2 coupling shafts were fractured at the 
turbine portion of the shaft and were sent to the NTSB materials lab for examination. No 
anomalies were noted to the P/T- 4 turbine wheel as viewed through the exhaust collector. The 
gas producer fuel control unit was damaged by fire at the mounting base. Control linkage 
rigging was found in the closed position. The exhaust collector received crushing deformation 
during the accident sequence. The right air guide tube was unremarkable. The left air guide 
received crushing deformation during the accident sequence. The fuel cutoff arm on the fuel 
control unit was in the closed position. The throttle arm on the fuel control unit was in the idle 
position.
The Rolls-Royce RR300 Engine Monitoring Unit (EMU) was removed and sent to the National 
Transportation Safety Board's (NTSB) vehicle recorder laboratory for an attempted data 
extraction.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Clinical Laboratory of the Black Hills, located in Rapid City, South Dakota, performed an 
autopsy on the pilot on October 3, 2011. The autopsy concluded that the cause of death was due 
to "blunt trauma injuries" and the report listed the specific injuries. 
The FAA, Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, located in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, 
conducted toxicological testing on the specimens that were submitted. Carbon monoxide and 
cyanide tests were not performed. Tests for ethanol were negative. Losartan, a blood pressure 
medication, was detected in the liver.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The main rotor mast, hub, and gear box assemblies were sent to the NTSB Material Laboratory 
in Washington, DC, for further examination. The inboard end of each main rotor blade was 
attached to the hub. The enclosure for the gear box assembly and the mast were made from 
non-ferrous metal. The enclosure for the gear box and other nonferrous pieces in the general 
area of the gear box showed sagging deformation features consistent with heat damage from 
exposure to fire. The wall portion of the gear box in certain areas exhibited globule-like 
features consistent with re-solidified metal. The mast in the area of the fracture exhibited 
severe bending deformation. The cover for the mast in the area between the hub and gear box 
also showed evidence of bending deformation and contained a longitudinal fracture in the wall. 
Portable binocular microscope examination of the ferrous pieces such as the main structural 
tubes, attachment points for the control surfaces (clevis bolts) and non-ferrous pieces revealed 
the fracture faces were on slant plane relative to their longitudinal axes and contained dimpled 
features consistent with overstress separation. The noted signatures were consistent with a 
mast bump event. 
The Rolls-Royce RR300 Engine Monitoring Unit (EMU) was examined at the NTSB vehicle 
recorder laboratory. The EMU records the engine's gas temperature, torque, N1, and N2 
speeds. Due to the extreme heat and fire damage, no data was recovered from the device.
Page 6 of 8CEN12FA001
A teardown examination of the engine was conducted, under the oversight of the NTSB 
investigator-in-charge (IIC), at Roll-Royce Corporation in Indianapolis, Indiana. The 
examination revealed the compressor backplate assembly stationary seals, and the impeller 
rotating seals, exhibited 360 degree rotational scoring. In addition, the P/T-4 nozzle exhibited 
localized rub area on both the P/T-3 and P/T-4 blade tracks. The inspection of the engine did 
not reveal any pre impact failures or conditions that would prevent the engine from normal 
operation. 
The engine's N1 and N2 coupling adapters were sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory for 
further examination. The N1 coupling adapter contained an internal spline at each end. A 
circumferential fracture split the part into two pieces. The smaller piece contained a 
longitudinal fracture. The circumferential and longitudinal fractures intersected the internal 
spline portion at one end of the shaft. The N2 coupling adapter contained only a 
circumferential fracture. The pieces were ultrasonic cleaned and examination of the fracture 
faces revealed that they were on a slant plate relative to their longitudinal axes and contained 
dimpled features consistent with overstress separation. 
On February 21, 2012, Robinson Helicopter Company released, R66 Service Bulletin SB-03. 
This service bulletin addressed the possibility of machining burrs being present in certain 
helicopter hydraulic servos. NTSB investigators removed and examined the three hydraulic 
control servos from the accident helicopter at Robinson Helicopter Company on November 1, 
2012. The examination did not reveal any preimpact anomalies. 
Multiple swab samples were taken from the wreckage and sent to the Smithsonian National 
Museum of Natural History for DNA and Microscopic analysis. All samples were negative for 
bird remains.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Unknown or undetermined (Defining event)
Aircraft structural failure
Uncontrolled descent
Part(s) separation from AC
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
64
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/03/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/05/2010
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 3600 hours (Total, all aircraft), 22 hours (Total, this make and model), 60 hours 
(Last 90 days, all aircraft)
Page 7 of 8CEN12FA001
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER CO
Registration:
N266CY
Model/Series:
R66 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
0010
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
06/06/2011, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
83 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
120 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
ROLLS-ROYC
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
RR300
Registered Owner:
P P & J LLC
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
P P & J LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PHP, 2209 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
3 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1255 MDT
Direction from Accident Site:
40°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / None
Wind Direction:
150°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / N/A
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
29°C / 4°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Gillette, WY (GCC)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Winner, SD (ICR)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1105 MDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
44.017778, -101.634444
Page 8 of 8
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy LeBaron
Adopted Date:
04/10/2014
Additional Participating Persons:
Gary Soldwisch; Federal Aviation Administration; Rapid City, SD
Matthew Rigsby; Federal Aviaition Administration; Fort Worth, TX
Thom Webster; Robinson Helicopter; Torrance, CA
Michael Weber; Rolls Royce; Indianapolis, IN
Publish Date:
04/10/2014
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=81955
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
