National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Milton, FL
Accident Number: MIA05LA036
Date & Time: 12/02/2004, 1312 CST
Registration: N7510W
Aircraft: Piper PA-28-180
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that the preflight was normal, fuel was "clear", no water was present, and he had approximately 35 gallons of fuel in the fuel tanks.
He taxied to runway 36 and did an engine run-up prior to takeoff.
He noted that the fuel selector was on the right fuel tank.
He departed on runway 36, and shortly after liftoff the airplane engine started to run "rough", the pilot then switched the fuel tank selector to the left tank, he could not remember if the fuel tank selector was on a detent or not.
He made a 180-degree turn to return back to the field and crashed 116 feet west of the north end of runway 18.
The pilot added, during that time with the engine problem, he placed his right hand on the yoke and with the left hand he reached for the fuel selector slapping it to the left tank position.
In the process he was leaning into and pulling on the yoke.
With FAA oversight, Lycoming and Piper conducted examination of the airplane and engine.
The airplane's engine examination revealed no indication of pre-impact anomalies or failure.
The fuel lines were examined and no indication of fuel contamination was present.
Fuel was found in all fuel lines forward of the gascolator on the firewall.
The fuel tank selector was found in the off position.
The FAA inspector stated that the witnesses who assisted with the accident recovery did not change the fuel selector position.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of the improper fuel selector position.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION 2.
(F) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 4.
STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 5.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.
The commercial-rated pilot received serious injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial damage.
The flight was originating at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that the preflight was normal, fuel was "clear", no water was present, and had approximately 35 gallons of fuel in the fuel tanks.
He taxied to runway 36 and did an engine run-up prior to takeoff.
He noted that the fuel selector was on the right fuel tank.
He departed on runway 36, and shortly after liftoff the airplane engine started to run "rough", the pilot then switched the fuel tank selector to the left tank, he could not remember if the fuel tank selector was on a detent or not.
He made a 180-degree turn to return back to the field and crashed west of the north end of runway 18.
The pilot added, during that time with the engine problem, he placed his right hand on the yoke and with the left hand he reached for the fuel selector slapping it to the left tank position.
In the process he was leaning into and pulling on the yoke.
A pilot witness stated, he observed the airplane when it departed runway 36.
When the airplane was about 200 feet above the ground, it sounded like the engine was throttled back and shortly after the engine was absence of sound, but the propeller was still windmilling.
The airplane made a 120-degree turn to the left with a 30-degree nose down and 30-degree left wing bank as it descended through 100 feet.
The airplane impacted the ground left wing first, then the nose, and turned left about 90 degrees as it skidded a short distance.
He ran toward the accident airplane.
As he approached the airplane he saw the pilot was injured and heard the electrical fuel pump running.
He managed to turn off the ignition as he was talking to the 911 operator.
He was concern due to the sound of the electrical fuel pump operating was still heard.
Shortly after rescue personnel arrived.
An examination of the crash site, airplane, airplane's systems and airplane's engine was conducted by the responding FAA inspector with representatives of Textron Lycoming and New Piper Aircraft, Inc.
The accident airplane impacted the grass overrun area; 100 feet short and 80 feet to the left of the runway centerline on a heading of 220 degree.
The accident airplane slid about 90 feet before coming to a stop, at latitude 30 degrees, 38 .586 minutes north and longitude 86 degrees, 59.666 minutes west, upright on a heading of 090 degrees.
The fuselage sustained impact damage and the left front of the fuselage was buckled aft of the firewall.
The left wing was partially separated from the fuselage at the wing root.
The right wing remained attached to the fuselage.
The stabilator had damage on the left side.
The landing gears were separated from their respective attaching points.
Continuity for the flight controls was established.
A copious amount of fuel remained in both tanks.
The fuel tank selector was found in the off position.
An operational test of the fuel selector was performed.
No abnormalities were noted with the fuel selector.
Examination of the airplane's engine showed the fuel lines had no indication of contamination present.
Fuel was found in all fuel lines forward of the gascolator on the firewall.
The carburetor's fuel bowl had clean fuel present, the accelerator pump functioned, the internal passages and nozzle were clear, the screen was clean, and the needle value in normal unremarkable condition.
Both magnetos produced sparks.
The spark plugs had no damage and were observed to have service wear with normal gray color combustion deposit.
The oil sump drain was broken and the oil drained onto the ground, quantity was not determined.
The remaining engine's oil system was unremarkable.
The crankshaft was rotated by hand and continuity of crankshaft, camshaft, valve train, and accessory drives were noted.
All four cylinders produced compression while the engine was rotated.
The engine examination revealed no evidence of pre-impact failure.
Witnesses stated to the responding FAA inspector, the fuel mixture was found in the full position and no one that assisted in the accident recovery had contact with the fuel selector.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
