National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: BEAUMONT, TX
Accident Number: FTW00LA023
Date & Time: 11/01/1999, 1630 CST
Registration: N7833X
Aircraft: Cessna 172B
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The airplane's engine lost power as a result of fuel exhaustion, and during the ensuing forced landing the airplane struck trees.
According to the flight instructor, he visually confirmed that each fuel tank was 1/2 full before departing on a local training flight.
He estimated that he had approximately 2 hours of flying time, based on the quantity of fuel in the tanks.
The flight departed, flew approximately one hour, and returned to the airport.
The student was executing touch-and-go landings, and on the fourth takeoff/climb, as the airplane turned crosswind, the engine began to 'sputter.'
The flight instructor assumed control of the airplane and aligned it with runway 13.
After the airplane had overflown 1/2 of the 3,601-foot runway, he advanced the throttle to see if the engine would respond.
The engine responded, and he initiated a climb to set up for another landing.
As the instructor turned the airplane back toward runway 31, the engine lost total power.
The airplane came to rest 0.5 miles north of the approach end of runway 31.
The FAA inspector, who examined the airplane, stated that both fuel tanks contained residual fuel only.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Fuel exhaustion as a result of the flight instructor's failure to refuel the airplane.
A factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
(C) REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND(CFI) ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING Findings 3.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On November 1, 1999, at 1630 central standard time, a Cessna 172B airplane, N7833X, was substantially damaged when it impacted trees and terrain during a forced landing near Beaumont, Texas.
The certified flight instructor and student pilot were not injured.
The airplane was registered to an operated by a private individual.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 instructional flight and a flight plan was not filed.
The local flight originated from the Beaumont Municipal Airport, Beaumont, Texas, at 1500.
According to the flight instructor, he visually confirmed that each wing fuel tank was 1/2 full during the preflight inspection.
He estimated that he had approximately 2 hours of flying time based on the quantity of fuel in the tanks.
The airplane departed and flew approximately one hour before returning to the airport.
The student was executing touch-and-go landings on runway 31, and during the fourth takeoff/climb, as the airplane turned cross-wind, the engine began to "sputter."
The flight instructor assumed control of the airplane and turned the airplane toward runway 13.
The airplane had overflown 1/2 the length of the 3,601-foot runway when the instructor advanced the throttle to see if the engine would respond.
The engine responded, and the instructor initiated a climb, intending to initiate another approach.
The instructor turned the airplane back toward runway 31, and simultaneously, the engine "sputtered" and lost total power.
The instructor executed a forced landing to a field.
While on short final to the field, the airplane's wings struck trees, and the airplane contacted the ground.
The airplane came to rest upright, 0.5 miles from the approach end of runway 31.
The instructor stated that he visually checked the fuel tanks after the accident, and there "appeared to be little fuel in both tanks."
The FAA inspector, who examined the airplane, reported that both wing spars were structurally damaged.
He added that the fuel tanks contained "residual fuel only."
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor Age: , Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Right Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine; Instrument Airplane Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 1 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
