National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: CHANDLER, AZ
Accident Number: LAX00LA031
Date & Time: 11/02/1999, 1140 MST
Registration: N98909
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that he flared high and the airplane landed flat on all three landing gear and bounced three times.
The nose tire went flat and the propeller contacted the ground.
Subsequent inspection revealed the firewall was buckled.
The pilot said there were no mechanical malfunctions or failures prior to the hard landing.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's misjudged landing flare and failure to maintain an adequate airspeed margin, which resulted in a stall/mush and hard landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
(C) FLARE - MISJUDGED - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
(C) AIRSPEED(VREF) - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On November 2, 1999, about 1140 hours mountain standard time, a Cessna 172N, N98909, sustained substantial damage during a hard landing at the Chandler, Arizona, municipal airport.
Sawyer Aviation operated the airplane, which was rented by the pilot, under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.
The private pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
The local area personal flight departed Sky Harbor Airport, Phoenix, Arizona, about 1130.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed.
The pilot stated that he flared high and the airplane landed flat on all three landing gear and bounced three times.
The nose tire went flat and the propeller contacted the ground.
Subsequent inspection revealed the firewall was buckled.
In his written statement, the pilot said there were no mechanical malfunctions or failures prior to the hard landing.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 19, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
