While en route at flight level (FL) 360, the captain of the commercial air carrier flight 
requested and was granted a lower altitude (FL 300) to minimize the effect that turbulence was 
having on the airplane. After the captain received pilot reports indicating that varying degrees 
of turbulence, mountain wave activity, and low-level windshear existed, he illuminated the seat 
belt sign and made an announcement for the passengers to be seated. The flight crew then 
advised the cabin crewmembers of possible turbulence and instructed them to prepare the 
cabin for landing, stay near their seats, and be seated immediately if turbulence was 
encountered. About 7 to 10 minutes later, while the airplane was at FL 300, the flight 
encountered moderate-to-severe turbulence. A flight attendant who was in the lavatory when 
the turbulence was encountered sustained a broken ankle after being thrown in the air twice.
The flight's encounter with known severe turbulence associated with mountain wave activity, 
which resulted in a flight attendant sustaining a broken ankle.
On December 1, 2011, about 1339 Pacific standard time, a Boeing 757-222, N547UA, 
encountered turbulence at flight level (FL) 300, during the cruise phase of flight. United 
Airlines (UAL) operated flight 721 under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
121 as a scheduled domestic passenger flight. One flight attendant sustained serious injuries; 
the 2 flight crew, 3 additional flight attendants, and 146 passengers were not injured. The 
airplane was not damaged. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and an instrument 
flight rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed. The flight departed the Denver International 
Airport (DEN), Denver, Colorado, at 1215, and was en-route to San Francisco International 
Airport (SFO), San Francisco, California, when the turbulence was encountered.
According to United Airlines, the Western United States was experiencing widespread 
moderate to severe turbulence on the day of the incident.  The flight planned en route cruise 
altitude was FL360.  While en route, the flight descended to FL300 at 13:17 PT because 
smoother conditions were reported.  As the flight was nearing the Sierra Nevada Mountains on 
the Modesto 3 arrival into San Francisco, there were reports of turbulence up ahead.  When the 
reports were received, the captain illuminated the seat belt sign and made an announcement 
for passengers to be seated with seat belts fastened.
The purser was contacted by the captain to discuss the approaching area of turbulence.  The 
captain directed the purser to have the flight attendants wrap up cabin service, and stay near 
their seats and to be seated immediately if turbulence was encountered. The purser advised the 
cabin crew of the captain's directions. After the announcement was made, an aft galley flight 
attendant stated she went into the lavatory to brush her teeth.  After approximately 7-10 
minutes later, following the announcement, 2-3 jolts of moderate turbulence followed by a 
brief episode of severe turbulence was encountered.  This occurred 22 minutes before landing. 
The flight, at the time, was on the Modesto Three Standard Terminal Arrival for SFO, in the 
vicinity of ELCAP intersection. The flight attendant, in the lavatory, reportedly was thrown 
twice in the air, and landed awkwardly on her right ankle.   The flight continued to San 
Francisco and landed at 1401 local time.
The turbulence event was reported by United Airlines on December 5, 2011, after it was 
confirmed that one of the flight attendants had suffered a broken fibula.
A weather study was completed by a National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) staff 
meteorologist; the complete study is attached to the public docket for this report. The area was 
favorable for mountain wave activity over the region due to an upper level low, and strong wind 
flow over the mountain ranges. The GOES-11 visible and infrared satellite images depicted 
clear skies over the accident area with no visual signs of potential turbulence.
Several pilot reports in the surrounding area and at varying altitudes around the time of the 
accident reported low-level wind shear, extreme turbulence, occasional to moderate chop, 
continuous light chop, and moderate to severe turbulence, along with mountain wave activity.
The flight data recorder (FDR) information was read out and analyzed by a flight data recorder 
specialist at the NTSB. The complete report is attached to the public docket for this accident. 
The FDR contained approximately 108 hours of recorded data, which included the turbulence 
event. The FDR data indicated that approximately 1 hour 34 minutes after takeoff, the vertical 
acceleration fluctuated between 0 g's and 2 g's peaking at a maximum of 1.91 g's during a 28-
second time period.
According to an excerpt from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Air Traffic Control 
(ATC) package, at 1242, UAL flight 721 checked into sector 34, and was told to expect 
occasional light chop. The flight crew was also told that AIRMETs for the western United States 
were available on HIWAS, flight watch, or flight service frequencies. The flight crew was then 
issued a frequency change. Upon check in with the new sector (sector 47), the flight crew was 
advised that their ride would deteriorate in about 20 minutes. The UAL flight crew was 
instructed to advise when that happened. The sector controller told them to plan on a lower 
altitude. About 15 minutes later, the UAL flight crew requested a lower altitude. UAL flight 721 
was issued another frequency change. After checking in with the new sector controller the 
flight crew was advised of "bad rides over the Sierra Nevada Mountain Range, but that FL300 
and FL320 were not bad." When queried how their ride was, the flight crew responded that 
they had experienced light chop. About 10 minutes later, the flight crew reported that they had 
encountered moderate to severe at FL 300 and asked for a lower altitude. UAL flight 721 was 
cleared to FL270, and the sector controller asked them to verify that they had encountered 
severe turbulence, to which the pilot replied that he wouldn't quite call it severe turbulence, but 
it was a bad ride. The detailed report is attached to the public docket for this report.
The flight continued to its destination and landed without further incident.
