The flight was transitioning through an area of known severe turbulence. One of the flight 
attendants reported that the flight crew asked the cabin crew to secure the cabin early as they 
expected to encounter turbulence during the descent. Shortly thereafter, the airplane 
encountered severe turbulence and the flight attendants were thrown about the galley; one 
sustained a serious injury. The cockpit voice recorder contained audio that was not relevant to 
the flight (it was likely recorded over by subsequent events), thus it could not be conclusively 
determined when the flight crew asked the flight attendants to be seated because they could 
not recall. It is likely that the flight crew™s request for the cabin to be secured was close to the 
time of the turbulence encounter, since none of the flight attendants had completed securing  
the service items when the encounter occurred. Synoptic conditions were favorable for 
mountain wave activity and a significant meteorological information (SIGMET) advisory and 
airmen™s meteorological information advisories had been issued for turbulence over the region. 
The flight crew also had an advisory issued from their enhanced weather information systems 
for severe turbulence. The event occurred in the region that the SIGMET and the advisory for 
severe turbulence had been issued. According to the filed flight plan, the flight was to descend 
before entering the advisory area for weather avoidance; however, the planned descent was not 
followed.
The flight crew™s flight into known severe turbulence associated with mountain wave activity.
HISTORY OF THE FLIGHT
On December 1, 2011, at 1953 Pacific standard time, a Boeing 737-7H4, N261WN, flight 1489, 
encountered turbulence at flight level 30,000 feet (FL300), over Yosemite National Park, 
California.  One flight attendant sustained serious injuries; 2 flight attendants received minor 
injuries; 2 pilots and 95 passengers were not injured. Southwest Airlines operated the flight 
under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121, as a scheduled-passenger 
flight that departed Albuquerque International Sunport Airport (ABQ), Albuquerque, New 
Mexico. An instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan had been filed. The flight was destined for 
Metropolitan Oakland International Airport (OAK), Oakland, California.
According to Southwest Airlines, the airplane had been at FL400 and was descending to FL300 
when the flight encountered severe turbulence. All three flight attendants were not seated 
when the turbulence was encountered. One flight attendant was in the forward galley and the 
other two flight attendants were in the aft galley. When the turbulence was encountered, the  
flight attendant in the forward galley was thrown up and down, and side to side with her feet 
leaving the cabin floor. She was able to hold onto a counter, and was eventually able to secure 
herself in the forward jumpseat. The two flight attendants in the aft galley were thrown around 
the aft galley and struck their heads and backs; they also were eventually able to secure 
themselves in their respective jumpseats and remained there throughout the landing. Both 
flight attendants were transported to the hospital via ambulance. One flight attendant was 
released with minor injuries. The other flight attendant was released from the hospital as well, 
and was informed the following day of the compression fracture of his vertebrae. There were no 
passengers transported to the hospital. According to statements from the flight attendants, 
they had been advised by the flight crew to secure the cabin early because the flight crew was 
expecting turbulence later in the descent. Statements from the flight crew indicated that the 
flight attendants had to be seated multiple times throughout the flight due to turbulence.
The captain reported that they had descended from FL400 to FL300 due to moderate 
turbulence. They were authorized to stop at any smooth altitude. The crew had continuous 
turbulence through FL320. At FL300, the ride was better, but shortly thereafter, they 
encountered abrupt and significant severe turbulence for approximately 10 seconds. The 
aircraft accelerated from .760 mach to .865 mach with vertical pitch change and associated 
yaw. They requested an immediate descent and checked on the status of the cabin crew and 
passengers. They were then advised of the injuries to the cabin crew. They declared an 
emergency and landed at Oakland where they were met by medical personnel.
In a statement submitted by the first officer, he reported that upon departure, they requested 
that the flight attendants remain seated until called. About 45 minutes after departure, the 
captain cleared the flight attendants to move around the cabin. The flight encountered 
additional turbulence, and the captain requested that the flight attendants take their seats. As 
the flight continued, it encountered intermittent moderate turbulence at FL400 and they 
requested a different altitude. The flight descended to FL300. All passengers were in their seats 
because the seatbelt sign was on, but the three flight attendants were not seated. The first 
officer could not recall the captain clearing the flight attendants from their seats.
According to statements submitted by the flight attendants, the flight crew informed the flight 
attendants that they were going to have them secure the cabin 35 minutes early due to 
projected turbulence. Shortly thereafter, the flight encountered severe turbulence. During the 
encounter, all flight attendants were lifted from the floor from the turbulence and unsecured 
service items were strewn about the galleys.
According to a statement from the dispatcher, the flight had been planned and filed to descend 
to FL260 prior to entering the area where the event occurred.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The cockpit voice recorder (CVR) was examined. The recording consisted of four channels of 
audio information; however, none of the audio was pertinent to the incident/accident 
investigation. The audio was consistent with the CVR being overwritten or recorded over by 
subsequent events. 
Data obtained from the flight data recorder (FDR) showed at 1931, the airplane was in level 
flight at 40,000 feet, and was experiencing vertical accelerations of about +/- 0.1g. At 1943:05, 
the aircraft descended to 30,000 feet. The flight management computer (FMC) computed wind 
speed showed a significant increase in wind speed at 30,000 feet compared to 40,000 feet. At 
1953:21, when the airplane was level at 30,000 feet, it began experiencing vertical accelerations 
for about 13 seconds. During this period, the maximum negative and positive vertical 
accelerations were -0.18g and +3.52g, respectively.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A Senior Meteorologist reviewed weather information pertinent to the flight. Synoptic 
conditions were favorable for mountain wave activity over California, and the National 
Weather Service had issued significant meteorological information (SIGMET) and airman™s 
meteorological information (AIRMET) notices for turbulence over the region.  Additional 
information was included in the flight crew™s weather document from their enhanced weather 
information systems (EWINS) provider (SW45), which expected severe turbulence between 
FL300-420. The event occurred in the region that the SIGMET and SW45 had been issued. No 
visual sign of the turbulence other than some lower cap or lenticular clouds over the peaks 
were noted, but visual meteorological conditions (VMC) prevailed at their location.
