Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
OCHOPEE, FL
Accident Number:
MIA98LA066
Date & Time:
02/01/1998, 1413 EST 
Registration:
N94929
Aircraft:
Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot reported that at an altitude of about 2,000', the engine lost power & ran rough. He 
elected to land on a road that was perpendicular to a highway. The airplane was seen touching 
down on the road, but was heading towards the intersection of the road & highway, where the 
Sheriff's Department was working a motor vehicle accident. As the airplane approached the 
activity at the highway intersection, the pilot attempted to take off to avoid hitting vehicles & 
people. He entered a steep climb to avoid a power line, then the airplane descended nose first 
into trees. The pilot stated that where the airplane touched down on the road, it was 'slippery' 
which made it 'hard to stop.'  As the airplane moved towards the highway, the pilot noticed that 
people were still on the road, so he tried to avoid hitting them by taking off & flying over the 
highway. The pilot said, '...unfortunately since we lost speed in the landing, we didn't have 
enough power and we stalled into the trees.'  The engine was examined & partially torn down. 
The examination of the engine revealed that the #4 cylinder exhaust valve was broken off at the 
base of the stem & was found in the combustion chamber. The bottom part of the valve was 
retrieved from inside the muffler, along with pieces of the valve seat. Damage from the valve 
was found on the cylinder head & piston top. A hole was found in the top of the piston. Further 
examination of the broken valve stem revealed that it was pitted & corroded. In addition, the 
engine showed signs of having been operated at high temperatures for a considerable length of 
time. An external examination of the engine revealed corrosion on the exterior of the steel 
cylinder barrels. Paint on the cylinder heads was blistered & peeled. The ignition system 
harness was found worn & tattered. The engine log books revealed that the engine had been 
operated about 700 hours past the manufacture's recommended overhaul time. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
partial loss of engine power due to a fractured number 4 exhaust valve, which resulted in a 
forced landing; and the lack of sufficient airspeed to maneuver over power lines during an 
attempt to abort (go around from) an emergency landing, which resulted in an inadvertent stall 
and subsequent impact with trees.  Factors relating to the accident were: the owner/operator's 
failure to perform the engine manufacture's recommended overhaul at the recommended time, 
Page 2 of 6MIA98LA066
and high obstructions in the emergency landing area. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(PARTIAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) ENGINE ASSEMBLY,VALVE,EXHAUST - FRACTURED
2. (F) MAINTENANCE,OVERHAUL,MAJOR - NOT PERFORMED - COMPANY MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ABORTED
Findings
3. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - HIGH OBSTRUCTION(S)
4. EVASIVE MANEUVER - INITIATED - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (C) AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE
6. (C) STALL - INADVERTENT
----------
Occurrence #4: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 6MIA98LA066
Factual Information
 On February 1, 1998, about 1413 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N94929, owned 
by Gateway Aviation Inc., operating as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, impacted with 
trees near Ochopee, Florida.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was 
filed.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  The private pilot was seriously injured and one 
passenger received minor injuries.  The flight had originated from Opa Locka, Florida, at 1330.
The pilot had refueled at Everglades City, Florida, and was en route back to Opa Locka.  
At an altitude of about 2,000 feet, the pilot reported that the engine lost power and ran rough.  
He elected to land on a road that was perpendicular to Highway 41.  The airplane was seen 
touching down on the road, but was heading towards the intersection of the road and the 
highway where the Sheriff's Department was working a motor vehicle accident.  As the airplane 
approached the activity at the highway intersection, the pilot attempted to take off to avoid 
hitting the vehicles and people.  The airplane went nose high, turned 90 degrees to the left, and 
descended nose first into the trees.
The pilot stated that at first he "...couldn't determine the cause of the engine 
roughness...we reached US41, but I noticed it was crowded...I tried to avoid US41...[and] I 
suddenly realized a small road.  We tried to land there."  In addition, he stated that when the 
airplane touched down on the road, it was "slippery" which made it "hard to stop."  As the 
airplane moved towards the highway, the pilot noticed that the people were still on the road, so 
he tried to avoid hitting them by "lift[ing] the plane and over flew US41."  The pilot said, 
"...unfortunately since we lost speed in the landing, we didn't have enough power and we 
stalled into the trees."
The engine was examined on February 12, 1998, at a hanger at the Fort Lauderdale 
Executive Airport, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, under the supervision of the NTSB investigator in 
charge.  An examination and partial teardown of the engine revealed that the No. 4 cylinder 
exhaust valve was broken off at the base of the stem and was found in the combustion 
chamber.  The bottom part of the valve was retrieved from inside the muffler, along with pieces 
of the valve seat.  Damage from the valve was found on the cylinder head and piston top.  A 
hole was found in the top of the piston.  Further examination of the broken valve stem revealed 
that it was pitted and corroded.
According to the FAA inspector's statement, the engine showed "signs of having been 
operated at high temperatures for a considerable length of time."  The external examination of 
the engine revealed corrosion on the exterior of the steel cylinder barrels.  The paint on the 
cylinder heads was blistered and peeled.  The ignition system harness was found worn and 
tattered.  The engine log books revealed that the engine had been operated about 840 hours 
past the manufacture's recommended overhaul time.  The manufacture's recommended time 
before overhaul was 2,400 hours
Page 4 of 6MIA98LA066
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
24, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/28/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
82 hours (Total, all aircraft), 82 hours (Total, this make and model), 32 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 14 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N94929
Model/Series:
152 152
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
15285814
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/13/1998, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1675 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
17 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7445 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-235-N2C
Registered Owner:
GATEWAY AVIATION INC
Rated Power:
108 hp
Operator:
GATEWAY AVIATION INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA98LA066
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
APF, 9 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1420 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
270°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 4000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 18 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
90°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
EVERGLADES CITY, FL 
(X01)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1345 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ALAN       J YURMAN
Adopted Date:
02/15/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
BILL   EVERETT; MIAMI, FL
LEAH D RIDDLE; WICHITA, KS
EDWARD   ROGALSKI; BELLEVIEW, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA98LA066
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
