Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
BOXBOROUGH, MA
Accident Number:
NYC98FA063
Date & Time:
02/02/1998, 0900 EST 
Registration:
N79588
Aircraft:
Cessna 172K
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
After departure, a witness observed the Cessna 172 at a low altitude with the nose bobbing up 
and down.  Another witness saw the airplane in a left turn and heard a power reduction.  The 
airplane then dove into a wooded area.  A post-crash fire consumed the cockpit and wings.  The 
investigation found no evidence of a mechanical failure or malfunction with the engine or 
airframe.  Witnesses reported frost on the wings of airplanes in the area at the time of the 
accident.  Examination of the outside tie down where the airplane had been secured revealed 
no evidence that the tops of the wings had been examined or de-iced. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The failure of the pilot to remove the frost on the wings before departure, which resulted in a 
stall 
Page 2 of 7NYC98FA063
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - ICING CONDITIONS
2. (C) AIRCRAFT PREFLIGHT - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
4. STALL - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
5. OBJECT - TREE(S)
Page 3 of 7NYC98FA063
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 2, 1998, about 0900 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172K, N79588, was 
destroyed when it struck the ground and burned in Boxborough, Massachusetts, about 1 
minute after it departed from the Minute Man Airport (6B6), Stow, Massachusetts.  The 
certificated commercial pilot was fatally injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed 
for the personal flight.  No flight plan had been filed for the flight that was conducted under 14 
CFR Part 91.
A witness reported that he arrived at the airport by private airplane on the evening of 
February 1, 1998, and his airplane remained outside during the night.  When he returned to the 
airport on the morning of February 2, 1998, about 0830-0845, he observed frost on the wings 
of his airplane.  He saw the accident pilot and talked to him for a few minutes, and then went 
inside.  He did not observe the accident pilot's pre-flight inspection or departure.
A witness beyond the departure end of runway 03 was about 45 feet off the ground 
cutting trees, when he observed the airplane about 50 feet over his head.  The engine sounded 
normal to the witness, and the nose was "bobbing up and down."  The airplane passed over a 
stand of trees, descended below the treetops, started a left turn, and disappeared from view.
Another witness observed the airplane as it continued in the left turn.  She heard a 
power reduction, and watched the nose of the airplane drop as it disappeared into tree.  She 
then saw smoke where the airplane had disappeared into the trees.  
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight at north 42 degrees, 28.82 minutes 
latitude, and west 71 degrees, 31.15 minutes longitude.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land, 
glider, and instrument airplane.  He was issued a Third Class FAA Airman Medical Certificate 
on August 8, 1997, with a limitation to wear corrective lenses.
The pilot's flying logbook was not recovered, and the pilot's recency of experience and 
flight review could not be determined.  According to the pilot's last FAA airman medical 
application, he listed his total time as 1,800 hours with no flight time in the preceding 6 
months.  
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The airplane had been refueled with 31 gallons of automotive gasoline before the 
accident.  Examination of the maintenance logbooks revealed a supplemental type certificate 
(STC) for the use of automobile gasoline.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane was examined at the accident site on February 2, 1998.  The accident site 
was a wooded area with snow on the ground.  On-site examination disclosed broken tree limbs 
on a 45 degree descending path.  The wreckage debris was scattered in the general magnetic 
direction of 250 degrees.  The engine and fuselage came to rest 66 feet beyond the first tree 
strike.  All debris was located within a 100 foot radius of the engine and fuselage.  The outboard 
10 feet of the left wing was found near the base of the first tree strike.  The outboard 8 feet of 
Page 4 of 7NYC98FA063
the right wing was about 30 feet beyond the engine.  The cabin and inboard wing panels were 
consumed by fire.  A strong smell of fuel was present at the accident site.  The debris and 
engine were moved to a hangar for further examination.
Flight control continuity was not confirmed due to impact damage.  All breaks in flight 
control cables occurred at other than attach points, and the ends of the cables were puffed, 
similar to tension overload failures.  The wing flap jackscrew corresponded to a flaps up 
position.  The elevator trim jackscrew corresponded to a position of elevator tab 10 degrees up.  
The engine could not be rotated due to a bent propeller flange.  However, when 
disassembled, there was no evidence of bearing wear or internal failure.  The spark plugs were 
sooty, and there was no impact damage to the electrodes.  Both magnetos had received 
impact/fire damage and would not generate spark.  The propeller blades were wavy in 
appearance, and had rotational scoring marks.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The toxicological testing report from the FAA Toxicology Accident Research Laboratory, 
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma was negative for drugs and alcohol for the pilot.
An autopsy was conducted by Sarah Thora-Steffesen, MD, of the Massachusetts Medical 
Examiners Office on February 3, 1998. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Another pilot at the Minute Man Airport reported he arrived after dark on February 1, 
1998, in a Piper PA-28, and parked on the ramp area.  He reported that frost was present on 
the top surface of both wings of his airplane, at 0900, the next morning, with the airplane 
parked in the sun.  He estimated the depth of the frost at 1/16 inch.  He also commented that 
he was concerned about the amount of frost and would have removed it from the wings before 
flight.
Examination of the parking area where N79588 was parked, on February 3, 1998, 
revealed snow on the ground except for the cement pad, which was used for the landing gear.  
The rungs on a ladder lying on the ground matched the patches of melting ice on the ground.  
There were no holes in the snow from a ladder, or footprints in the snow.  There was no 
evidence that any anti-icing fluid had been applied to the top surface of the wings.
Inspectors from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and from the 
Massachusetts Department of Aeronautics reported frost on the top surface of airplanes at 
nearby airports about the time of the accident.
The 0900 observation at Bedford, Massachusetts, located 10 nautical miles east of 
Minute Man airport, on a heading of 103 degrees, included high scattered clouds, visibility 5 
miles, temperature 25 degrees Fahrenheit, dewpoint 21 degrees Fahrenheit, calm winds, and 
mist in the air.
References to the hazards of frost have been found in advisory circulars (AC) published 
by the FAA.  Following are some references:
AC-61-23C - PILOT'S HANDBOOK OF AERONAUTICAL KNOWLEDGE \ CHAPTER 5 - 
WEATHER \ MOISTURE AND TEMPERATURE \ Dew and Frost
"When the ground cools at night, the temperature of the air immediately adjacent to the 
Page 5 of 7NYC98FA063
ground is frequently lowered to the saturation point, causing condensation.  This condensation 
takes place directly upon objects on the ground as dew if the temperature is above freezing, or 
as frost if the temperature is below freezing."
"Dew is of no importance to aircraft, but frost creates friction which interferes with the smooth 
flow of air over the wing surfaces, resulting in a higher stall speed.  Frost should always be 
removed before flight."
AC-00-6A - AVIATION WEATHER \ For Pilots and Flight Operations Personnel \ Part one - 
WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW ABOUT WEATHER \  Chapter 10 - ICING \ FROST
"...Frost does not change the basic aerodynamic shape of the wing, but the roughness of its 
surface spoils the smooth flow of air thus causing a slowing of the airflow.  This slowing of the 
air causes early air flow separation over the affected airfoil resulting in a loss of lift.  A heavy 
coat of frost will cause a 5 to 10 percent increase in stall speed.  Even a small amount of frost on 
airfoils may prevent an aircraft from becoming airborne at normal takeoff speed.  Also possible 
is that, once airborne, an aircraft could have insufficient margin of airspeed above stall so that 
moderate gusts or turning flight could produce incipient or complete stalling...."
AC 00-6A - AVIATION WEATHER \ For Pilots and Flight Operations Personnel \ Part One - 
WHAT YOU SHOULD KNOW ABOUT WEATHER \ Chapter 10 - ICING \ IN CLOSING
"...Always remove ice or frost from airfoils before attempting takeoff."
Wreckage Release
The aircraft wreckage was released to the insurance adjuster, Mr. Daniel S. Klein, on 
February 3, 1998.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
66, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Glider
Restraint Used: 
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/08/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
1800 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Page 6 of 7NYC98FA063
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N79588
Model/Series:
172K 172K
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
17258199
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
10/01/1997, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2300 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
7 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1951 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320-F2D
Registered Owner:
HERBERT L. HARDY
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
HERBERT L. HARDY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BED, 133 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0900 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
110°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 20000 ft agl
Visibility
5 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
-4°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (6B6)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0900 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
MINUTE MAN (6B6)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
268 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
3
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
2770 ft / 48 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Page 7 of 7NYC98FA063
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
ROBERT     L HANCOCK
Adopted Date:
08/27/1999
Additional Participating Persons:
JAMES   VOLNER; BEDFORD, MA
RICHARD   BUNKER; BOSTON, MA
GREGORY   SCHMIDT; WICHITA, KS
GREGORY   ERIKSON; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
