Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Algonac, MI
Accident Number:
CEN10FA182
Date & Time:
04/01/2010, 1305 EDT 
Registration:
N853CZ
Aircraft:
CZECH AIRCRAFT WORKS SPOL SRO 
MERMAID
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Local residents observed the airplane flying low along the river. They reported that it entered a 
bank in the direction of their residence and at one point the wings were perpendicular to the 
water. The nose of the airplane suddenly dropped and it descended, ultimately striking the 
dock and shallow water. The airplane came to rest inverted, partially supported by the boat 
dock and partially in the river. A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine did not 
identify any anomalies consistent with a preimpact failure or malfunction. While 
Diphenhydramine, an over-the-counter antihistamine that commonly results in impaired 
performance, was found in the pilot™s blood at a level consistent with recent use, the 
investigation was not able to definitively conclude that the pilot suffered from impairment.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s loss of control resulting from an aerodynamic stall/spin while maneuvering at low 
altitude.
Findings
Aircraft
Performance/control parameters - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6CEN10FA182
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On April 1, 2010, at 1305 eastern daylight time, a Czech Aircraft Works Mermaid amphibious 
airplane, N853CZ, piloted by a private pilot, was destroyed during an in-flight collision with a 
boat dock near Algonac, Michigan.  The local flight was being conducted under 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 without a flight plan.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.  
The pilot sustained fatal injuries.  The local flight departed Oakland-Troy Airport (VLL), Troy, 
Michigan, about 1200.
A firefighter observed the accident airplane from his location at the fire station.  He estimated 
the airplane™s altitude at 500 feet above ground level (agl) and reported that it entered a turn 
over the river.  The airplane™s nose subsequently dropped and it descended upside-down 
toward the river.  He lost sight of the airplane prior to impact.
Local residents observed the airplane flying low along the river.  They reported that it entered a 
bank in the direction of their residence and at one point the wings were perpendicular to the 
water.  The nose of the airplane suddenly dropped and it descended, ultimately striking the 
dock and shallow water.
The airplane came to rest inverted, partially supported by the boat dock and partially in the 
river.  The water depth was about 1 foot at that location.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 80, held a private pilot certificate with single-engine land and sea airplane 
ratings.  He was issued a third-class airman medical certificate on June 18, 2009, with a 
restriction for corrective lenses.
The pilot™s flight time logbook was not available to the NTSB.  On his most recent application 
for a medical certificate, the pilot reported 2,200 hours total flight time, with 40 hours flown 
within the past 6 months.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was a 2007 Czech Aircraft Works Mermaid, serial number 06MM008.  It 
was a two-place, amphibian design and certified as a light sport airplane.  It was powered by a 
120 horsepower Jabiru 3300 reciprocating engine, serial number 33A-1065.
The most recent annual inspection was completed on November 3, 2009, at 4.0 hours total 
airframe time.  An engine oil change was accomplished on March 23, 2010, at 13.9 hours.  
There were no subsequent entries contained in the logs.  There was no record of unresolved 
maintenance issues related to the airframe or engine.
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) records indicated that the airplane was imported from 
the Czech Republic, and was issued an FAA Airworthiness Certificate in December 2007.  The 
accident pilot purchased the airplane on October 30, 2009.
METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS
Conditions at the Selfridge Air National Guard Base (MTC), located approximately 13 miles 
west of the accident site, at 1255, were recorded as:  Wind from 160 degrees at 11 knots, 
visibility 12 miles, broken clouds at 22,000 feet above ground level, temperature 22 degrees 
Page 3 of 6CEN10FA182
Celsius, dew point 8 degrees Celsius, and altimeter 29.87 inches of mercury.
Conditions at the Coleman A. Young Municipal Airport (DET), located approximately 24 miles 
southwest of the accident site, at 1253, were recorded as:  wind from 200 degrees at 9 knots, 
visibility 10 miles, clear skies, temperature 22 degrees Celsius, dew point 8 degrees Celsius, 
and altimeter 29.88 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted a boat dock along the St. Clair River.  It came to rest inverted with the 
left wing supported by the boat dock and the right wing in the river.  The accident site was 
about 60 feet from the shoreline/retaining wall.  The water depth was approximately 1 foot.
The nose of the aircraft was crushed and the cockpit area was compromised.  Both wings 
remained attached to the airframe.  The right wing was dislocated aft approximately 15 
degrees.  The wings exhibited leading edge crushing (impact) damage, and the wing skins were 
deformed and buckled.  The right aileron was partially separated.  The right flap remained 
attached to the wing, but it was rotated against the lower wing skin, past its normal extended 
position.  The left flap and aileron remained attached to the wing.  Aileron control continuity 
was confirmed.  However, the rod ends common to both the left and right aileron push-pull 
tubes at the inboard wing roots were separated consistent with overload.
The empennage was partially separated from the aft fuselage.  The rudder, horizontal stabilizer 
and elevators remained attached to the vertical stabilizer.  Elevator and rudder control 
continuity was confirmed to the empennage separation.  The elevator control push-pull tube 
was separated at the aft fuselage separation point.  The tube was deformed at the separation 
point and the appearance of the fracture surface was consistent with an overload failure.  
Elevator continuity was confirmed from the aft fuselage separation point to the cockpit area.
The left side of the engine and engine shroud exhibited damage consistent with impact.  The 
engine appeared to be otherwise intact.  Internal engine continuity was confirmed through 
crankshaft rotation.  The carburetor contained fluid consistent in odor and appearance with 
fuel.  No sediment or water was observed.  The throttle body and air induction assembly 
appeared intact.
The propeller blades and hub appeared intact.  (The propeller blades had been removed from 
the hub prior to the post accident examination.)  One propeller blade exhibited cracking of the 
finish surface on the aft face of the blade.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy of the pilot was performed on April 2, 2010.  The pilot™s death attributed to a neck 
fracture sustained in the accident.
The FAA Civil Aerospace Medical Institute forensic toxicology report noted the presence of 
Diphenhydramine and Metoprolol in the submitted samples.  Specifically, the report noted:
     Diphenhydramine detected in Liver;
     0.081 (ug/ml, ug/g) Diphenhydramine detected in Blood;
     Metoprolol detected in Urine;
     Metoprolol detected in Blood.
Page 4 of 6CEN10FA182
The pilot had a Special Issuance of his FAA Medical Certificate due to a history of prostate 
cancer in remission and high blood pressure controlled with medication (metoprolol and 
valsartan).  He had undergone cataract surgery with intraocular lens replacement, and a recent 
opthalmologic evaluation had noted a history of elevated blood sugar controlled with diet and 
age-related macular degeneration with normal visual acuity.
Diphenhydramine is an over-the-counter antihistamine that can have sedative effects.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Loss of control in flight
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
80, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land; Single-engine 
Sea
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
06/18/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
2200 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CZECH AIRCRAFT WORKS 
SPOL SRO
Registration:
N853CZ
Model/Series:
MERMAID 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Special Light-Sport
Serial Number:
06MM008
Landing Gear Type: 
Amphibian; Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
11/03/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1430 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4 Hours as of last inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Jabiru
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
3300
Registered Owner:
Michigan Sport Aviation LLC
Rated Power:
120 hp
Operator:
Michigan Sport Aviation LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN10FA182
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
MTC, 580 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
13 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1255 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
276°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
 
Visibility
12 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 22000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.87 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
22°C / 8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Troy, MI (VLL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Troy, MI (VLL)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1200 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Oakland-Troy (VLL)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
727 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
43.622222, -82.573333 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Timothy Sorensen
Adopted Date:
04/12/2011
Additional Participating Persons:
Roland Standring; FAA-Detroit FSDO; Belleville, MI
Publish Date:
04/12/2011
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=75626
Page 6 of 6CEN10FA182
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
