Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Justin, TX
Accident Number:
CEN09FA115
Date & Time:
01/03/2009, 1345 CST 
Registration:
N99YK
Aircraft:
NANCHANG CHINA CJ-6
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
2 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
After leading a three-ship formation to the destination airport, and while in pattern to land, the 
lead airplane was observed to be in a very steep right turn that immediately turned to a near 
vertical nose-down descent. The airplane then impacted terrain in a near vertical nose-down 
attitude. A postimpact fire consumed portions of the cockpit, fuselage, right aileron, left 
elevator, rudder, and vertical fin. Prevailing winds were from 40 degrees from runway heading 
at 10 knots gusting to 19 knots. The investigation could not determine if the wind conditions 
contributed to the pilot's decision to use a steeper-than-normal bank angle. federal Aviation 
Administration Advisory Circulatory 61-67C informs pilots that accelerated stall can occur at 
higher-than-normal airspeed if there are abrupt and/or excessive control inputs such as during 
steep turns. An examination of the engine and airframe did not reveal any preimpact 
anomalies.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain adequate airspeed while maneuvering on approach, which 
resulted in an accelerated stall and subsequent loss of control. 
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Performance/control parameters - Capability exceeded (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Page 2 of 6CEN09FA115
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 3, 2009, approximately 1345 central standard time (CST) a Nanchang China CJ-6, 
N99YK,  was destroyed and consumed by a post crash fire after a loss of control and impact 
with terrain while on base leg for landing at the Propwash Airport (16X), Justin, Texas.  The 
private pilot and passenger sustained fatal injuries.  The aircraft was owned by a corporation, 
operated by a private individual, and flown in accordance with 14 Code of Federal Regulations 
(CFR) Part 91.  No flight plan was filed for the local area flight.  Visual meterological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident.
The airplane was leading a three-ship formation on a local area pleasure flight.  The pilot called 
the flight and announced an overflight of Propwash airport in loose trail formation conducting 
a right break to enter the traffic pattern at 3 second intervals for landing on runway 17.  The 
pilot of the second aircraft initiated his break, established on downwind leg, and completed his 
landing checklist.  When he looked outside the cockpit for the lead aircraft's position he noticed 
lead flying on the base leg approximately 300-400 feet above ground level in a very steep right 
turn that immediately turned to a near vertical nose down descent.  The airplane impacted the 
ground near vertical and 180 degrees from the intended landing direction.  Witnesses on the 
ground confirmed this same scenario.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 69, held a private pilot certificate for airplane single engine and multi engine 
land, and instrument airplane.  A third class medical certificate was issued on August 27, 2007 
with the restriction that glasses must be available for near vision.  The pilot™s log book was not 
found prior to the completion of this report.  However, on the pilot™s last application for a 
medical certificate the pilot reported accumulating 2,500 total hours with 400 logged in the 
previous six months.
The passenger, age 61, held a commercial pilot certificate for airplane single engine and multi 
engine land, and instrument airplane.  A second class medical certificate was last issued on 
July 15, 2005 with no restrictions.  In addition, the passenger held a flight instructor certificate 
for airplane single engine land and instrument airplane.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The tandem two-seat, dihedral wing, retractable tricycle landing gear airplane, serial number 
1332010, was manufactured in 1965.  It was powered by a 360-horsepower Vendeneyev M14P 
radial engine driving a MT MTV-9-B-C three-bladed, variable pitch, metal propeller.  The 
airplane was certified under an experimental exhibition category on November 2, 2006 and 
reported to have accumulated 4,590 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1353, an automated weather reporting station at the Fort Worth Alliance Airport (KAFW), 
Alliance, Texas, about 7 miles south of the accident site, reported wind from 210 degrees at 10 
knots gustng to 19 knots, visibility 10 miles, clear skies, temperature 82 degrees Fahrenheit (F), 
dew point 48 F, and a barometric pressure of 29.64 inches of Mercury.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Page 3 of 6CEN09FA115
Propwash Airport (16X) is a privately-owned, non-towered airport located at an elevation of 
800 feet mean sea level.  Runway 17, the landing runway, was a 3,000 foot long by 60 foot wide 
asphalt runway.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane came to rest in a nearly vertical attitude.  The empennage was bent to the right 90 
degrees just aft of the wings and was rotated clock-wise 90 degrees.  The flight instruments and 
engine were found just forward and to the left of the cockpit.  A post-impact fire consumed 
portions of the cockpit, fuselage, right aileron, left elevator, rudder, and vertical fin.  The 
landing gear was found extended.  The split flap was found extended.  Both wings displayed 
accordion crushing with the right wing displayed a higher degree of damage than the left wing.  
Control continuity was established from the cockpit area to each of the control surfaces.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
An autopsy was performed on the pilot on January 4, 2009, by the Tarrant County Medical 
Examiner™s District, Fort Worth, Texas.  The autopsy ruled the cause of death to be from 
ﬁmultiple blunt force injuriesﬂ and the manner of death to be an accident.
Forensic toxicology was performed on specimens from the pilot by the FAA Bioaeronautical 
Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.  The toxicology report stated that no 
carbon monoxide, cyanide, or drugs were detected in blood.  No ethanol was detected in 
vitreous.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA Advisory Circulatory (AC) 61-67C, Stall and Spin Awareness Training, dated 
September 25, 2000, informs pilots that "[a]accelerated stalls can occur at higher-than-normal 
airspeeds due to abrupt and/or excessive control applications.  These stall may occur in steep 
turns, pullups, or other abrupt changes in flightpath."
History of Flight
Approach-VFR pattern base
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Post-impact
Fire/smoke (post-impact)
Page 4 of 6CEN09FA115
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
69, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Front
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
08/27/2007
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
(Estimated) 2500 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
NANCHANG CHINA
Registration:
N99YK
Model/Series:
CJ-6 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Airworthiness Certificate:
Experimental
Serial Number:
1332010
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
Vendeneyev
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
M14P
Registered Owner:
CENTROL INC
Rated Power:
360 hp
Operator:
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6CEN09FA115
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KAFW, 722 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
7 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1353 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
180°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
10 knots / 19 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
210°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.64 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28°C / 9°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Justin, TX (16X)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Justin, TX (16X)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Propwash Airport (16X)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
800 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
Visual
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Full Stop; Traffic Pattern
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Fire:
On-Ground
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
33.080556, -97.358889 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
William H Gamble
Adopted Date:
04/22/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Willis Power; Federal Avaiation Administration; Fort Worth, TX
Publish Date:
04/22/2010
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6CEN09FA115
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
