The pilot stated that he noted no problems with the airplane during the preflight inspection 
and the engine runup.  After liftoff on runway 29, the airplane climbed to treetop level, at 
which point a gust of wind pushed the airplane left toward trees bordering the runway.  The 
pilot had to bank the airplane to avoid the trees, and the airplane stopped climbing.  After 
"barely clearing" the trees at the end of the runway, the pilot elected to put the airplane back on 
the ground as he was concerned the airplane might not clear trees located further ahead.  He 
selected a streambed as an emergency landing site.  During the emergency landing, the 
airplane contacted trees along the edge of the streambed.  The pilot reported that the 
temperature was 88 degrees F and the winds were from 300 degrees at 3 knots.  The airport 
elevation was 2,415 feet, and the density altitude was calculated to be approximately 5,000 
feet.
The pilot's inadequate compensation for the weather conditions and his failure to maintain the 
initial takeoff climb, which resulted in a collision with trees during an emergency landing.  
Contributing factors were the unfavorable wind and high density altitude weather conditions.
On August 1, 2004, approximately 1430 Pacific daylight time, a Cessna 150C, N7815Z, lost 
altitude and struck trees during the initial takeoff climb from the Lost River Resort Airport, 
Mazama, Washington.  The airplane sustained substantial damage, the private pilot received 
serious injuries, and the passenger received minor injuries.  The airplane was being operated 
by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14, CFR Part 91 when the accident occurred.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed.  The flight was originating at 
the time of the accident with an intended destination of Arlington Municipal Airport, 
Arlington, Washington.
According to a report prepared by a deputy with the Okanogan County Sheriff's Office, who 
responded to the accident site, the pilot told the deputy that he was taking off in the airplane 
on runway 29 and "could not get lift and clear the trees at the end of the runway."  The deputy 
reported that he did not see any indication the airplane hit the trees located at the end of the 
runway, but actually cleared those trees, then descended, contacted the ground and slid about 
40 feet into another group of trees.  The airplane came to rest about 150 yards from the 
departure end of the runway.  The deputy reported that the temperature was 92 degrees 
Fahrenheit (F), the humidity was 23%, and the wind was from the north at about 6 mph.
In a telephone interview conducted by the NTSB investigator-in-charge on August 3, 2004, the 
pilot stated that he noted no problems with the airplane during the preflight inspection and the 
engine runup.  After liftoff, the airplane climbed to treetop level, at which point a gust of wind 
pushed the airplane left towards the trees bordering the runway.  The pilot had to bank the 
airplane to avoid the trees, and the airplane stopped climbing.  After "barely clearing" the trees 
at the end of the runway, the pilot elected to put the airplane back on the ground as he was 
concerned the airplane might not clear trees located further ahead.  He selected a streambed as 
an emergency landing site.  During the emergency landing, the airplane contacted trees along 
the edge of the streambed.  
The pilot reported that the temperature was 88 degrees F and the winds were from 300 
degrees at 3 knots.  The pilot did not recall the current altimeter setting.  At 1453, the nearest 
weather reporting station, located at Omak, Washington approximately 41 nautical miles east 
of the accident site, reported an altimeter setting of 29.74 inches.  Using the airport elevation of 
2,415 feet, a temperature of 88 degrees F, and an altimeter setting of 29.74 inches, the density 
altitude was calculated as 5,048 feet.
