Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Lihue, HI
Accident Number:
LAX01LA083
Date & Time:
02/01/2001, 0918 HST 
Registration:
N985SA
Aircraft:
Eurocopter AS-350-B2
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled - Sightseeing
Analysis 
The commercial pilot was performing a hydraulic accumulator test during the before takeoff 
check when the helicopter inadvertently lifted off.  The hydraulic pressure had been bled off 
during the test, and the pilot could not regain control of the helicopter prior to it impacting the 
ground tail rotor first.  The collective was locked down during the accumulator test; however, it 
became unlocked when the pilot was repositioning his hands to restore hydraulic power after 
the accumulator test.  FAA inspectors indicated that the collective lock design allowed for the 
release of the collective when the cyclic was moved during the test with the hydraulic pressure 
depleted.    
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The manufacturer's inadequate collective lock design, which resulted in the collective 
unlocking during a preflight check and subsequent unintentional liftoff and loss of helicopter 
control.  The pilot's loss of control was due in part to the unavailability of the hydraulic system.
Page 2 of 7LAX01LA083
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: STANDING - ENGINE(S) OPERATING
Findings
1. CHECKLIST - PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND
2. (C) ROTORCRAFT FLIGHT CONTROL,COLLECTIVE CONTROL - UNLOCKED
3. HYDRAULIC SYSTEM - NOT AVAILABLE
4. (C) ACFT/EQUIP,INADEQUATE DESIGN - MANUFACTURER
----------
Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: OTHER
Findings
5. LIFT-OFF - INADVERTENT
6. AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT POSSIBLE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
7. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 7LAX01LA083
Factual Information
On February 1, 2001, at 0918 Hawaiian standard time, a Eurocopter AS-350-B2 single engine 
helicopter, N985SA, impacted terrain and rolled over after an unintentional liftoff during a 
before takeoff check at Lihue, Hawaii.  The helicopter sustained substantial damage; however, 
the pilot, who was the sole occupant, received only minor injuries.  The helicopter was 
registered to and operated by Safari Helicopters Inc., of Lihue, as an on-demand, sightseeing, 
air-taxi flight under 14 CFR Part 135.  The pilot was performing a before takeoff run-up on the 
Lihue Airport helipad, in preparation for flight's boarding and departure, when the accident 
occurred.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident and a 
company visual flight rules flight plan was filed.
According to the pilot, he was in the process of conducting the hydraulic accumulator test 
during the before takeoff checklist when the accident occurred.  According to the Eurocopter 
training manual, the helicopter can be maneuvered without hydraulic assists, "but this requires 
the pilot to apply non-negligible forces that are difficult to gauge."  The training manual also 
states, "in case of loss of hydraulic pressure, accumulators in the main rotor servo actuators 
provide a small energy reserve, giving the pilot time to reconfigure in the safety configuration.   
The helicopter's before takeoff checklist calls for a hydraulic accumulator test to be 
accomplished with the fuel flow control in the "flight" power setting.  The test dictates that the 
collective pitch be locked down prior to testing the accumulators.  The pilot is then instructed 
to cut off hydraulic pressure by actuating the hydraulic test push-button (located on the center 
consol).  The hydraulic warning light will illuminate and the hydraulic warning horn will 
sound.  The pilot is then instructed to "move the cyclic 2 or 3 times along both axes separately 
on 10 percent of total travel, check for hydraulic assistance by absence of control load."  Once 
this is accomplished, the pilot is to press the hydraulic test pushbutton (on the center console) 
to restore hydraulic pressure.
At the time of the accident, the pilot was seated in the left cockpit seat.  From the left seat, the 
collective is positioned to the left of the seat, the cyclic is centered in front of the seat between 
the pilot's legs, and the hydraulic test pushbutton is to the right of the seat on the center 
console.  During the hydraulic accumulator test, while positioned in the left seat, the pilot has 
to remove his left hand from the collective control and place it on the cyclic control, then he has 
to remove his right hand from the cyclic and depress the hydraulic test pushbutton.  The pilot 
then repositions his hands to their normal position (left hand on collective and right hand on 
cyclic).  Once the test is complete, the pilot has to remove his left hand again from the collective 
and place it on the cyclic and remove his right hand from the cyclic and depress the pushbutton 
to restore hydraulic pressure.  
According to the pilot, it was when he repositioned his hands to restore hydraulic pressure 
when the helicopter became airborne in a nose low attitude.  The pilot quickly repositioned his 
left hand to the collective and his right hand to the cyclic.  He attempted to pull aft on the 
cyclic, turn the aircraft into wind, and takeoff in order to gain a controllable airspeed.  The 
aircraft immediately pulled back to the right and entered a back and forth oscillation.  The 
aircraft "entered a figure '8' type of oscillation with a nose high then nose low position in 
extreme almost wing over attitudes."  The helicopter descended like a "falling leaf" and struck 
the ground tail rotor first on the right side.  The pilot heard a series of grinding sounds and 
observed the main rotor blades disintegrate upon ground impact.  The helicopter came to rest 
Page 4 of 7LAX01LA083
on the right side, and the pilot shutdown the engine and exited the helicopter.  
There are two types of collective locks utilized in the AS-350-BA and B2 helicopters.  One lock 
(located on right seat collective) incorporated a steel plate, which slides over a stud mounted 
on the forward side of the collective head.  The other lock (located on the bottom side of the left 
seat collective) utilizes a clip that is attached to and hangs below the collective arm, curving up 
at the end forming a c-shaped clip.  The c-shaped clip wraps around a pin, which is mounted on 
the cockpit floor oriented along the longitudinal axis of the helicopter.  The left seat collective 
lock utilizes a locking plate, which the pilot depresses while he pushes the collective lever 
down.  When the locking plate is depressed, the clip is aligned with the locking pin and the clip 
automatically engages around the pin when the collective is lowered.  When the locking plate is 
not depressed, the clip is offset from the pin preventing it from unintentionally engaging in 
flight.  
The employment of either lock depends on an upward spring load incorporated in the 
collective control handle.  In either case, the spring loading must be physically overcome in 
order to apply the locks, as well as to ensure that the control handle remains in the full down or 
flat pitch position.  When physical pressure on the collective is released, the spring loading 
helps keep both locks in the locked position, while preventing the upward movement of the 
control handle.  
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspectors from the Honolulu Flight Standards District 
Office responded to the accident site, and, as part of the investigation, performed the hydraulic 
system check in a company helicopter identical to the accident helicopter.  The inspector noted 
that once the hydraulic system check is performed and the pressure is bled from the 
accumulators, the airframe experiences transient 1:1 vibratory loads.  This loading excites the 
collective control, and it reacts by bouncing up and down against the lock.  The lock sometimes 
reacts by releasing the collective.  The positive spring loading causes the collective, upon 
release, to suddenly pop up, putting some degree of pitch in the main rotor blades.  This 
scenario was played out by the FAA inspectors and it was noted that feedback from the cyclic 
motion with hydraulic pressure off, coupled with the collective lock design, would result in the 
collective lock releasing the collective.  In the accident sequence, the pilot's hands were 
transitioning and were not in position to offset the instantaneous and unexpected positive 
collective load. 
According to the Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1/2), the pilot had 
accumulated a total of 14,438 flight hours, of which 7,632 hours were in the same make and 
model as the accident helicopter.    
Page 5 of 7LAX01LA083
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/22/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/30/2000
Flight Time:
14438 hours (Total, all aircraft), 7632 hours (Total, this make and model), 11747 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 21 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 15 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Eurocopter
Registration:
N985SA
Model/Series:
AS-350-B2 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3111
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
7
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/03/2001, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4961 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
3093.1 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Turbomeca
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
1D1
Registered Owner:
SAF, LTC
Rated Power:
475 hp
Operator:
Safari Helicopter, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Safari Helicopter Tours
Operator Designator Code:
XSFA
Page 6 of 7LAX01LA083
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
LIH, 153 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
Observation Time:
0853 HST
Direction from Accident Site:
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
3 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
250°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.13 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
24°C / 18°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
, HI (LIH)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
Company VFR
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0918 HST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Lihue (LIH)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
21.966667, -159.333333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Robert R Crispin
Adopted Date:
04/15/2003
Additional Participating Persons:
Jeff T Weller; Federal Aviation Administration; Honolulu, HI
Andrew Colvin; Federal Aviation Administration; Honolulu, HI
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7LAX01LA083
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
