Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Goodyear, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX04LA111
Date & Time:
02/01/2004, 1100 MST 
Registration:
N2234S
Aircraft:
Cessna T210L
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Serious, 1 Minor, 1 
None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane experienced a forced landing after a loss of power due to fuel exhaustion.  The 
pilot stated that they had departed Burbank, California, en route to Gila Bend, Arizona, where 
they were going to refuel.  The pilot reported to FAA inspectors that he had fueled the airplane 
to it's 90-gallon capacity the day before the accident and had flown the airplane for 1 hour after 
that.  During the accident flight, the pilot had used a richer mixture to aid in cooling one 
cylinder.  He told the inspector that this may have led to a miscalculation of the fuel 
consumption during the flight.  As the flight neared the vacinity of Gila Bend, the pilot 
contacted Albuquerque Air Route Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and reported a low fuel 
situation and that he was going to land at Gila Bend for fuel.  The controller contacted the Gila 
Bend airport and determined that there was no fuel available there and suggested that the pilot 
should divert to another airport.  They then headed towards Buckeye Municipal Airport, but 
were later notified by ARTCC that Buckeye also did not have fuel.  At this time they diverted to 
the Phoenix Goodyear Airport and advised the tower that they were low on fuel and coming in 
to land.  As they approached the airport, the pilot switched fuel tanks but the airplane exhibited 
signs of fuel exhaustion.  The engine lost power, and the pilot landed in a plowed field about 1 
mile from the airport.  Post accident inspection by FAA inspectors found no fuel onboard the 
airplane.  All fuel lines and tanks were intact.  The inspectors found no evidence of a fuel leak.  
According to the Pilot's Operating Handbook, the Cessna T210L has a fuel capacity of 90 
gallons; .5 gallons are unusable on each side.  According to the engine's manufacturer, the 
average fuel burn is about 18 gallons per hour at 75 percent horsepower.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's inadequate fuel consumption calculations and in-flight planning/decision, which 
resulted in fuel exhaustion.
Page 2 of 6LAX04LA111
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: APPROACH
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION
2. (C) FUEL CONSUMPTION CALCULATIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (C) IN-FLIGHT PLANNING/DECISION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: LANDING
Findings
4. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 6LAX04LA111
Factual Information
On February 1, 2004, about 1100 mountain standard time, a Cessna T210L, N2234S, landed off 
airport near the Phoenix Goodyear Airport, Goodyear, Arizona, following a loss of engine 
power.  The pilot/owner was operating the airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91.  
The private pilot and one passenger sustained serious injuries, one passenger sustained minor 
injuries, and one passenger was uninjured.  The airplane sustained substantial damage.  The 
personal cross-country flight departed Bob Hope Airport, Burbank, California, at an 
undetermined time en route to Gila Bend Municipal Airport, Gila Bend, Arizona.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
 
A sheriff's deputy interviewed the pilot and the front seat passenger after the accident.  The 
pilot stated that they departed Burbank in the morning for a sightseeing flight in Arizona.  They 
had decided to stop at Gila Bend for fuel.  The passenger reported that they had enough fuel to 
fly from Burbank to Gila Bend.
In a statement to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector, the pilot reported that he 
had fueled the airplane to its 90-gallon capacity the day before the accident and had flown the 
airplane for 1 hour after that.  During the accident flight, the pilot had used a richer mixture to 
aid in cooling one cylinder.  He told the inspector that this may have led to a miscalculation of 
the fuel consumption during the flight.
As the flight neared the vacinity of Gila Bend, the pilot contacted Albuquerque Air Route 
Traffic Control Center (ARTCC) and reported a low fuel situation and that he was going to land 
at Gila Bend for fuel.  The controller contacted the Gila Bend airport and determined that there 
was no fuel available there and suggested that the pilot should divert to another airport.  They 
then headed towards Buckeye Municipal Airport, but were later notified by center that Buckeye 
also did not have fuel.  At this time they diverted to the Phoenix Goodyear Airport and advised 
the tower that they were low on fuel and coming in to land.
As they approached the airport, they switched to the other fuel tank.  It went from 1/8 tank to 
empty in 15 minutes.  They decreased their speed in an effort to conserve fuel.  Near the 
airport, the airplane exhibited signs of fuel exhaustion.  The pilot did not believe he was going 
to make the runway.  The airplane lost power, and the pilot landed in a plowed field about 1 
mile from the Phoenix Goodyear airport.  The airplane sustained damage to the main landing 
gear and to the fuselage.
Post accident inspection by FAA inspectors found no fuel onboard the airplane.  All fuel lines 
and tanks were intact.  The inspectors found no evidence of a fuel leak.
According to the Pilot's Operating Handbook, the Cessna T210L has a fuel capacity of 90 
gallons; .5 gallons are unusable on each side.  According to the engine's manufacturer, the 
average fuel burn is about 18 gallons per hour at 75 percent horsepower.
Page 4 of 6LAX04LA111
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
54, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/12/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/02/2002
Flight Time:
1425 hours (Total, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N2234S
Model/Series:
T210L 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
21061179
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3800 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
2406 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-520-H
Registered Owner:
Thomas J. Frith-Smith
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
Thomas J. Frith-Smith
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX04LA111
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PHX, 1103 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
18 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1056 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
90°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 25000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.05 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / -8°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Burbank, CA (BUR)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Goodyear, AZ (GYR)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor, 1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious, 1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
33.416667, -112.366667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
HOWARD D PLAGENS
Adopted Date:
12/28/2004
Additional Participating Persons:
Bruce Bessette; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Greg W Schmidt; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX04LA111
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
