Page 1 of 13
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Bisbee, AZ
Accident Number:
LAX05GA192
Date & Time:
06/01/2005, 1835 MST 
Registration:
N5205F
Aircraft:
Eurocopter AS 350 B2
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Public Aircraft
Analysis 
While hovering over a mountainous area on an aerial observation mission, the helicopter 
entered a rapid yaw rotation to the left then descended to ground impact.  While hovering over 
items of interest on the ground, the pilot began a turn to the left at 200 feet above ground level.  
The helicopter began to turn more rapidly than normal and the pilot applied right pedal.  The 
right pedal application did not counteract the turn rate and the helicopter continued spinning 
to the left.  The pilot then reduced power and pitched the helicopter's nose forward while 
maintaining right pedal.  The helicopter continued to rotate as it descended to impact with the 
ground.  At the time of the accident, the pilot was not aware from which direction the wind was 
blowing.  The pilot's regular flying assignment consisted of high-altitude surveillance flights 
over Florida and he was on a short duration pilot augmentation assignment to the Tucson 
operations base and had limited mountain flying experience.  A pilot flying in the area 
immediately following the accident reported winds greater than 20 knots and blowing from the 
west.  The helicopter was operating at a gross weight of 4,020 pounds.  The maximum 
allowable gross weight of the helicopter is 4,961 pounds.  The density altitude was 7,850 feet 
mean sea level (msl) and the out of ground effect hover capability of the helicopter was about 
8,000 feet msl.  Post accident examination of the helicopter did not reveal any preimpact 
airframe or engine malfunctions.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the pilot's failure to maintain an adequate forward airspeed, which resulted in an in-flight loss 
of control due to a loss of tail rotor effectiveness, while operating near the out of ground effect 
hover capability of the helicopter.  Contributing factors to the accident was the high density 
altitude and the pilot's lack of experience in the operating environment.
Page 2 of 13LAX05GA192
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. TERRAIN CONDITION - MOUNTAINOUS/HILLY
2. (F) LACK OF FAMILIARITY WITH GEOGRAPHIC AREA - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - HIGH DENSITY ALTITUDE
4. WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND
5. (C) COMPENSATION FOR WIND CONDITIONS - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
6. (C) LOSS OF TAIL ROTOR EFFECTIVENESS - ENCOUNTERED - PILOT IN COMMAND
7. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED
Findings
8. TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND
Page 3 of 13LAX05GA192
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 1, 2005, at 1835 mountain standard time, a Eurocopter AS 350 B2, N5205F, collided 
with the ground while performing an aerial search about 5 nautical miles east-southeast of 
Bisbee, Arizona, in the Mule Mountains.  The United States Customs and Border Protection 
(CBP), who was also the registered owner of the helicopter, was operating it as a public-use 
flight.  The airline transport pilot sustained serious injuries; the observer sustained minor 
injuries.  The helicopter sustained substantial damage.  The helicopter departed from the 
Davis-Monthan Air Force Base at 1523, and made an en route fuel stop at Naco, Arizona, about 
1700, where the pilot also picked up the observer.  The pilot and observer were performing 
patrol operations when the accident occurred.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and 
the flight was followed via CBP flight following.
A United States Border Patrol (BP) agent was driving south on highway 80 near the accident 
time, and looked through a "split" in the mountains, when he saw the helicopter about 2,600 
feet away, laterally.  The helicopter was circling slowly; first to the right, then to the left, then 
back to the right again.  It appeared that the personnel onboard were looking at something on 
the ground.  Then the helicopter dropped out of sight between two hills.  When he looked 
toward the helicopter again, he saw a cloud of dust and then saw it positioned on the ground 
with the main rotor turning.  The entire event took place over a period of about 20 seconds.  
The agent presumed the pilot landed the helicopter in the desert and did not realize that the 
helicopter had crashed until the following morning.  The agent had worked many times in the 
area of the accident site and said that the wind conditions varied.  He further stated that 
sometimes the, "valleys turn into funnels for the wind."
Pilot Statements
CBP received a written statement from the pilot.  In the pilot's statement, he reported 
encountering an "uncontrollable left yaw."  He attempted to regain control of the helicopter 
prior to impacting the ground.
In a later conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge 
(IIC), the pilot reported the following information:
The pilot refueled and picked up a BP agent at the Naco BP station.  Normally, ground agents 
with the Border Patrol will radio in information regarding search areas for the mission.  The 
day of the accident flight, the BP agent did not receive any information from the ground 
personnel so instead the pilot and agent elected to transition the washes and ridgelines south 
of Highway 80.
While flying southbound approximately 200 feet above the rising terrain, at airspeed between 
40 to 60 knots, the pilot began a left turn to continue searching a wash area.  The left turn rate 
was greater than the pilot expected and full right pedal deflection did not counteract the left 
turn.  The pilot thought that he lost tail rotor authority and lowered the nose of the helicopter 
while decreasing power.  The turn tightened and just prior to impact with the ground, the pilot 
pulled power [collective] attempting to soften the helicopter's touchdown.  During the loss of 
control, the pilot did not hear any alarms or see any warning lights prior to the helicopter's 
impact with the terrain.
Page 4 of 13LAX05GA192
The pilot stated that during the flight and into the loss of control, he did not feel or hear 
anything that indicated a mechanical problem with the helicopter.  As the helicopter began 
turning to the left, the pilot initially thought that the turn was due to a loss of tail rotor 
authority.  His initial response to reduce power and pitch the aircraft nose forward while 
maintaining right pedal to gain airspeed only aggravated the flight characteristics of the 
aircraft.  As the conditions worsened, the pilot believed that the loss of control could have been 
mechanical in nature.  
Just prior to ground impact, the pilot raised the collective to its full up position.  After coming 
into contact with the ground, the pilot stated that he heard the low rotor horn.  After waiting 
for the main rotor to stop, the pilot and the BP agent exited the aircraft.
The pilot reported that upon departing Naco, the winds were from the west-southwest.  The air 
was smooth and he did not experience any chop or control problems transitioning the terrain 
during the flight.  The pilot could not recall from which direction the wind was blowing just 
prior to the accident.
Passenger Statement
The passenger was interviewed by the Safety Board IIC on June 14, 2005.  He reported that 
they flew over a ridge, coming from the south, and entered a bowl shaped area with hills on all 
sides.  There was one outlet area to the northwest to which the passenger could see Highway 
80.
He reported that they descended into the area to inspect debris on the ground.  They circled the 
debris to the right, in a flight condition similar to a hover, and determined that the debris was 
trash.  They continued the circle to the right about 200 feet above ground level, when suddenly 
the pilot began fighting the controls and the helicopter dropped.  The passenger heard a "beep, 
beep, beep" sound immediately prior to, or immediately following, the helicopter's reverse in 
turn direction to the left.  The helicopter turned about 10 times to the left prior to impact with 
the ground.  The helicopter impacted the ground and the rotor blades continued to turn.  Once 
the main rotor blades stopped turning, the pilot and passenger evacuated the helicopter out of 
the left door.  The passenger believed that the helicopter's position relative to terrain precluded 
any chance of an in-flight collision with an object.  
The passenger stated that the flight was bumpy and gusty when they flew near the hills, and 
that as the wind blew the helicopter, the pilot would counteract its effects with the flight 
controls.  The passenger also stated that the normal length of the flights was 4 hours.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Pilot
The pilot has been employed by the CBP since 1987.  He was initially employed as an airplane 
pilot but in 2001, transitioned to the helicopter.  He has an airline transport pilot certificate 
with helicopter and multiengine airplane ratings, and holds commercial privileges for single 
engine land airplanes.  The pilot holds a type rating for the Cessna Citation.  The pilot also 
holds a flight instructor certificate for helicopters, single and multiengine airplanes, and 
instrument airplanes and helicopters.
At the time of the accident, the pilot's total reported flight time was 8,000 hours.  The pilot had 
accumulated approximately 700 hours total time in helicopters; 600 hours which were in the 
accident make and model helicopter at the time of the accident, and 500 hours as pilot-in-
Page 5 of 13LAX05GA192
command.  The pilot was authorized to wear night vision goggles (NVGs) and had accumulated 
37.2 hours of flight experience with NVGs at the time of the accident.  
The pilot was authorized by the CBP's Miami Air and Marine Branch to conduct maintenance 
check flights (MCF) in the AS 350.  On June 13, 2003, the pilot attempted to obtain 
authorization as an instructor pilot (IP) for the CBP.  The pilot received "below standards" 
ratings in the following areas: oral evaluation; normal approach; and autorotational descents.  
In the comments sections, the check pilot noted, "It was determined by the SIP [senior 
instructor pilot] that additional training is needed to make IP better standardized.  [The pilot] 
is a good pilot but needs a little more training before IP evaluation."  Prior to this, the accident 
pilot had received six training flights for the IP from February 7, 2003, until June 12, 2003, 
and was recommended for the IP check ride on June 12.  In the notes section for the June 12th 
flight, the evaluating SIP noted that the pilot, "performed above standards."  Following the 
pilot's failure to pass the IP check ride, CBP personnel logged the check ride attempt as 
additional training in the helicopter.
The pilot underwent AS 350 recurrent training at Helistream, Incorporated, on October 6, 
2004.  The training included a cumulative of about 6 hours of flight time and additional ground 
instruction.  The topics covered were as follows: normal procedures; abnormal and emergency 
procedures; high altitude mountain flying; instrument flying; and hazardous flight conditions.  
The grading scale on the training was between 1 and 5, with 1 being excellent and 5 being 
unsatisfactory.  The pilot received an average rating (3) in the "high altitude mountain flying," 
which was covered on day two of training.  The pilot received an above average rating (2) in 
"instrument flying" and "hazardous flying conditions."  All of the "normal procedures" and 
"abnormal and emergency procedures" showed an increase from average to above average, 
excluding the "t/r control failure/malfunction" and the "hydraulics failure," which were rated 
average and also covered during day two.  Many of the other operational areas were covered 
over 2 to 3 days with noted improvement in the pilot's performance.
The pilot was required to report for duty at the Tucson area border patrol operation for a 
special operation that began on March 30, 2005.  The operation involved increased support of 
the BP operations.  The area of operations was divided into seven geographic areas.  Most of 
the pilots flying the mission were on a 9-day duty rotation in the area, and had varied flying 
experience backgrounds.  Pilots were pulled from all of the available branch stations to 
contribute to the mission.  Upon arriving at Tucson, the pilot underwent his annual flight check 
and night vision goggles recurrent training from April 6 to 7.  The accident occurred during the 
pilot's third tour for the Tucson mission.  The operational flying environment for the Tucson 
mission consisted of low-level mountainous flying over desolate, desert terrain.  The pilot's 
normal flying environment in Florida consisted of surveillance flights.  The pilot also 
performed a 6-week mission in Salt Lake City, Utah, during the winter Olympics.
Approximately 7 days of the 9-day duty requirements were used for scheduled flights.  The 
pilots were normally scheduled in 8-hour duty increments beginning at 0500, 1600, or 2400.  
Normally, the flights would operate over a period of 4 hours.  However, depending on the 
mission requirements, the actual flying time might decrease or increase accordingly.
As previously mentioned in this report, the mission areas were divided into specific 
geographical areas.  Prior to operating in a new geographical area, pilots were required to 
undergo a familiarization flight (FAM-flight) of the area.  The pilot reported for duty on May 
24th and completed a FAM-flight of the mission area on May 25th.  The FAM-flight was 
Page 6 of 13LAX05GA192
coupled with another mission and the total recorded flight time for both the FAM-flight and 
mission flight was 3.5 hours.  It should be noted that the FAM-flight record could not be 
immediately located in the CBP's records since it was logged with the mission flight.
On the pilot's three mission tours, he was scheduled on the 1600- to 2400-hour shift, and the 
night of the accident was the last flight on his duty schedule prior to returning to Florida.  The 
helicopter was scheduled to return to Davis-Monthan at 1900.
According to the pilot, his normal mission duties in Miami were entirely different than those 
required for the Tucson mission.  He said the nature of the Tucson mission required pilots to 
take the knowledge acquired from the provided training and familiarization flights, and learn 
through experience flying in the area.
The pilot was on a duty schedule from 1500 to 2300, and his flight time was scheduled between 
1600 and 2000.  Working in the east desert section required the pilot to depart Davis-Monthan 
about 1530 in order to arrive at the Naco station close to 1600.  The pilot usually returned to 
Davis-Monthan about 2100.  There was one occasion where the pilot was required to wear 
night vision goggles while returning from Naco and he was the sole person onboard.
The pilot stated that the current work schedule was tiring but that he felt rested enough to 
complete the mission requirements.
Passenger
The senior BP agent was a passenger on the accident flight.  He was based in the accident area 
for about 1 year.  This was his third flight in a helicopter.  The purpose of the flight was to assist 
the BP agents on the ground in finding illegal immigrants.  The ground agents would radio to 
the helicopter if they suspected any activity.  The pilot was from Miami and not familiar with 
the area, so the passenger was assigned to fly with him to help him locate specific areas 
dictated by the ground crews.
According to the passenger, the activity was quiet the day of the accident.
HELICOPTER INFORMATION
The helicopter was to be maintained in accordance with Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) regulations, the CBP policy, and through a government contract with L-3 
Communications, a repair station authorized under 14 CFR Part 145.  The last inspection 
performed on the helicopter occurred on May 18, 2005, and was an "F" inspection, which 
included the 100-, 150-, 200-, 300-, and 500-hour inspections, at an aircraft total time of 
2,384.3 hours and engine time of 4,031.1 hours.  The total airframe time on the helicopter was 
2,476.0 hours at the time of the accident.  The next inspection was a 100-hour and was due at 
2,484.0 hours.  The helicopter was transferred from the Houston branch of the CBP for the 
mission. 
Prior to the helicopter's release for each flight, per CBP policy, maintenance is required to sign-
off on the helicopter.  This form was not signed for the accident flight.  
Per CBP policy, three airworthiness directives (ADs), in the form of inspections conducted 
prior to each flight, were required for continuous airworthiness.  These ADs were not signed off 
for the accident flight.  AD 2001-26-55 compliance was mandated to prevent failure of the tail 
rotor blade, which could result in severe vibration, loss of the tail rotor gearbox, and 
subsequent loss of control of the helicopter.  AD 2002-03-52 was created to detect bonding 
Page 7 of 13LAX05GA192
failure between the metal bushing and each STARFLEX star arm end, which could result in 
severe lateral vibrations and subsequent loss of control of the helicopter.  AD 2003-22-06 was 
created to prevent separation of the control rod outboard spherical bearing ball from its outer 
race, rubbing of the body of the control rod against the tail rotor blade pitch horn clevis, failure 
of the control rod, and subsequent loss of control of the helicopter.
Just prior to the accident flight, all three hydraulic accumulators were serviced and ground 
tested after a CBP pilot reported that the cyclic moved violently to the left during the hydraulic 
check.  The helicopter was repaired, ground tested, and returned to service.
L-3 Communications used a maintenance tracking system called Electronic Maintenance 
Records Keeping System (EMRKS), to track all of the maintenance performed on the 
helicopter.  It should be noted that maintenance personnel were not able to locate particular 
records for the helicopter through this computer system and there were standardization 
discrepancies in the entries among the aviation maintenance technicians assigned to the 
Tucson mission.
 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The closest official aviation weather reporting station was Douglas Bisbee Airport, which was 5 
miles west-nothwest of the accident site.  The automated surface observation system reported 
the following information at 1756: wind from 280 at 15 knots, gusting to 19 knots; visibility 10 
statute miles; sky clear; temperature 90 degrees Fahrenheit; dew point 29 degrees Fahrenheit; 
altimeter 29.87 inches of mercury.  At 1856, the following conditions were reported: wind from 
280 at 11 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; sky clear; temperature 86 degrees Fahrenheit; dew 
point 27 degrees Fahrenheit; altimeter 29.88 inches of mercury.
A Safety Board meteorologist reviewed weather data during the time of the accident.  In 
summary, no frontal boundaries or radar echoes were identified over Arizona. The closest 
upper air sounding to the accident site indicated west-southwesterly winds at 15 knots below 
6,000 feet with little change in direction.  The sounding was dry with relative humidities less 
than 20 percent and supported thermals through 13,000 feet.
A BP pilot flying in the accident area immediately following the accident, reported greater than 
20-knot winds blowing from the west.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The helicopter impacted rough, cactus and ocotillo tree covered terrain.  The terrain 
surrounding the helicopter formed a bowl with walls that rose to elevations of 5,500 feet mean 
sea level (msl).  A terrain saddle approximately 750 feet wide formed an opening to this bowl 
on its northwestern wall.
The nose of the helicopter pointed in a southwesterly direction and the accident site was at an 
approximate elevation of 4,900 feet msl.
The FAA coordinator responded to the accident scene.  The tail rotor and gearbox were 
displaced from the helicopter and located approximately 25 feet from the main wreckage.  All 
of the components were confined to a 50-foot area surrounding the helicopter.  The initial 
impact point was located approximately 25 feet from where the helicopter came to rest and the 
tail rotor strike tab was located a few feet from the initial impact point.
Page 8 of 13LAX05GA192
Control continuity was established from the antitorque pedals aft to the end of the tail rotor 
drive shaft.  Cyclic and collective continuity were also confirmed to the main rotor hub.  The 
two fuel boost pumps were supplied with power and functionally tested, with no anomalies 
noted.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Immediately following the accident, the pilot underwent toxicological testing for drugs and 
alcohol at the Copper Queen Community Hospital, Bisbee.  The tests were negative for ethanol 
and all tested drugs.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The helicopter seats were equipped with Oregon Aero seat cushions (Part Number 30420) and 
lumbar supports (Part Number 38031).  Oregon Aero seat cushion systems have been tested 
and meet or exceed the 19G vertical/26G horizontal/50-millisecond lumbar load survivability 
specification of 14 CFR Part 23.562.  The interior foam and outer covering meet the Federal 
Aviation Regulation (FAR) requirements as specified under 14 CFR Part 23.853.
The airplane was tracked using a CBP flight following system that was installed on the 
helicopter.  Following the accident, the pilot used his cell phone to notify CBP that an accident 
had occurred and that assistance would be necessary.  The BP agent climbed to the top of the 
nearest hill and used his cell phone to notify BP of the accident.  The BP handheld radio did not 
work. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The wreckage was recovered on June 3, 2005, for further examination.
On June 7, the Safety Board IIC, the FAA accident coordinator and representatives from 
American Eurocopter, Turbomeca, CBP, all parties to the investigation, examined the 
wreckage.
All of the fixed flight controls were manually actuated.  One tail rotor blade remained attached 
to the tail rotor gearbox, which was manually manipulated.  The pitch change links changed the 
pitch of the attached blade and the blade rotated with corresponding gearbox rotation.  The 
cockpit controls were manually moved and produced their corresponding movement through 
the transmission to the main rotor hub.
The end sections of the pitch change rod and the tail rotor drive shaft were removed from the 
helicopter.  The coupling and bellcrank were removed from the tail rotor gearbox.  All of the 
parts were sent to the Safety Board Material Laboratory, Washington, D.C., and examined by a 
metallurgist.  The results of the examination indicated that the fracture surfaces were 
consistent with overload failures.  Examination of the tail rotor drive shaft revealed that the 
dimple shapes on the fracture surface were consistent with the drive shaft rotating clockwise, 
and the aft piece rotating counterclockwise.  The pitch change rod is connected to the bellcrank 
by an eye that is stamped on its aft end.  One side of the eye was fractured.  Bending of the 
pitch change rod eye suggested an excessive tension load on the input rod.  The full 
metallurgical report is included in the accident file supporting docket material.
The main rotor blades had light chordwise scratching on blade tip surfaces and the leading 
edge was colored brown by an organic material.  Investigators that responded on scene 
indicated that the brown color was green at the time of the accident.
Page 9 of 13LAX05GA192
The right skid was broken from the helicopter during the accident sequence.  Both fuselage 
attachments were curled under the helicopter and the breakages were similar.  The left skid 
remained attached to the fuselage.  The bottoms of the skids were examined.  The right skid 
showed fore and aft scoring overlayed by sideways scoring.  Approximately 3 inches aft of the 
steel cross tube there was a dent.  The left skid showed fore and aft scoring with a lesser 
amount of sideways scoring.
The engine was examined.  The aircraft fuel filter and the Michigan fuel filter were previously 
removed.  The Michigan filter contained small deposits; the aircraft fuel filter was clean.  The 
chip detectors were removed and were clean.  The oil filter was clean and the oil bypass button 
was not popped.  All remaining fuel and oil filters were clean and had traces of fuel or oil.  Oil 
was present in the oil tank.
The engine's axial compressor rotated freely and there were no loose fuel lines, or damage on 
the front or rear supports.  The collective and throttle were manually actuated from the cockpit 
and continuity was established from the throttle control arm to the engine.  The throttle and 
the anticipator traveled freely.  The fuel shutoff was functionally tested and produced a positive 
shutoff.  There was no blade damage evidence in the tail pipe.  Continuity was established from 
the engine's free turbine to the main rotor and free-wheel rotation aft to the tail rotor.  
On June 21, 2004, the tail rotor servo was examined and tested at the Hawker Pacific 
Aerospace Facility, Sun Valley, California.  The IIC and a representative from Hawker Pacific 
Aerospace were present during the examination.
During the recovery of the helicopter, the tail rotor servo piston was cut approximately 3 inches 
from the rod end to facilitate recovery.  Because of this, many of the functional tests on the 
test-bench were not performed.
The tail rotor servo was mounted on a test bench.  The cut piston end rested on the bench.  The 
bypass lock operated normally.  No external leakage was noted during or following the tests.  
The servo control was pressurized to 580.4 pounds per square inch (psi).  When the piston was 
extended and retracted, the dynamometer readings were within specification limitations (.58 
pounds and .67 pounds, respectively).  The bypass locking mechanism locked at 80 psi and 
unlocked at 150 psi.  The piston travel was free and correct and there was no chattering evident 
during the testing.
The tail rotor servo was disassembled.  The disassembly did not reveal any mechanical or 
operational anomalies with the servo.  All of the bearings and seals were intact and smooth.  
The cylinder bores were free from gouging or scrape marks.  The filter was free of 
contaminants.  The bypass and servo spools were clean and free from gouging or scrape marks 
and they moved freely in their housings.
Using a Safety Board computer and the weather conditions from the Bisbee Automated Surface 
Observation System, the IIC calculated the density altitude to be approximately 7,850 feet msl.
The CBP Safety Officer calculated the weight and balance of the helicopter.  Using the installed 
gear and equipment on the helicopter, the gross weight was calculated to be 4,020 pounds.  
The maximum gross weight of the helicopter is 4,961 pounds.  Using the calculated density 
altitude of 7,850 feet and performance charts supplied by Eurocopter, the out of ground effect 
hover capability of the helicopter was 8,000 feet.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Page 10 of 13LAX05GA192
According to the Rotorcraft Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-21), "Unanticipated yaw is the 
occurrence of an uncommanded yaw rate that does not subside of its own accord and, which, if 
not corrected, can result in the loss of helicopter control.  This uncommanded yaw rate is 
referred to as loss of tail rotor effectiveness (LTE) and occurs to the right in helicopters with a 
counterclockwise rotating main rotor and to the left in helicopters with a clockwise main rotor 
rotation." 
Furthermore, "At higher altitudes where the air is thinner, tail rotor thrust and efficiency is 
reduced.  When operating at high altitudes and high gross weights, especially while hovering, 
the tail rotor thrust may not be sufficient to maintain directional control and LTE can occur."  
The handbook recommends the following procedures to help reduce the onset of LTE [all 
references to the left pedal were changed to right pedal]:
1.Maintain maximum power-on rotor rpm.  If the main rotor rpm is allowed to decrease, 
the anti-torque thrust available is decreased proportionally.
2.Avoid tailwinds below an airspeed of 30 knots.  If loss of translational lift occurs, it 
results in an increased power demand and additional anti-torque pressures.
3.Avoid out of ground effect (OGE) operations and high power demand situations below 
an airspeed of 30 knots.
4.Be especially aware of wind direction and velocity when hovering in winds of about 8 to 
12 knots.  There are no strong indicators that translational lift has been reduced.  A loss of 
translational lift results in an unexpected high power demand and an increased antitorque 
requirement.
5.Be aware that if a considerable amount of right pedal is being maintained, a sufficient 
amount of right pedal may not be available to counteract an unanticipated left yaw.
6.Be alert to changing wind conditions, which may be experienced when flying along ridge 
lines and around buildings.
The handbook recommends to, "Apply full right pedal while simultaneously moving cyclic 
control forward to increase speed.  If altitude permits, reduce power.  As recovery is affected, 
adjust controls for normal forward flight–If rotation cannot be stopped and ground contact is 
imminent, an autorotation may be the best course of action.  Maintain full right pedal until the 
rotation stops, then adjust to maintain heading."
On February 2, 2005, Eurocopter issued Service Letter number 1673-67-04 that reminded 
pilots of the yaw control forces on helicopters.  The Service Letter concluded with the following 
statements:
1.In hover flight or at very low forward flight speed, stopping a quick rotation to the left 
must be performed by immediately applying the RH [right hand] yaw pedal with a significant 
and maintained amplitude, regardless of the tail rotor type.
2.In hover flight or at very low speed, intentional initiation of a turn to the left shall 
always be made by moderate action on the yaw pedals.
3.Wind coming from the left or tail wind increases the aircraft rotation speed.
The helicopter and engine were released to the CBP on June 23, 2005, excluding the parts 
retained for further examination.  The tail rotor servo, end portions of the tail rotor drive shaft 
Page 11 of 13LAX05GA192
and tail rotor pitch change rod, bellcrank, and tail rotor gearbox coupling were released to the 
CBP on July 12, 2005.  No parts or pieces were retained.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Airline Transport; Flight Instructor
Age:
45, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane; Helicopter
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Helicopter; 
Instrument Airplane; Instrument 
Helicopter
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 1 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
03/01/2005
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2004
Flight Time:
8000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 600 hours (Total, this make and model), 6000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 120 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 8 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Eurocopter
Registration:
N5205F
Model/Series:
AS 350 B2 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
3109
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
5
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2005, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
4961 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
78 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Shaft
Airframe Total Time:
2476 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Turbomeca
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
Arriel 1D1
Registered Owner:
United States Customs Nat'l 
Aviation Center
Rated Power:
712 hp
Operator:
United States Customs and 
Border Protection
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 12 of 13LAX05GA192
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
DUG, 4154 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
14 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1756 MST
Direction from Accident Site:
70°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
15 knots / 19 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.87 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
32°C / -2°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Tucson, AZ (DMA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Tucson, AZ (DMA)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1500 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
31.439444, -109.835278
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Kristi Dunks
Adopted Date:
02/28/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Randy Prine; Federal Aviation Administration; Scottsdale, AZ
Mitchell Brininstool; United States Customs and Border Protection; San Angelo, TX
Archie Whitten; Turbomeca USA; Grand Prairie, TX
Joe Syslo; American Eurocopter; Grand Prairie, TX
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 13 of 13LAX05GA192
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
