The pilot stated that, during the preflight inspection of the airplane, he checked the fuel gauge, 
and it indicated 65 gallons. Due to the design of the fuel system, it is not possible to visually 
check the fuel level to confirm that the fuel gauge indication is accurate. During takeoff and as 
he reduced power for enroute climb, the left engine began to surge and lose power. He 
immediately turned left back toward the airport and contacted the control tower to advise that 
he was making a single-engine, straight-in approach to land. When he lowered the landing 
gear, the right engine began to surge and lose power. Subsequently, the pilot declared an 
emergency, and, realizing he had insufficient engine power and altitude to return to the 
airport, he retracted the landing gear and made a no-flap, gear-up landing on a nearby golf 
course. Postaccident application of battery power to the airplane confirmed that the fuel gauge 
indicated 65 gallons; however, when the airplane's fuel system was drained, only about 1/2 
gallon of fuel was recovered. Thus, the engines lost power due to fuel exhaustion.
Loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion. Contributing to the accident was the failure of the 
fuel gauge to indicate the actual amount of fuel on board the airplane and the design of the 
airplane's fuel system, which precluded a visual confirmation of the fuel level.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On March 1, 2013, about 1545 mountain standard time, an Aero Commander 500B, N93AA, 
lost power on both engines shortly after takeoff, and the pilot made a gear-up forced landing on 
a golf course fairway near Broomfield, Colorado. The airline transport pilot and one passenger 
received minor injuries. The airplane was substantially damaged. The airplane was registered 
to and operated by American East Airways Corporation under the provisions of 14 Code of 
Federal Regulations Part 91 as a test flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
local flight, which operated without a flight plan. The flight originated from Rocky Mountain 
Metropolitan Airport (KBJC), Broomfield, about 1540.
The pilot said that during the airplane preflight, the fuel gauge indicated 65 gallons, but the 
design of the fuel system precluded a visual inspection of the fuel level. The pilot said he took 
off on what was to be a test flight after the installation of the left engine. Shortly after reducing 
to climb power, the left engine began to surge and lose power. The pilot made an immediate 
left turn back towards the airport and contacted the control tower to advise he was making a 
single-engine straight-in landing approach. When he lowered the landing gear, the right engine 
began to surge and lose power. The pilot declared an emergency. Realizing he had insufficient 
engine power and altitude to return to KBJC, he retracted the landing gear and made a no-flap 
gear-up landing on the Omni Interlocken Golf Course.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot, age 69, held an airline transport pilot certificate with a multiengine land rating, and 
commercial privileges in airplanes single-engine land/sea and glider ratings. He was type rated 
in the Boeing 737 and a Dornier Alpha Jet. He also held a flight instructor certificate with 
airplane single/multiengine and instrument ratings, and a ground instructor certificate with an 
advanced rating. His first class airman medical certificate, dated December 3, 2012, contained 
restrictions for corrective lenses to be worn for distant vision, and possess glasses for near and 
intermediate vision. 
The pilot estimated he had logged more than 15,000 total flight time, of which more than 414 
hours were accrued in the Aero Commander.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
N93AA, serial number 500B-1296-111, was manufactured by the Aero Commander 
Corporation in 1964. It was powered by two Lycoming IO-540-E1B5 fuel-injected engines, 
rated at 290 horsepower each.
According to the aircraft's maintenance records, an annual inspection was done on February 
13, 2013, at a total airframe time of 10,020.6 hours. The Hobbs meter read 586.7 hours. At that 
time, the left engine was replaced by an overhauled engine (serial number L-8807-48). The 
engine had accrued 5,391.0 total hours before overhaul. The right engine, serial number L-
11118-48, had been overhauled on April 18, 2012. Total hours prior to overhaul were not given, 
but it had accrued 167.6 hours since overhaul.
Both propellers were Hartzell models HC-A3VK-2B. The left propeller (serial number BJ74) 
and the right propeller (serial number BJ252) had accrued 167.6 hours since overhaul. Total 
hours on the propellers were not given.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Weather recorded by the KBJC AWOS (Automated Weather Observation Station) at 1549 was 
as follows: 
Wind, calm; visibility, 40 statute miles; sky condition, 9,000 feet scattered clouds, ceiling 
22,000 feet, broken clouds; temperature, 7 degrees Celsius (C.); dew point, -8 degrees C.; 
altimeter, 30.24 inches of mercury.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The fuselage structure, forward of wing attach point, was bent upwards and there was vertical 
deformation throughout the length of the fuselage, particularly the lower portion. The outer 3 
feet of the left wing was crushed back to the spar, and the left propeller blades were bent.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The pilot said that when he preflighted the airplane, the fuel gauge indicated 65 gallons. Due to 
the design of the fuel system, it is not possible to visually check the fuel level unless all tanks 
are completely full. An FAA inspector applied battery power to the airplane post accident and 
the fuel gauges displayed 65 gallons of fuel. According to the salvage company that recovered 
the airplane, approximately ½-gallon of 100LL aviation gasoline was drained from the fuel 
system.
The following are excerpts from Section V of the Aero Commander 500B Maintenance Manual:
"Fuel is contained in five rubberized fuel bladders, two of which are located in each wing, 
inboard of the nacelles, and one in the center wing section above the baggage compartment. 
The five cells have a total capacity of 150-159 U.S. gallons and are interconnected by two-inch 
diameter tubes to ensure adequate fuel flow from the wing cells to the center cell. All cells are 
filled through the fuel fill port located on top of the right wing above the forward fuel cell. 
"The fuel quantity indicating system is comprised of an indicating gage, mounted on the 
instrument panel– with a dial to indicate the quantity of fuel in the fuel cells. The fuel quantity 
gage dial is marked from E (empty) to 135 U.S. gallons. Fuel cell capacity above 135 gallons is 
not indicated."
