National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Doylestown, PA
Accident Number: ERA10LA104
Date & Time: 01/01/2010, 1108 EST
Registration: N4026J
Aircraft: CESSNA 150G
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The accident flight was the first flight since an overhauled engine was installed.
The pilot performed an engine run-up before takeoff and noted no discrepancies.
During the initial climb, between 50 and 75 feet above ground level, the engine experienced a partial loss of power.
The pilot executed a forced landing into a field; the airplane came to rest upright and there were no injuries to the pilot or passenger.
Postaccident inspection of the engine revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.
The temperature and dew point at the time of the accident were favorable for serious carburetor ice at cruise power.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: A partial loss of engine power due to carburetor icing.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time and no flight plan was filed for the 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 personal, local flight from DYL.
The airplane was substantially damaged and the certificated commercial pilot and one passenger were not injured.
The flight originated from DYL about 1106.
The pilot stated that the purpose of the flight was for him to fly the airplane following extensive engine maintenance.
He intended on orbiting the airport for 1 hour, then intended on landing and having a mechanic (passenger), visually inspect the engine.
A total of approximately 6 gallons of 100 low lead (100LL) fuel were in each fuel tank as determined by a dipstick and confirmed by the fuel quantity gauges.
No contaminants were noted in either fuel tank or gascolator during his preflight check, and he did not notice any discrepancies during the engine run-up before takeoff.
The pilot further stated that after takeoff during climb out when the flight was between 50 and 75 feel above ground level, he noticed a partial loss of engine power.
With trees ahead he turned to the right towards an open field and while in a right turn, the right main landing gear contacted the ground.
The left main landing gear then contacted the ground causing the gear to separate.
The airplane came to rest upright in a left wing low attitude which resulted in fuel leaking from the left fuel cap.
Inspection of the accident site by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector revealed the airplane was resting in the middle of a corn field with the left and nose landing gears separated.
A small fire in the engine compartment had been quickly extinguished.
The airplane was recovered for further examination.
Inspection of the engine by an FAA airworthiness inspector following recovery of the airplane revealed the air induction housing was crushed around the carburetor, but there were no obstructions of the air induction system.
The air induction filer which had been separated and recovered from the accident site was determined to have been properly installed.
The throttle, mixture, and carburetor heat control cables were connected and properly attached; however, impact damage precluded range of motion checks.
The accelerator pump of the carburetor operationally checked good.
The spark plugs were new and exhibited light gray coloration of the porcelain insulator.
The engine was rotated by hand and spark was noted at all spark plugs, and compression was noted in all cylinders.
No indication of a failure or malfunction was noted to the muffler.
A surface observation weather report taken at DYL at 1054, or approximately 14 minutes before the accident indicates in part that the dry bulb and dew point temperatures were 35 and 33 degrees Fahrenheit respectively, and the relative humidity was 92 percent.
According to FAA Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin (SAIB) CE-09-35, based on the recorded temperature and dew point about the time of the accident, the conditions were favorable for serious carburetor icing at cruise power setting.
An overhauled engine was installed the day before and test run after installation.
The recording tachometer time at the time of installation was 6,275.32, while the tachometer at the time of the accident was 6,275.41.
