National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Marana, AZ
Accident Number: LAX02LA099
Date & Time: 03/03/2002, 1130 MST
Registration: N77618
Aircraft: Fairchild 24W-46
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis On the landing rollout the left brake hung up, and the airplane came to rest inverted off of the runway.
During an examination of the brakes it was found that the left brake piston would not release the disc when manually pushed in.
No further mechanical anomalies were noted with the brake system.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The left brake failed due to a stuck piston.
Findings Occurrence #1: NOSE OVER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) LANDING GEAR,NORMAL BRAKE SYSTEM - RESTRICTED Factual Information On March 3, 2002, at 1130 mountain standard time, an experimental Fairchild 24W-46, N77618, nosed over during the turnoff from landing at the Marana Northwest Regional Airport (AVQ), Marana, Arizona.
The airplane, owned and operated by the private pilot under the provisions of 14 CFR Part 91, sustained substantial damage.
The pilot, the sole occupant, was not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
The cross-country flight departed the Casa Grande Municipal Airport, Casa Grande, Arizona, about 1100, and was destined for AVQ.
No flight plan had been filed.
In the pilot's written statement, he indicated that he made a normal wheel landing.
On rollout he applied rudder and then brake to maintain directional control.
He stated that the left brake locked up and the airplane went over on it's back.
During retrieval of the airplane, the brake pads were loosened.
Both the owner and the person assisting with the retrieval noted that there was no clearance of the brake pads.
When they attempted to push in the piston to release the disk they found it could not be moved.
They also noticed that the brake pads were discolored.
No further discrepancies were noted with the brake system.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 74, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Multi-engine Sea; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
