National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: KOTLIK, AK
Accident Number: ANC02LA019
Date & Time: 03/01/2002, 1435 AST
Registration: N7373U
Aircraft: Cessna 207A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 5 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Scheduled
 Analysis The commercial certificated pilot was on final approach for landing at a remote airport during a scheduled domestic passenger flight.
The airplane was about 300 feet above the ground, with 15 degrees of flaps, and an airspeed of about 80 knots.
The pilot said that the airplane's airspeed seemed too fast, so he reduced engine power.
The airplane's airspeed then became too slow, so he increased engine power, but the airplane collided with terrain short of the runway threshold.
The airplane received damage to the nose gear, propeller, and left wing.
The runway is 4,422 feet long, by 100 feet wide.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the pilot-in-command to maintain the proper glide path to the runway during the final approach for a VFR landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: UNDERSHOOT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) PROPER GLIDEPATH - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND Factual Information On March 1, 2002, about 1435 Alaska standard time, a Cessna 207A airplane, N7373U, sustained substantial damage during landing at the Kotlik Airport, Kotlik, Alaska.
The airplane was being operated as a visual flight rules (VFR) scheduled domestic passenger flight under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident occurred.
The airplane was operated as Flight 408, by Hageland Aviation Services Inc., Anchorage, Alaska.
The commercial certificated pilot, and the four passengers, were not injured.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed.
VFR company flight following procedures were in effect.
The flight originated at the Mountain Village Airport, Mountain Village, Alaska, at 1338.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigator-in-charge (IIC) on March 1, the director of operations for the operator reported the pilot told him that he was on final approach for landing on runway 19 at Kotlik.
The airplane was about 300 feet above the ground, with 15 degrees of flaps, and an airspeed of about 80 knots.
The pilot said that the airplane's airspeed seemed too fast, so he reduced engine power.
The airplane's airspeed then became too slow, so he increased engine power, but the airplane collided with terrain short of the runway threshold.
The airplane received damage to the nose gear, propeller, and left wing.
Runway 19 at Kotlik has a gravel surface, and is 4,422 feet long, by 100 feet wide.
The remarks section of the airport facility directory/Alaska Supplement for Kotlik states, in part: "Unattended.
Runway condition not monitored, recommend visual inspection prior to landing.
...Runway 01-19 marked with reflective cones."
Pilot Information Certificate: Flight Instructor; Commercial Age: 22, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): Airplane Single-engine; Instrument Airplane Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
