National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Hailey, ID
Accident Number: SEA02LA046
Date & Time: 03/01/2002, 1936 MST
Registration: N421DG
Aircraft: Cessna 421C
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 2 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis While on approach to the Friedman Memorial airport (Hailey, Idaho), the pilot  of the Cessna 421C lowered the landing gear but failed to receive a gear down and locked indication on the right main gear.
He attempted to lower the landing gear utilizing the nitrogen blow down system, again without success.
The pilot then executed a landing with the nose and left main gear extended.
Post-crash examination revealed a small amount of water in the landing gear hydraulic lines.
When the landing gear system was purged and replenished with uncontaminated fluid the gear operated without malfunction both normally and with the use of the blow down system.
Temperature at Hailey, Idaho, remained well below freezing before and after the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: Water contamination within the aircraft's landing gear hydraulic line(s) which froze and blocked the line(s) preventing extension of the right main gear.
A factor was the below freezing environmental conditions which the aircraft was operating in prior to and during the approach and landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION Phase of Operation: APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) HYDRAULIC SYSTEM - CONTAMINATION,WATER 2.
HYDRAULIC SYSTEM,LINE - BLOCKED(TOTAL) 3.
The pilot and passenger were uninjured.
Visual meteorological conditions existed and an IFR flight plan had been activated.
The flight, which was personal, was operated under 14CFR91, and originated from Santa Monica, California, earlier in the day, and was destined for Hailey.
As the aircraft approached Hailey, the pilot reported that he was unable to obtain a down and locked status on the right main landing gear.
He then attempted a manual extension of the landing gear using the nitrogen blow down system, but again was unable to get a down and locked indication on the right main gear.
The aircraft was landed with the nose and left main gear extended and during the initial landing roll the right wing impacted the runway.
An examination and testing of the aircraft's landing gear and associated hydraulic systems was conducted under the oversight of an inspector from the Federal Aviation Administration's (FAA) Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) at Boise, Idaho.
The hydraulic system was drained and the fluid was captured.
Examination of the fluid yielded no particulate contaminants but a small amount of water was found in the fluid.
The hydraulic system was subsequently replenished and the aircraft was placed on jacks.
The landing gear was then cycled up and down repeatedly with no malfunction noted.
The landing gear was then extended utilizing the emergency extension system, again with no malfunction (refer to ATTACHMENT FAA-I).
The surface temperature at Friedman airport was well below freezing several hours before and after the accident.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 51, Male Airplane Rating(s): Multi-engine Land; Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
: 7560 lbs Time Since Last Inspection: 50 Hours Engines: 2 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time: 3898 Hours as of last inspection Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Installed, not activated Engine Model/Series: GTSIO-520-L Registered Owner: Benjamin, Mark J.
Rated Power: 375 hp Operator: Benjamin, Mark J.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
