Approximately 15 minutes into the flight, the tail rotor failed, and the helicopter entered an 
uncommanded turn to the left.  The pilot initiated an autorotation to an opening in a wooded 
area.  The pilot flared the helicopter over the trees, and the helicopter settled into the trees.  As 
the pilot increased the collective, the helicopter rolled to the left and came to rest inverted in 
the trees.  Examination of the helicopter by the pilot and a mechanic revealed that the tail rotor 
drive system uses three belts interconnected via pulleys at various points in the tail boom, to 
drive the tail rotor.  The intermediate tail rotor drive belt was shredded and destroyed.  The 
forward and aft tail rotor drive belts were intact and undamaged.  At the time of the accident, 
the tail rotor drive belts had accumulated approximately 80 hours.  The tail rotor drive belts 
had a life limit of 250 hours.  The reason for the failure of the tail rotor drive belt could not be 
determined.
the failure of the tail rotor drive belt for undetermined reasons.  A contributing factor was the 
lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
On January 3, 2007, at 1505 central standard time, a Marino Exec 162F-1995 single-engine 
homebuilt helicopter, N113JD, sustained substantial damage when it impacted trees and 
terrain during a forced landing following a loss of control near Baldwin City, Kansas.  The 
airline transport pilot sustained serious injuries and the passenger sustained minor injuries.  
The helicopter was registered to and operated by the pilot.  Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed, and a flight plan was not filed for the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 
personal flight.  The local flight departed Paola, Kansas, approximately 1500, and was en route 
to Lawrence, Kansas.
According to the pilot, approximately 15 minutes into the flight, the "tail rotor failed," and the 
helicopter entered an uncommanded turn to the left.  The pilot initiated an autorotation to an 
opening in a wooded area.  The pilot flared the helicopter over the trees, and the helicopter 
settled into the trees.  As the pilot increased the collective, the helicopter rolled to the left and 
came to rest inverted in the trees.  The fuselage and tail boom sustained substantial damage 
and the main rotor blades were destroyed.
Examination of the helicopter by the pilot and a mechanic revealed that the tail rotor drive 
system uses three belts interconnected via pulleys at various points in the tail boom, to drive 
the tail rotor.  The intermediate tail rotor drive belt was shredded and destroyed.  The forward 
and aft tail rotor drive belts were intact and undamaged.  At the time of the accident, the tail 
rotor drive belts had accumulated approximately 80 hours.  The tail rotor drive belts had a life 
limit of 250 hours.  The reason for the failure of the tail rotor drive belt could not be 
determined.
