Shortly after takeoff, the airplane's engine lost power. The airplane hit trees and then terrain, 
resulting in substantial damage. A postaccident examination revealed that one spark plug and 
its lead assembly had separated from its cylinder. Examination of the threads and the orifice on 
the cylinder revealed no anomalies. Further examination revealed that the remaining spark 
plugs were loose but had not separated from their respective cylinders. It is likely that the 
spark plug that had become separated was also loose and not properly secured during 
maintenance. Examination of the airplane's engine, airframe, and systems revealed no 
additional anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
The improperly secured spark plug, which resulted in a total loss of engine power.
On August 3, 2013, about 1130 central daylight time, an experimental amateur built Titan 
Tornado 1 airplane, N70786, was substantially damaged when it impacted trees and terrain 
after takeoff at Wild Rose Idlewild Airport (W23), Wild Rose, Wisconsin. The private pilot was 
seriously injured. The airplane was registered to and operated by the pilot under the provisions 
of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 as a personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed for the flight, which operated without a flight plan. The local flight was originating at 
the time of the accident.
According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector who traveled to the scene, 
several witnesses reported that the pilot was having problems with his engine. The pilot had 
removed and cleaned the spark plugs and was flying the airplane to see if the problem 
persisted. Shortly after takeoff the engine lost power. The airplane hit trees and then terrain, 
resulting in substantial damage to both wings, the empennage, and the fuselage.
The FAA inspector reported that one spark plug and lead assembly had separated from its 
cylinder. Examination of the threads and the orifice on the cylinder revealed no anomalies. He 
stated that the remaining spark plugs were loose but had not separated from their respective 
cylinders. An examination of the airframe and remaining systems revealed no anomalies.
In a telephone conversation with the pilot, he stated that he had not been having problems with 
the engine and had not removed or cleaned the spark plugs prior to the accident. He stated that 
the accident flight was the first flight of the airplane; he had just purchased the airplane and 
had not operated it or flown it prior to the accident.
