The pilot reported that he was on a short cross-country flight when he felt a slight vibration in 
the airplane. An instrument panel scan revealed that the engine™s cylinder head temperatures 
had risen above 450 degrees F. The pilot diverted toward the nearest airport, but the engine 
lost power before the airplane reached the airport. During the forced landing in a cornfield, 
both wings sustained substantial damage. A postaccident engine examination and test run 
revealed no evidence of any preimpact anomalies with the engine that would have prevented 
normal operation. The reason for the loss of engine power could not be determined.
A loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because postaccident 
examination did not reveal any anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. 
On August 1, 2013, about 0945 Pacific daylight time, a Weber GPA-2 (Long-EZ) experimental 
amateur-built airplane, N199BW, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following 
a loss of engine power near Brentwood, California. The airline transport pilot, the sole 
occupant, received minor injuries. The pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of 
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the 
cross-country flight, which had originated from Livermore Municipal Airport, Livermore, 
California, approximately 30 minutes before the accident. A flight plan had not been filed. 
The pilot stated that he was at an altitude of 4,500 feet when he noticed a slight vibration in the 
airplane. He examined the instrument panel and saw that the engine's cylinder head 
temperatures were rising above 450 degrees Fahrenheit. He did not remember looking at oil 
temperature or pressure indications. He diverted toward the nearest airport, but the engine 
lost power. He selected a road for a forced landing, but during the approach to the road he saw 
power lines ahead, so he attempted to make a 180-degree turn and land in the opposite 
direction on the road. He was unable to complete the turn, and he landed in a corn field. Both 
wings sustained substantial damage. 
A Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) inspector examined the airplane at the accident site 
the day after the accident. He reported that the engine was still in place in the rear of the 
fuselage, and it was upright and appeared to be level. He checked the engine's oil level and 
found that it was full, and the oil appeared to be very clean. The airplane was then retrieved to 
a secure salvage yard. The inspector again examined the airplane on August 9, 2013. He found 
the engine still mounted to the airframe, and he was able to rotate it by hand. When he 
attempted an engine start, the engine immediately started. He moved the throttle back and 
forth, and the engine accelerated smoothly and without hesitation. Following the engine run, 
the inspector removed and split the oil filter. It was clean with no metal debris. The inspector 
also removed the carburetor's fuel screen/filter, and it was clean. The examination and test run 
revealed no evidence of any pre-impact discrepancies with the engine that would have 
prevented normal operation.
