Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
FLOYD, VA
Accident Number:
IAD98LA065
Date & Time:
06/01/1998, 1632 EDT 
Registration:
N7794Y
Aircraft:
Piper PA-30
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
In cruise flight at 10,500 feet, the pilot reported a loss of engine power on one engine and 
requested vectors to an airport approximately 40 miles away.  The controller offered vectors to 
any of three airports closer to the airplane's position.  The pilot declined the offer and repeated 
his initial request.  The airplane subsequently lost power in both engines and crashed 
approximately 30 miles prior to the requested airport.  Examination revealed an undetermined 
amount of fuel in both outboard auxiliary fuel tanks.  Both inboard main fuel tanks contained 
no evidence of fuel.  The cockpit area revealed each fuel selector was in the 'Main' position.  
The two main tanks held a total of 60 gallons, of which 6 gallons were unusable.  Performance 
charts for the airplane revealed that in cruise flight at 10,500 feet, the airplane consumed 
approximately 15 gallons of fuel per hour.  Examination of the airplane's rental and fueling 
records revealed the it had flown approximately 4 hours since the last fuel service and had 
completed at least 5 takeoffs and landings.  Examination of the fuel system revealed no defects 
and both engines ran to rated power in a test cell. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's improper selection of fuel tank position resulting in fuel starvation of both engines. 
Page 2 of 7IAD98LA065
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. ALL ENGINES
2. (C) FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
3. (C) FUEL TANK SELECTOR POSITION - IMPROPER - PILOT IN COMMAND
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT - EMERGENCY
Page 3 of 7IAD98LA065
Factual Information
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 1, 1998, at 1632 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-30, N7794Y, was destroyed during a 
forced landing near Floyd, Virginia.  The two certificated commercial pilots were seriously 
injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the flight that originated at Concorde, 
North Carolina, approximately 1500, destined for Lewisburg, West Virginia.  No flight plan was 
filed for the personal flight conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
A review of voice communication transcripts from the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
revealed N7794Y contacted Roanoke Approach Control, at 1620, for advisories and flight 
following services.  The airplane was approximately 45 miles southwest of Roanoke, Virginia 
(ROA), at 10,500 feet.
At 1622, N7794Y reported "...we're descending through ah nine thousand, we're losing the right 
engine, we need priority."  The pilot also requested radar vectors for Roanoke.  The approach 
controller advised N7794Y that three airports were closer to their position than ROA.  The pilot 
advised they would continue to ROA.  When the controller asked the number of occupants and 
the amount of fuel on board, the pilot responded, "we got two souls on board and we're full of 
fuel...I'm estimating eighty-five gallons."
During the subsequent descent, the pilot advised they were "...losing altitude and directional 
stability."  The approach controller, a licensed pilot, stated he could hear the airplane's stall 
warning horn over the pilot's radio transmissions.
The airplane crashed approximately 30 miles southwest of the Roanoke Regional Airport.
The accident occurred during the hours of daylight approximately 37 degrees, 5 minutes north 
latitude, and 80 degrees, 20 minutes west longitude.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land, multi-
engine land, and instrument airplane.  His most recent second class medical certificate was 
issued May 1, 1997.
A review of the pilot's records revealed 801 hours of total flight experience, 168 hours of which 
were in multi-engine airplanes.  The pilot logged 6 hours of flight experience in the 3 days prior 
to the accident, 2.1 hours of which were in the accident airplane the day before the accident.  
The pilot had not flown in the year prior to the flight logged May 28, 1998.
The second pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single engine land, 
multi-engine land, and instrument airplane.  He also held a flight instructor certificate with 
ratings for airplane single and multi-engine land.
The second pilot's most recent FAA second class medical certificate was issued February 2, 
1998.
The second pilot's logbook was not recovered.  However, he did report 1,300 hours of flight 
experience on the date of his most recent FAA medical examination.  In a telephone interview 
with an FAA Aviation Safety Inspector (Operations), the airplane's owner reported that the 
second pilot had approximately110 hours of multi-engine experience, 65 hours of which were 
in the PA-30.
Page 4 of 7IAD98LA065
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The weather reported at Pulaski, Virginia, 23 miles northwest of the accident site was: clear 
skies with winds from 320 degrees at 12 knots gusting to 15 knots.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
Two FAA Aviation Safety Inspectors (Operations and Airworthiness) examined the wreckage 
on June 2, 1998, and all major components were accounted for at the scene.  The wings were 
separated outboard of the engine nacelles and the empennage was separated aft of the cabin 
area.  Flight control cable continuity was established from the cockpit to the point of wing and 
empennage separation.  All flight control cables appeared to have failed in overload at the 
points of separation.
Examination of the four fuel tanks revealed an undetermined amount of fuel in both outboard 
auxiliary fuel tanks.  Both inboard main fuel tanks contained no evidence of fuel.  Examination 
of the cockpit area revealed each fuel selector in the "Main" position. 
On June 3, 1998, the airplane engines were removed from the scene for further examination.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Both fuel selectors and fuel strainers were removed and examined by the FAA Inspectors for 
defects outlined in Airworthiness Directives.  No defects were noted.  According to a written 
report by the Inspectors: "No defects were found that would prevent fuel flow to the engines."
The engines were examined on July 15 and 16, 1998, at the Textron Lycoming Company, 
Williamsport Pennsylvania, under the supervision of a Safety Board Investigator.  Both engines 
started and ran to rated power in a test cell.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Piper PA-30 had a total fuel capacity of 90 gallons.  The two main tanks held a total of 60 
gallons, of which 6 gallons was unusable.  Performance charts for the PA-30 revealed that in 
cruise flight at 10, 500 feet, the airplane consumed approximately 15 gallons of fuel per hour.
Examination of the airplane's rental and fueling records revealed N7794Y had flown 
approximately 4 hours since the last fuel service and had completed at least 5 takeoffs and 
landings.  
Examination of the Piper PA-30 Pilot's Operating Handbook revealed the airplane was not 
equipped with a stall warning horn.  The airplane was equipped with a gear up warning horn.  
According to the handbook: "The gear up warning horn will sound when power is reduced 
(below 12 inches of manifold pressure) on both engines and the gear is not down and locked."
According to the FAA Operations Inspector, the airplane's owner said the airplane was rented 
to the pilot on the day of the accident.  The pilot had completed a check-out in the airplane the 
day before.  The pilot wanted to practice instrument flight "under the hood" and invited the 
second pilot along to act as safety pilot on a trip to Lewisburg, West Virginia.  The second pilot 
watched the first pilot perform the pre-flight inspection from inside the terminal building. 
According to the Owner's Handbook for the model PA-30, the emergency procedure for a loss 
of engine power in cruise flight was "...maintain airspeed and directional control of airplane; 
immediately advance mixture, propeller and throttle controls...Turn on fuel pumps, check 
ignition switches, fuel gauges and fuel cell selectors..."
Page 5 of 7IAD98LA065
The airplane wreckage was released on November 17, 1998, to a representative of the owner's 
insurance company.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
44, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/05/1997
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
801 hours (Total, all aircraft), 589 hours (Pilot In Command, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 90 days, 
all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N7794Y
Model/Series:
PA-30 PA-30
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
30-877
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/18/1998, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
3600 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
50 Hours
Engines:
2 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4197 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, activated, did not 
aid in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO-320
Registered Owner:
LEONARD M. LANCASTER
Rated Power:
150 hp
Operator:
LEONARD M. LANCASTER
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Operator Does Business As:
LANCASTER AVIATION INC
Operator Designator Code:
Page 6 of 7IAD98LA065
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PSK, 2120 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
23 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1642 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
300°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 15 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
320°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
26°C / 12°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
CONCORDE, NC (3N8)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
LEWISBURG, WV (LWB)
Type of Clearance:
VFR on top
Departure Time:
1500 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Destroyed
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
BRIAN      C RAYNER
Adopted Date:
03/30/2000
Additional Participating Persons:
JOHN H PHELPS; RICHMOND, VA
JAMES F BROWN; WILLIAMSPORT, PA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 7 of 7IAD98LA065
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
