Page 1 of 2ANC18LA018
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location:
Lynchburg, VA
Accident Number:
ANC18LA018
Date & Time:
01/01/2018, 1725 EST 
Registration:
N594MA
Aircraft:
COSTRUZIONI AERONAUTICHE 
TECNA P2006
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
On January 1, 2018, about 1725 eastern standard time, a Costruzioni Aeronautiche Tecnam 
P2006T airplane, N594MA, sustained substantial damage following a landing gear separation 
during landing at the Falwell Airport, Lynchburg, Virginia. The certificated flight instructor in 
the right seat and the pilot receiving instruction in the left seat sustained no injury. The 
airplane was registered to Mid-Atlantic Air Ventures, Inc., Martinsville, Virginia and was 
operated by the Infinity Flight Group, Trenton, New Jersey, as a 14 
Code of Federal 
Regulations
 Part 91 visual flight rules instructional flight. Visual meteorological conditions 
were present at the time of the accident and no flight plan was filed. The airplane departed 
from the Trenton Mercer Airport, Trenton, about 1440.
The flight instructor reported that the flight was an instructional multiple leg cross-county, 
that was required for the pilot to complete toward a commercial pilot certificate. Enroute to the 
Falwell Airport, the flight following procedures were cancelled once the airplane was within 5 
miles from the destination airport. The aircrew then monitored the automated terminal 
information service (ATIS) from the Lynchburg Regional Airport/Preston Glen Field, 
Lynchburg, which reported the wind condition at 8 knots, from 290째. The pilot was landing on 
runway 28. 
The flight instructor further reported, the pilot entered the airport traffic pattern from the 
north-northwest onto a 3 mile right base leg for runway 28. The pilot then lowered the landing 
gear and confirmed there were 3 green landing gear lights. The pilot turned onto final 
approach, and with the flaps fully extended, the aircrew verified verbally that all landing gears 
were down and locked. The pilot maintained about a 500 fpm descent on final and verified 
verbally with the flight instructor that the airspeed was 70 knots. The pilot flared and executed 
a normal landing. Immediately after touchdown, the left main landing gear assembly separated 
at the axle. Subsequently, the airplane skidded for about 100 feet, departed the runway to the 
left, and came to rest on the grass. The pilot performed a shutdown and the two occupants 
egressed without further incident.
Page 2 of 2ANC18LA018
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
The flight instructor reported there were no wind gusts during the approach and landing, and 
there was no side loading at touchdown. The flight instructor further reported that in his 
experience, he did not feel the landing would have caused any damage.
The airplane sustained substantial damage to the fuselage. The separated main landing gear leg 
assembly was recovered and secured for future examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
COSTRUZIONI AERONAUTICHE 
TECNA
Registration:
N594MA
Model/Series:
P2006 T
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Amateur Built:
No
Operator:
Infinity Flight Group
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KLYH, 938 ft msl
Observation Time:
2154 UTC
Distance from Accident Site:
5 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point:
-6째C / -21째C
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 
7 knots / , 290째
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility:
10 Miles
Altimeter Setting:
30.42 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Departure Point: 
TRENTON, NJ (TTN)
Destination: 
Lynchburg, VA (W24)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
37.378056, -79.121389 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Michael J Hodges
Additional Participating Persons:
Mark Jennings; FAA Richmond FSDO; Richmond, VA
Pending Designation; Agenzia Nazionale per la Sicurezza del Volo; Rome, FN
Pending Designation; Construzioni Aeronautiche Tecnam (Advisor); Casoria, FN
Note:
The NTSB did not travel to the scene of this accident.
