Page 1 of 7
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Oceano, CA
Accident Number:
WPR13FA083
Date & Time:
01/02/2013, 1605 PST 
Registration:
N45923
Aircraft:
LUSCOMBE 8A
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Aerodynamic stall/spin
Injuries:
1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
Witnesses reported that they observed the airplane flying low above the beach before it 
ascended abruptly. When the airplane was about 150 to 200 feet above the ground, the ascent 
stopped, and the airplane then descended in a nose low attitude to ground impact. Witnesses 
also reported that the engine sounded normal during the accident sequence. Postaccident 
examination of the airframe and engine revealed no preimpact mechanical malfunctions or 
failures that would have precluded normal operation. 
The pilot had a reported history of marijuana abuse. Toxicology testing on the pilot was 
positive for tetrahydrocannabinol at levels that indicate he was likely impaired during the 
flight. This impairment likely affected the pilot™s ability to maintain airplane control and his 
decision to begin a low-level flight maneuver at an altitude that was not sufficient for recovery 
before impact with the ground. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s failure to maintain airplane control and his improper decision to begin a low-level 
maneuver at an altitude that was not sufficient for recovery before ground impact. 
Contributing to the accident was the pilot™s impairment from marijuana use.
Page 2 of 7WPR13FA083
Findings
Aircraft
Altitude - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Decision making/judgment - Pilot (Cause)
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Illicit drug - Pilot (Factor)
Page 3 of 7WPR13FA083
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 2, 2013, about 1605 Pacific standard time, a Luscombe 8A, N45923, was 
substantially damaged when it impacted terrain about 2 miles south of the Oceano County 
Airport (L52), Oceano, California. The commercial pilot was fatally injured. The airplane was 
registered to, and operated by, the pilot as a 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 local 
personal flight. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The 
flight originated from L52 at an unknown time. 
Witnesses reported that they observed the airplane flying low above the beach when it 
ascended abruptly. When the airplane was approximately 150-200 feet above the ground, it 
appeared to stop and descended abruptly before it impacted the sand dunes below. The 
witnesses did not see the initial impact, but they observed the airplane bounce. Witnesses 
reported that the engine sounded normal during the accident sequence. 
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
At the time of the accident, the pilot, age 56, held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane 
single- and multi-engine land privileges. The pilot also held an airframe and powerplant 
mechanics certificate. The pilot's most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) second 
class medical was issued on October 1, 2012 with the restriction that he must possess glasses 
for near and intermediate vision. During his examination, the pilot reported he had a total of 
7,000 flight hours, 185 of which were within the six months preceding the examination. The 
pilot's logbooks were not located.
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The two-seat, high-wing, fixed-gear airplane, serial number 2450, was manufactured in 1946. 
It was powered by a Continental Motors A-65-8, 65 horsepower engine and was equipped with 
a fixed-pitch propeller. The airplane's maintenance logbooks were not located. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The nearest weather reporting station, San Luis Obispo Regional Airport (SBP), located 
approximately 10 miles north of the accident site reported at 1756, calm wind, 10 statute miles 
of visibility, clear skies, temperature 17 degrees C, dewpoint -6 degrees C, and an altimeter 
reading of 30.08 inches of mercury. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT
The wreckage debris path was approximately 720 feet long with a heading of about 19 degrees. 
The first identified point of impact was a divot on the ridge of a sand dune that was consistent 
with a tire mark. Almost immediately following the initial point of impact was an about 8 foot 
by 3 foot section of heavily disrupted sand, with three foot wide sliding marks extending 
toward an approximate 2 foot by 6 inch impact point. After the impact point, there was about 7 
feet of undisturbed sand followed by the main wreckage, which was a total of about 120 feet 
beyond the first point of impact. The final piece of debris was a wheel that was located about 
600 feet beyond the main wreckage on the other side of a second sand dune. 
Examination of the main wreckage revealed that the airplane came to rest in a nose low 
Page 4 of 7WPR13FA083
attitude. The forward fuselage sustained extensive crush damage, and the cabin area came to 
rest on top of the engine. The aft fuselage and empennage were still attached by the airplane's 
belly skin; however, it was folded underneath the airplane's wings and came to rest inverted in 
the sand. The empennage sustained minimal damage. The left and right horizontal stabilizers 
had a different paint scheme from the rest of the yellow empennage and airframe. The wings 
were still attached to the cabin and mostly intact; both wings sustained leading edge crushing 
throughout. Evidence of corrosion was noted at the wing spar attachment points and scattered 
throughout the remainder of the airframe. Flight control continuity was established from the 
cockpit controls to their respective flight control surfaces. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The autopsy was performed on the pilot by the San Luis Obispo County Sheriff Œ Coroner 
Office in San Luis Obispo, California. The cause of death was sharp force injury and the 
autopsy noted that the pilot had an enlarged heart. Toxicology testing detected 
tetrahydrocannabinol in lung (0.0485 ug/ml), liver (0.011 ug/ml), and blood (0.0062 ug/ml). 
Tetrahydrocannabinol carboxylic acid, was detected in urine (0.0965 ug/ml), liver (0.0369 
ug/ml), blood (0.0067 ug/ml), and lung (0.0053 ug/ml).
The pilot had a history of cannabis abuse with a positive Department of Transportation 
required random test in 1999. The FAA had evaluated his history and determined him to be 
eligible for a second class medical certificate in 2003 and thereafter. Although additional 
random drug tests were recommended, they were not performed. 
For more detailed information see the Medical Factual Report located in the accident docket. 
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Engine Examination
The engine was removed from the firewall and slung from a hoist. Initial visual inspection of 
the recovered engine revealed no visual anomalies. The cylinder rocker covers and spark plugs 
were removed; the spark plug electrode areas were consistent with 'worn out - normal' when 
compared to the Champion AV-27 chart. The valves were undamaged and contained no 
abnormal thermal discoloration. When the propeller was rotated by hand, thumb compression 
was established on all cylinders, all valves moved in sequence and had similar amounts of lift, 
and the accessory gears rotated. The carburetor was fracture separated at the throttle plate 
neck; both pieces of the carburetor were removed from the engine. Sand was found inside of 
the carburetor and was consistent with the sand on scene. Both the throttle and mixture levers 
moved freely from stop to stop when manipulated by hand. The carburetor bowl was removed; 
there was no fuel in the carburetor bowl or the undamaged metal float. The oil screen was 
removed and contained some carbon flakes.
History of Flight
Maneuvering-low-alt flying
Aerodynamic stall/spin (Defining event)
Uncontrolled descent
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Page 5 of 7WPR13FA083
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
56
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Unknown
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
Yes
Medical Certification:
Class 2 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/01/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
7000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 99999 hours (Total, this make and model)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
LUSCOMBE
Registration:
N45923
Model/Series:
8A 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2450
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
A&C65 SERIES
Registered Owner:
GLEN P RAY
Rated Power:
65 hp
Operator:
GLEN P RAY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 6 of 7WPR13FA083
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
SBP, 212 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1756 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
354°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
Calm / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.08 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
17°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Oceano, CA (L52)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Oceano, CA (L52)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
 PST
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Oceano County Airport (L52)
Runway Surface Type:
N/A
Airport Elevation:
14 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude:
35.066111, -120.618333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Samantha A Link
Adopted Date:
01/20/2015
Additional Participating Persons:
Dalton L Mountz; Federal Aviation Administration; San Jose, CA
Publish Date:
01/20/2015
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85940
Page 7 of 7WPR13FA083
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
