Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
OAKLEY, KS
Accident Number:
CHI00LA149
Date & Time:
06/01/2000, 0700 CDT 
Registration:
N2329Y
Aircraft:
Piper PA-36-200
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 137: Agricultural
Analysis 
The airplane veered off of runway 34 in a sharp turn to the right while back taxiing for takeoff.  
The pilot reported that there were light to moderate rain showers located 15-20 miles 
west/southwest of the airport prior to his preflighting the airplane.  He also reported that the 
wind velocity changed in magnitude and direction during the taxi.  The pilot also reported that 
following the accident, the winds increased from the east/northeast to 12-15 mph and that 
there was convective activity in the area. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
the directional control not maintained by the pilot.  The thunderstorm, quartering 
tailwind/crosswind and the weather evaluation by the pilot were contributing factors. 
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER
Phase of Operation: TAXI - TO TAKEOFF
Findings
1. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - THUNDERSTORM
2. (C) DIRECTIONAL CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND
3. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - TAILWIND
4. (F) WEATHER EVALUATION - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND
5. (F) WEATHER CONDITION - CROSSWIND
Page 2 of 5CHI00LA149
Factual Information
 On June 1, 2000, at 0700 central daylight time, a Piper PA-36-200, N2329Y, operated by 
Cooperative Agricultural Services Incorporated, was substantially damaged during a back taxi 
for takeoff on runway 34 (5,000 feet by 75 feet, asphalt) at the Oakley Municipal Airport, 
Oakley, Kansas.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time accident.  The 14 CFR 
Part 137 aerial application flight was not operating on a flight plan.  The commercial pilot 
reported no injuries.  The local flight was originating at the time of the accident.
In a written statement, the pilot reported the following: "...I arrived at the airplane's hanger at 
6:10 a.m. to preflight the plane and pushed it out of the hanger to load it for spraying that 
morning.  Winds were light and variable out of the north/northwest at 5 to 7 mph.  Thin cloud 
cover with light to moderate rain showers to the west/southwest of the airport about 15-20 
miles away.  The direction I was to spray was about 20 miles southeast of the airport.  After 
pre-flight and loading the plane I checked the radar and wind speed/direction again and 
conditions were still favorable for flight.  I started the plane, let it warm up, all systems and 
controls were functioning correctly and fully operational.  I then let the plane idle while I 
checked weather conditions once more.  The wind was a little more east/northeast about 8-10 
mph with light showers about 10 miles away to the southeast.  I proceeded to taxi to the 
runway, did my run-up again found all systems and control operating correctly and rolled out 
on the runway 16 to back taxi for departure on 34.  I was proceeding very slowly with my feet 
on the rudders and stick to the left to compensate for the crosswind.  I had rolled less than 300 
ft. when the tail whipped suddenly to the right and the airplane veered to the left.  I instantly 
tried to bring it back to center to no avail.  The plane left the runway in a sharp turn to the 
right...  Once back at the hanger, I checked radar and winds finding winds had increased to E-
NE 12-15 mph with a moderately strong thunderstorm in the area."
Weather radar indicated an area of 40 dBZ returns to be present in the area at 0715.
The accident airplane was equipped with a tailwheel landing gear arrangement.  Advisory 
Circular 61-21A, Flight Training Handbook, states under Taxiing-Tailwheel Type Airplanes, 
"An airplane with a tailwheel landing gear arrangement has a tendency to "weathervane" or 
turn into the wind while it is being taxied.  This tendency is much greater than in airplanes 
equipped with nosewheels...  The tendency of the tailwheel-type airplane to weathervane is 
greatest while taxiing directly crosswind: consequently, directional control is somewhat 
difficult.  Without brakes, it is almost impossible to keep the airplane from turning into any 
wind of considerable velocity since the airplane's rudder control capability may be inadequate 
to counteract the crosswind.  In taxiing downwind the tendency to weathervane is increased, 
due to the tailwind decreasing the effectiveness of the flight controls.  This requires a more 
positive use of the rudder and the brakes, particularly if the wind velocity is above that of a 
light breeze.  Unless the field is soft, or very rough, it is best when taxiing downwind to hold the 
elevator control in neutral or slightly forward."
Page 3 of 5CHI00LA149
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Commercial
Age:
38, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Center
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/31/2000
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
Flight Time:
640 hours (Total, all aircraft), 20 hours (Total, this make and model), 10 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N2329Y
Model/Series:
PA-36-200 PA-36-200
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Restricted
Serial Number:
36-8160002
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
05/01/2000, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
10 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4215 Hours 
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
IO-540-K1G5
Registered Owner:
COOPERATIVE AGRICULTURAL 
SERVI
Rated Power:
300 hp
Operator:
COOPERATIVE AGRICULTURAL 
SERVI
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
Operator Does Business As:
CO-AG
Operator Designator Code:
Page 4 of 5CHI00LA149
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
HLC, 2690 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
29 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0653 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
60°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear / 0 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None / 0 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
0 ft
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
7 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 13°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
 (OEL)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
0700 CDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
OAKLEY MUNICIPAL AIRPORT (OEL)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
3045 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
34
IFR Approach:
Runway Length/Width:
5000 ft / 75 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
MITCHELL   F GALLO
Adopted Date:
05/08/2001
Additional Participating Persons:
JEFF   SPANGLER; WICHITA, KS
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5CHI00LA149
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
