Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Refugio, TX
Accident Number:
CEN10LA005
Date & Time:
10/02/2009, 1310 CDT 
Registration:
N991PP
Aircraft:
BEECH A36
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Fuel starvation
Injuries:
1 Minor, 2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
During a cross-country flight the pilot tracked his fuel usage by watching the engine analyzer; 
however, about 180 miles from his destination airport the engine lost power and the pilot 
performed a forced landing, resulting in substantial to the airplane.  During the descent the 
pilot unsuccessfully tried to restart the engine by switching the fuel selector between the right 
and left fuel tanks. An on-site examination of the airplane revealed that the that the airplane's 
left wing fuel tank contained about 2 cups of fuel and when the right wing fuel cap was 
removed, fuel would spill from the tank.  An additional examination of the fuel selector, 
airframe, and an engine test run failed to reveal a preimpact anomaly that would have 
precluded a restart of the engine. The pilot later added that while trying to restart the engine he 
did not turn on the electric-driven fuel pump. Additionally, he noted that the checklist that he 
carried in the aircraft failed to mention the electric-driven fuel pump; however, he noted that 
the pilot's operating handbook (POH) did mention the electric pump.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A total loss of engine power due to fuel starvation as a result of the pilot's improper fuel 
management. Contributing to the accident was the pilot's failure to follow the correct engine 
restart checklist.
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Use of checklist - Pilot (Factor)
Page 2 of 5CEN10LA005
Factual Information
On October 2, 2009, approximately 1310 central daylight time, a single-engine, Beechcraft A-
36 airplane, N991PP, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a loss of 
engine power, near Refugio, Texas. The private pilot received minor injuries and the two 
passengers were not injured. The airplane was registered and operated by a private individual. 
The approximately 676 nautical-mile cross-country flight originated from the New Century 
AirCenter Airport (KIXD), Olathe, Kansas under visual meteorological conditions en route to 
the Corpus Christi International Airport (KCRP) Corpus Christi, Texas. About 180 miles from 
the destination airport, the pilot activated an instrument flight plan for the 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91 flight.
According to the pilot, he departed KIXD with the fuel tanks "topped off", and that he managed 
the fuel en route by using the aircraft's engine analyzer.  During the flight he switched between 
the left and right fuel tanks and recorded how much fuel was consumed.  About four hours into 
the flight, the engine began to "sputter and lose power".  The pilot asked for, and received a 
heading to the nearest airport from air traffic control.  During the decent, the piloted switched 
from the right wing fuel tank to the left wing fuel tank, and then back to the right tank. 
However, he was unable to get the engine to restart. Unable to make the airport, the pilot 
elected to conduct an emergency landing in a field near the airport. The airplane collided with a 
bush before impacting terrain; the airplane then slid to a stop.  The pilot and passengers were 
able to exit the airplane unassisted.   The pilot added later, that while trying to restart the 
engine, he did not turn on the electric driven fuel pump. Additionally, he noted the checklist 
that he carried in the aircraft failed to mention the electric driven fuel pump; however, he 
noted that the pilot's operating handbook (POH) did mention the electric pump.
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector, who responded to the accident site, 
reported that the airplane's right gear had been forced through the wing, and that the airplane 
sustained substantial damaged during the forced landing.  He added that the airplane's left 
wing fuel tank contained, "2 cups of fuel" and when the fuel cap from the right wing was 
removed, fuel would spill from the tank.
The wreckage was transported to a secure facility near Lancaster, Texas, for further 
examination.
An examination was conducted by the NTSB IIC with a technical representative from Teledyne 
Continental Motors, on 23 October, 2009. 
The engine, with 81 hours since major overhaul, remained attached to the airframe.  The 
engine/fuselage was placed on a trailer without the wings, which had been removed for 
transport.  A fuel can was connected to the airplane's fuel system on the right side wing root.  
The airplane's propeller, which had been damaged in the accident, was replaced with a test 
propeller. Prior to starting the engine, a visual engine inspection was conducted and no 
abnormalities were discovered. Additionally, to check for proper operation, the fuel selector 
valve was turned to the left and right positions. The engine was then started and ran for several 
minutes at various (idle to full) power settings.   During the tests, the engine appeared to 
produce full power.
Page 3 of 5CEN10LA005
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Fuel starvation (Defining event)
Enroute
Loss of engine power (total)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
56, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
07/01/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/20/2008
Flight Time:
1142 hours (Total, all aircraft), 448 hours (Total, this make and model), 860 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 26 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 11 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
BEECH
Registration:
N991PP
Model/Series:
A36 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
E-914
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
6
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
 
Engine Manufacturer:
CONT MOTOR
ELT:
Engine Model/Series:
IO 520 SERIES
Registered Owner:
AERO MARK JM LLC
Rated Power:
285 hp
Operator:
AERO MARK JM LLC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5CEN10LA005
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KRKP
Distance from Accident Site:
17 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1253 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
140째
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Overcast 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 12000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
11 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
30째
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.86 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
28째C / 22째C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration
Departure Point: 
New Century Air, KS (KIXD)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
VFR/IFR
Destination: 
Corpus Christi, TX (KCRP)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Minor, 2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
 
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Craig Hatch
Adopted Date:
03/03/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Tom Fowles; FAA FSDO; San Antonio, TX
Jason Lukasik; Teledyne Continential Motors; Mobile, AL
Publish Date:
03/03/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=74855
Page 5 of 5CEN10LA005
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
