Page 1 of 8
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Mitchell, OR
Accident Number:
WPR10LA001
Date & Time:
10/02/2009, 1240 PDT 
Registration:
N1621C
Aircraft:
CESSNA 180
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (total)
Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor, 1 
None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The single engine airplane experienced a loss of engine power during flight and the pilot 
performed a forced landing in rugged terrain. Examination of the airplane wreckage revealed 
minimal evidence of fuel. The airplane had a modified fuel tank system through a supplemental 
type certificate (STC). The STC changed the fuel capacity of the two fuel tanks from 30 gallons 
to 28.2 gallons each. The installation information for the STC noted that to determine the 
usable fuel for the airplane, the airplane™s type certificate data sheet (TCDS) should be 
referenced and the unusable fuel amount listed therein should be subtracted from the new total 
fuel capacity. The TCDS for the airplane stated that 5 gallons of fuel were unusable, which 
made the new total usable fuel capacity on the airplane 51.4 gallons. As a part of the STC, the 
airplane flight manual (AFM) and the fuel selector valve placard were to be updated with the 
revised usable fuel quantity. This action was noted on the FAA Form 337 for the STC 
installation. The pilot had purchased the airplane several years prior to the accident and the 
previous owner told him that all of the fuel (56.4 gallons) was usable. The pilot reported that 
there was no AFM supplement for the STC included in his paperwork, and that he did not ever 
look at the quantities indicated on the fuel selector valve placard in the cockpit due to its 
location between the seats. Examination of the recovered airframe and engine components 
revealed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot™s lack of understanding of the airplane™s fuel system, which resulted in a loss of 
engine power due to fuel exhaustion.
Page 2 of 8WPR10LA001
Findings
Aircraft
Fuel - Fluid management (Cause)
Personnel issues
Knowledge of equipment - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Rough terrain - Not specified
Page 3 of 8WPR10LA001
Factual Information
HISTORY OF THE FLIGHT
On October 2, 2009, about 1240 Pacific daylight time, N1621C, a Cessna 180, lost engine power 
during flight and the pilot performed a forced landing in rugged terrain near Mitchell, Oregon. 
The private pilot was operating the airplane under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal 
Regulations Part 91. The pilot sustained minor injuries, one passenger sustained serious 
injuries, and one passenger was not injured. The airplane was substantially damaged. Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed and the pilot had requested and received flight following. 
The pilot departed about 1030 from Pistol Creek airstrip, a private airstrip in the Idaho 
backcountry, and was destined for Roberts Field Airport, Redmond, Oregon.
An Oregon State Trooper, who was also a private pilot, responded to the accident site. The 
trooper interviewed the pilot who reported that the engine lost power during the flight and 
then he force-landed the airplane. The Trooper documented the accident site and noted that 
the throttle, mixture, and propeller controls were in the full forward position. The flap lever 
was at 0 degrees. The fuel selector valve was positioned at ﬁBoth.ﬂ The magneto switch was in 
the off position. The trooper noted that the left wing was extensively damaged and the right 
wing was positioned vertically against a tree. He did not see fuel or smell the odor of fuel near 
either wing. The trooper also interviewed several hunters in the area that had witnessed the 
event. The witnesses reported that they were standing outside when they heard a popping 
noise. They looked up and saw the airplane fly overhead with no power. The airplane 
disappeared behind the trees prior to impact.
Pilot Statements
The pilot submitted several statements following the accident.
The first statement was received on October 15. He reported that prior to his original departure 
from Redmond, he requested that the fuel tanks be filled to ﬁ...within 1/2-inch of the necks and 
noted 23 gallons pumped on the truck meter.ﬂ He flew direct to Pistol Creek and used 1/3-1/2 
carburetor heat for approximately 40 percent of the flight. The pilot estimated 10 gallons of 
fuel for each hour of flight. The pilot™s calculations showed that he had 58.2 gallons of fuel total 
in the airplane, and he had used 22.5 gallons with 35.7 gallons remaining. He had flown 2.25 
hours. When the airplane was tied down at Pistol Creek, the pilot ensured that it was secured 
on level ground and checked to make sure that no fuel was dripping from the airplane. When 
he departed from Pistol Creek, he circled around an area that he and one of his passengers had 
hunted in the previous year, and then flew direct to Redmond. The carburetor heat usage 
during the flight was similar to the first. The pilot indicated that he used a fuel burn rate of 10 
gallons per hour for elapsed time, and 12.5 gallons per hour for tachometer time. At 4 hours 
and 20 minutes since the airplane had been refueled, the pilot™s calculations showed that just 
under 15 gallons of fuel were remaining based on elapsed time, and 8.2 gallons of fuel were 
remaining based on tachometer time. The pilot estimated his reserve fuel upon landing would 
be  between 5.2 to 11.5 gallons. Both tanks read about 1/8-fuel on the gages. He entered the 
airplane into a descent and about 5 minutes later, the engine lost power, dropping to idle, and 
would not respond to throttle. He immediately switched the fuel selector from the left tank to 
both, and there was no change. He then switched the selector to the right tank and the engine 
sputtered but then went back to idle. He then switched the selector to the both position where 
it remained. He pitched the airplane for best glide and saw two clearings. He attempted to land 
Page 4 of 8WPR10LA001
in one of the clearings but impacted trees near the end of the intended landing area. The pilot 
secured the airplane and did not see or smell any fuel. The pilot used his SPOT personal locator 
beacon to transmit several distress messages. He then climbed to the top of a hill in order to 
find cell service and reported the emergency. A search airplane located the accident site about 1 
hour later.
The pilot was interviewed by the FAA on October 16. The pilot reported that upon passing John 
Day Airport en route to Redmond, the engine ceased operating while the fuel selector was on 
the left tank. The pilot stated that he immediately moved the selector to the right tank, the 
engine sputtered a few times, but it did not continue to operate. The pilot then positioned the 
fuel selector to both.  During the interview, the pilot indicated that the fuel capacity on the 
airplane was 58 gallons due to a supplemental type certificate (STC) installation. The pilot then 
produced the STC paperwork for the FAA to review. The FAA then asked the pilot the amount 
of unusable fuel with this STC and the pilot stated that the previous owner told him that all 58 
gallons were usable.  The FAA noted that the actual usable fuel was 51.4 gallons. The FAA also 
showed the pilot the fuel selector decal that had been placarded with 51.4 gallons usable fuel. 
The pilot reported making the trip 8 to 9 times prior to the accident flight; however, the latest 
flight was the first time that he had not refueled in Idaho.
On October 28, the pilot submitted a letter to the FAA.  He reported that he contacted the 
previous owner who told him that he had burned the fuel out of one of the tanks when the STC 
was first installed and determined that all of the fuel was usable. According to the pilot, the 
previous owner was also not aware of the placard on the fuel selector. The pilot reported that 
when he purchased the airplane, he went through all of the paperwork and did not find any 
information related to the usable fuel on the airplane other than the example provided in the 
installation instructions which referenced a Cessna 182. In addition, he reported that the 
airplane flight manual did not contain a supplement for the STC installation.
On November 16, the pilot submitted a written statement to the FAA maintaining that the fuel 
tanks installed held 56.4 gallons total of usable fuel and that the previous owner and he had 
operated successfully since 1990 using those capacities. The pilot also noted that the fuel 
contained in the tanks may have been less than he presumed due to fueling errors (not filling 
the tanks as he requested), someone tampering with the fuel at Pistol Creek, and/or loss of fuel 
at the accident site. The pilot further stated that he was ﬁ...positive the prop continued to spin 
at least until such time as the collision with the tree...We clearly did not experience the silence 
of a stopped engine/prop.ﬂ
Previous Owner Statement
The previous owner of the airplane was contacted. Following the supplemental type certificate 
(STC) fuel tank installation, he continued to plan on 55 gallons of usable fuel. He reported that 
generally, he would plan for 12.5 gallons per hour fuel burn. Sometimes the airplane would 
burn 13 gallons if he did not lean the mixture consistently. Normally he would not fly the 
airplane longer than 4 hours. He recalled one time where he put just over 50 gallons onboard 
and he thought that he ﬁ...cut it too close.ﬂ  The previous owner also stated that at one point he 
was doing some work on the left wing and he needed to drain the fuel tank. He flew over an 
airport and burned all of the fuel out of the wing tank. When he refueled it, it appeared that he 
had burned the entire fuel capacity (28.2 gallons) out of the wing. The previous owner could 
not recall an airplane flight manual supplement related to the fuel tank STC. He indicated that 
it may have had one but he could not remember. He indicated that all of the paperwork was 
Page 5 of 8WPR10LA001
provided to the new owner.
AIRPLANE HISTORY
The four-seat, single-engine airplane, serial number 30321, was manufactured in 1953 and was 
originally equipped with 30-gallon bladder fuel tanks in each wing. According to the FAA 
Airplane Airworthiness file for the airplane, in 1990, 28.2-gallon standard fuel tanks were 
installed in each wing under supplemental type certificate (STC) SA 2346CE. On the FAA Form 
337 for the installation, it was noted that in addition to the airplane fuel tank changes, the 
airplane flight manual was also updated with supplements 1, 2, and 3.
According to STC SA2346CE, standard range 56 or 62-gallon capacity or long range 77-gallon 
capacity fuel tanks could replace the original bladder fuel tanks.
The instructions for the installation of the fuel tanks were recovered from the airplane 
maintenance records by the FAA accident coordinator.  For the standard 28.2-gallon standard 
tanks, the instructions noted that existing placard data should be removed and that a placard 
stating ﬁCapacity 28.2 Gal.ﬂ should be installed. The instructions also said  to correct the usable 
fuel valves on the fuel selector valve placard by obtaining the unusable fuel quantities from the 
type certificate data sheet (TCDS) for the applicable airplane. The unusable fuel quantity 
should then be subtracted from 56.4 gallons (28.2 each tank) to determine the usable fuel. 
These corrected quantities should then be noted on the fuel selector valve.
According to the TCDS for the accident airplane, the unusable fuel quantity is 5 gallons.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The airframe was examined. The fuel placards showed 28.2 gallons capacity on each wing, and 
the fuel selector placard at the fuel selector valve in the cockpit showed 51.4 gallons usable in 
the both position, and 25.7 gallons usable for each tank. The right fuel cap remained intact and 
secured to the tank. The left cap upper portion had separated from the lower portion. The 
lower portion of the cap was able to be secured into the fuel tank. There was no evidence of fuel 
staining on either wing or the fuselage. The fuel selector was removed from the airplane and 
examined. The fuel screen for the left wing was free from obstruction. The fuel screen for the 
right wing was not located. Approximately 1 ounce of fuel was collected from the fuel line 
leading from the left tank to the fuel selector. The color and smell of the fuel were consistent 
with 100 low lead (LL). The left fuel tank had been breached. The right fuel tank remained 
intact. Both fuel tanks were identified with a Monarch label and manufacture date of 
November 13, 1990. The firewall fuel strainer was unobstructed and contained no fuel. The 
drain valve was closed but free to move to the open position.
The Teledyne Continental Motors O-470-J engine, serial number 41500, was examined. The 
engine was separated from the firewall and airframe. Several areas of impact damage were 
noted. Crushing was evident on the forward left side and at cylinder number 1. The upper spark 
plugs were removed from the cylinders and were considered worn out-normal when compared 
to a Champion Check-A-Plug chart. The cylinders were borescoped and had residual oil and 
white combustion deposits. The rocker arm covers were removed. Thumb compression was 
obtained on all six cylinders and the valves each produced similar amounts of lift. Mechanical 
gear continuity was obtained from the propeller to the starter drive pulley, propeller governor 
drive gear, and accessory case. The carburetor was removed and disassembled. No fuel was 
evident in the bowl.  The carburetor floats were intact and the screen was clean. The propeller 
governor was removed. It was manually rotated and the screen was clean. The vacuum pump 
Page 6 of 8WPR10LA001
was removed and the drive coupler was intact. No fuel was evident at the engine. The Oberg oil 
filter contained oil and the screen was free from obstruction.
The McCauley propeller was examined. Both blades remained secured in the hub. Blade 1 had 
aft bending near the tip and scuffing along its leading edge. Blade 2 contained chordwise 
scratch marks on its trailing edge.
Examination of the recovered airframe and engine components revealed no evidence of 
preimpact mechanical malfunction.
History of Flight
Enroute-cruise
Loss of engine power (total) (Defining event)
Landing
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
55, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
12/01/2008
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/19/2009
Flight Time:
824 hours (Total, all aircraft), 274 hours (Total, this make and model), 724 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 42 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 23 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 7 of 8WPR10LA001
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
CESSNA
Registration:
N1621C
Model/Series:
180 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Utility
Serial Number:
30321
Landing Gear Type: 
Tailwheel
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/28/2009, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2650 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
22 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4825 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Teledyne Continental 
Motors
ELT:
C91  installed, activated, 
aided in locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
O-470-J
Registered Owner:
Tailwheel Excursion LLC
Rated Power:
230 hp
Operator:
William Gonce
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
RDM, 3080 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
63 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1256 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
270°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Thin Broken / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Broken / 5000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
12 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
290°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.04 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
13°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration
Departure Point: 
Pistol Creek, ID (PVT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Redmond, OR (RDM)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
1030 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious, 1 Minor, 1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
44.353056, -119.879167 (est)
Page 8 of 8
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Kristi Dunks
Adopted Date:
04/19/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Marty Conroy; Federal Aviation Administration; Portland, OR
Andrew Swick; Teledyne Continental Motors; Sacramento, CA
Jan Miller; Cessna Aircraft Company; Wichita, KS
Publish Date:
04/19/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=74837
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
