Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
CHERRY POINT, NC
Accident Number:
ATL01LA043
Date & Time:
04/01/2001, 1400 EDT 
Registration:
N78321
Aircraft:
Globe GC1B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Air Race/Show
Analysis 
A Globe GC1B lost a propeller blade in-flight while maneuvering in the number two position of 
a formation of three airplanes, a propeller blade separated from the propeller hub assembly. 
The second propeller blade, along with the hub assembly, subsequently separated from the 
engine crankshaft. Examination of the recovered propeller hub fracture faces disclosed fatigue 
cracking. The fatigue fracture propagated until it intersected the outside hub surface. 
According to McCauley Propeller the fatigue fracture reduced the propeller hub load carrying 
capacity until it was no longer a sufficient cross section to carry the centrifugal load of the 
propeller.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Fatigue cracking of the propeller hub that resulted in the in-flight separation of a propeller 
blade.
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING
Findings
1. (C) PROPELLER SYSTEM/ACCESSORIES,HUB - FRACTURED
2. (C) PROPELLER SYSTEM/ACCESSORIES,HUB - FATIGUE
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Page 2 of 5ATL01LA043
Factual Information
On April 1, 2001, at 1400 eastern daylight time, a Globe GC1B, N78321, registered to a private 
owner, lost a propeller blade in-flight while maneuvering at an air show in Cherry Point, North 
Carolina. The formation flight was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 CFR 
Part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the accident. 
The commercial pilot was not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The 
flight departed Cherry Point, North Carolina, at 1350.  
According to the pilot, while maneuvering in the number two position of a formation of three 
airplanes, a propeller blade separated from the propeller hub assembly. The second propeller 
blade, along with the hub assembly, subsequently separated from the engine crankshaft. The 
second propeller blade was subsequently recovered for examination. Examination of the 
airplane revealed a catastrophic engine failure as a result of a propeller blade separation. 
Examination also revealed part of the crankshaft was sheared at the hub attachment, and 
numerous engine attachment bolts were sheared.
The propeller assembly examination revealed a hub facture that originated in the root of the 
second inboard retention thread of the No. 2 socket. The facture was aligned along the trail 
edge side of the hub. Examination of the fracture faces revealed features consistent with fatigue 
cracking. The fatigue fracture propagated until it intersected the outside hub surface. 
According to McCauley Propeller the fatigue fracture reduced the propeller hub load carrying 
capacity until it was no longer a sufficient cross section to carry the centrifugal load of the 
propeller.
The propeller examination also revealed that it had been modified for oil-fill crack detection, in 
accordance with McCauley Propeller, service bulletin 182, dated July 16, 1990. However, there 
was no evidence of the red oil found inside the hub or on any pitch change components. No oil 
film was present on any of the components. The retention bearing races were rusted and 
brinnelled consistent with the absence of lubrication while the propeller had been in operation. 
The condition of the components suggests that the propeller had been drained of its red oil. A 
review of the aircraft records showed that the airplane was modified with a Meryln Product 
Supplemental Type Certificate (STC), P3EA that included the installation of a McCauley model 
D2A34C67-NP/76C-2 propeller. 
Reportedly, McCauley Propeller did not approve or seek the Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) approval of a specific airframe/engine/propeller installation of the D2A34C67 propeller 
on the Globe GC-1B aircraft. Note #9 of Type Certificate data sheet No. P3EA, list certain 
propeller engine combinations that are approved vibration wise for use on "Normal Category 
Single-Engine Tractor Aircraft". According to Merlyn Products and McCauley Propeller 
System, the accident propeller hub assembly was not approved for aerobatics flight. 
Reportedly, aerobatic usage of the accident type propeller hub assembly can increase the 
propeller operating stresses beyond the approved allowable limits. According to the 
pilot/owner, N78321 was not used for aerobatic flight. Meryln Products reported that the 
D2A34C67 propeller hub assembly is no longer available as part of STC P3EA.
Page 3 of 5ATL01LA043
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Age:
58, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/15/2001
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
05/15/2000
Flight Time:
6500 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2500 hours (Total, this make and model), 6000 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
1 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Globe
Registration:
N78321
Model/Series:
GC1B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
2321
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/27/2001, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
1750 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
6 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4968 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
IO 360C
Registered Owner:
MICHAEL P. KENNEDY
Rated Power:
210 hp
Operator:
MICHAEL P. KENNEDY
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5ATL01LA043
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
NKT, 28 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1355 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Scattered / 1000 ft agl
Visibility
6 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
Overcast / 2000 ft agl
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
160°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.59 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / 10°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
CHERRY POINT, NC (NKT)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
CHERRY POINT, NC 
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1350 EDT
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Airport Information
Airport:
Cherry Point (NKT)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
28 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
32L
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
8000 ft / 150 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 None
Latitude, Longitude:
35.067222, -77.415556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
PHILLIP POWELL
Adopted Date:
08/26/2002
Additional Participating Persons:
Jim Allen; Greensboro FSDO; Greensboro, TN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 5 of 5ATL01LA043
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
