National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: New Hudson, MI
Accident Number: CHI03LA076
Date & Time: 03/01/2003, 1810 EST
Registration: N123JL
Aircraft: Cessna T210L
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The airplane sustained substantial damage when it impacted terrain while on approach to land.
The pilot stated that he was a little high on final approach, so he reduced the throttle and lowered the nose.
He reported that when the airplane was 200 to 300 feet from the end of the runway, at a ground speed of 83 knots, the nose of the airplane veered to the left.
The pilot reported he was unable to realign the nose of the airplane using the rudder, and then the left wing stalled.
He reported he was able to get the wings almost level prior to the airplane impacting ground.
The airplane came to rest approximately 50 to 70 feet south of the runway, and 50 to 60 feet prior to the approach end of the runway.
Examination of the airplane showed control surface continuity.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control which resulted in the airplane stalling while on final approach.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: APPROACH - VFR PATTERN - FINAL APPROACH Findings 1.
(C) AIRSPEED - INADEQUATE - PILOT IN COMMAND 2.
STALL/MUSH - INADVERTENT - PILOT IN COMMAND 3.
REMEDIAL ACTION - NOT SUCCESSFUL - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS Factual Information On March 1, 2003, at 1810 eastern standard time, a Cessna T210L, N123JL, impacted terrain following a loss of control while on final approach to runway 25 at the Oakland Southwest Airport (Y47), New Hudson, Michigan.
The private pilot received minor injuries.
The airplane was substantially damaged.
The 14 CFR Part 91 flight was operating in visual meteorological conditions.
An IFR flight plan was filed, but was cancelled prior to the accident.
The flight originated from Traverse City, Michigan, at 1645.
The pilot reported that he flew the VOR-A approach, which brought him right over the airport.
He cancelled his IFR flight plan and circled to land on runway 25.
He stated that he had a crosswind from the left, but the winds were light.
The pilot stated that he was a little high on final approach, so he reduced the throttle and lowered the nose.
He reported that when the airplane was 200 to 300 feet from the end of the runway, at a ground speed of 83 knots, the nose of the airplane veered to the left.
The pilot reported he was unable to realign the nose of the airplane using the rudder, and then the left wing stalled.
He reported he was able to get the wings almost level prior to the airplane impacting ground.
The airplane came to rest approximately 50 to 70 feet south of the runway, and 50 to 60 feet prior to the approach end of the runway.
A Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness inspector conducted an on-scene examination of the airplane.
The examination showed control surface continuity.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 58, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): Airplane Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
