National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Greenwood, SC
Accident Number: ATL03LA050
Date & Time: 03/01/2003, 0056 EST
Registration: N67524
Aircraft: Cessna 152
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis According to the pilot, during cruise flight at 2000 feet, the airplane entered clouds and the pilot began to descend to 1200 feet.
The pilot requested assistance from air traffic, and was cleared to initiate a 180-degree turn.
During the 180-degree turn the pilot became disoriented and collided with the ground.
No mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by the non-instrument rated pilot.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot's continued visual flight into instrument meteorological conditions and loss of aircraft control, which resulted in an in-flight collision with the ground.
Findings Occurrence #1: IN FLIGHT ENCOUNTER WITH WEATHER Phase of Operation: CRUISE Findings 1.
(C) WEATHER CONDITION - LOW CEILING 2.
(C) VFR FLIGHT INTO IMC - CONTINUED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: LOSS OF CONTROL - IN FLIGHT Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 3.
(C) AIRSPEED - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: DESCENT - UNCONTROLLED Findings 4.
TERRAIN CONDITION - GROUND Factual Information On March 1, 2003, at 0056 eastern standard time, a Cessna 152, N67524, registered to Aiken Air Service and operated by a private pilot, collided with the ground during a 180-degree turn near Greenwood County Airport, Greenwood, South Carolina.
The personal flight was operated under the provision of Title 14 CFR Part 91 and visual flight rules.
Instrument meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of accident.
The airplane sustained substantial damage, and the private pilot received minor injuries.
The flight originated from Donaldson Center Airport, Greenville, South Carolina, on March 1, 2003 at 2350.
According to the pilot, he was in cruise flight at 2000 feet, when he contacted Atlanta Center for flight following.
Approximately 10 minutes after contacting Atlanta Center, the weather began to deteriorate.
The pilot reported he entered clouds and was descending to 1200 feet were he believed it was clear.
The pilot was still in the clouds and requested assistance from Atlanta Center.
Atlanta Center cleared the pilot to make a 180-degree turn.
The pilot reported the 180-degree turn, he became disoriented and collided with the ground.
Examination of the airplane revealed, the airplane came to rest in a stand of trees.
The main fuselage and cabin area were buckled.
Both wings of the airplane buckled back towards the vertical and horizontal stabilizers.
No mechanical or flight control malfunctions were reported by the pilot prior to the flight.
Pilot Information Certificate: Private Age: 46, Male Airplane Rating(s): Single-engine Land Seat Occupied: Left Other Aircraft Rating(s): None Restraint Used: Seatbelt, Shoulder harness Instrument Rating(s): None Second Pilot Present: No Instructor Rating(s): None Toxicology Performed: No Medical Certification: Class 3 Valid Medical--no waivers/lim.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
