The instrument-rated pilot was conducting a personal cross-county flight and was operating on 
an instrument flight rules flight plan. While he was flying in visual conditions between cloud 
layers at 7,000 ft and heading toward the destination airport, he reported to air traffic control 
that the airplane had experienced a vacuum pump failure and that he had lost the associated 
gyroscopic instruments and part of the instrument panel. The pilot continued toward the 
destination airport because it had the best weather conditions compared to alternate nearby 
airports; however, after accepting radar vectors for the GPS approach to the airport, he 
reported that the airplane had entered instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) and that he 
had lost a "little bit" of control. He then reported that more of the instruments had failed and 
that he was trying to get back to 7,000 ft. Shortly after, the controller provided the pilot with 
the weather conditions at a closer airport and asked him if he would like to try to land there; 
however, no further communications were received from the pilot. Review of radar data 
revealed that the airplane made several course and altitude deviations as it proceeded 
northeast until the end of the data.
The airplane was found separated in multiple pieces along a 0.4-mile-long debris path. Based 
on the radar data and debris path, it is likely that the pilot experienced spatial disorientation 
while maneuvering the airplane in IMC without a full instrument panel, that he subsequently 
lost airplane control, and that the airplane broke up in flight due to overstress during the 
ensuing uncontrolled descent.
Review of a vacuum pump manufacturer's service letter (SL) revealed that the mandatory 
replacement time for the make and model vacuum pump was 500 aircraft hours or 6 years 
from the data of manufacture, whichever came first. Compliance with the SL was not 
mandatory for 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91 operations. The vacuum pump was 
manufactured in May 1999, which was 17 years before the accident. Additionally, the airplane 
was not equipped with a backup/standby vacuum pump.
Page 2 of 8ERA16FA176
Metallurgical examination of the vacuum pump revealed that the rotor had separated radially 
in numerous locations. Three vanes remained intact, and three vanes separated into numerous 
pieces. Rotational scoring/rubbing marks were observed on the rotor and pump housing.
Additionally, debris was noted in the inlet screen, but the engine had impacted a dirt field. It is 
likely the rotor's contact with the pump housing caused the failure of the pump rotor and 
vanes; however, it could not be ruled out that debris ingestion contributed to their failure.
The pilot had severe coronary artery disease, and toxicological testing revealed low levels of 
diphenhydramine, a sedating antihistamine allergy treatment and sleep aid, and zolpidem, a 
prescription sleep aid. However, there was no evidence that the pilot's heart disease or sedating 
medications impaired his performance or incapacitated him.
The pilot's loss of airplane control while operating in instrument meteorological conditions 
with only a partial instrument panel due to a failure of the airplane's vacuum pump. 
Contributing to the accident were the pilot's spatial disorientation and the operation of the 
vacuum pump beyond the 6-year time limit recommended by the vacuum pump manufacturer.
