National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Albuquerque, NM
Accident Number: CEN11LA173
Date & Time: 02/03/2011, 0840 MST
Registration: N5802C
Aircraft: CESSNA 402
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Landing gear collapse
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 135: Air Taxi & Commuter - Non-scheduled
 Analysis Shortly after takeoff, the hydraulic pressure caution light illuminated and the nose gear failed to retract when the pilot attempted to raise the gear.
The pilot accomplished the appropriate emergency procedure checklists and unsafe gear indications remained.
Following an approved flyover of the tower to verify gear position, the pilot performed a precautionary landing.
During the landing the right main landing gear collapsed, resulting in substantial damage.
Subsequent examination of the airplane and related hydraulic system components revealed no anomalies and the landing gear system operated normally during functional testing.
The reason for the landing gear's failure could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The failure of the landing gear system for undetermined reasons.
The airline transport rated pilot was not injured.
The non-scheduled cargo flight was being conducted under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135 with a visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan.
The flight originated at ABQ, with Las Vegas Municipal Airport (LVS), Las Vegas, New Mexico, as the intended destination.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The pilot stated that following gear retraction on initial takeoff from ABQ, the hydraulic pressure caution light illuminated and the nose landing gear failed to retract.
The pilot accomplished the HYD PRESSURE LIGHT ILLUMINATED AFTER GEAR CYCLE and the LANDING GEAR WILL NOT EXTEND HYDRAULICALLY checklists and was left with unsafe gear indications.
He performed an approved fly over of the ABQ tower and landed after tower personnel reported the gear appeared to be down.
During the landing the right main landing gear collapsed, resulting in substantial damage to the right aileron.
The airplane was examined by Federal Aviation Administration inspectors and the airplane's operator the day following the accident.
The airplane was placed on jacks and the landing gear was functionally tested.
The landing gear system was cycled and no anomalies were noted.
The hydraulic control valve and the landing gear hydraulic shuttle valve were removed for functional testing and to check for contaminants.
No anomalies were found with either unit.
