National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Elverta, CA
Accident Number: WPR11LA122
Date & Time: 02/04/2011, 1422 PST
Registration: N416WC
Aircraft: McDonnell Douglas Helicopters
369E (MD500E)
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event: Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Injuries: 2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 133: Rotorcraft Ext. Load
 Analysis A lineman was on the skid of the helicopter installing high-power electrical lines on a power line structure.
The pilot positioned the helicopter about 30 to 50 feet from the structure.
The main rotor blades made contact with an installation rope, which then wrapped around the mast as the blades pulled it in.
The pilot lost control of the helicopter, and it began an uncontrolled descent to the ground.
A postaccident examination of the airframe and engine revealed no mechanical anomalies that would have precluded normal operation.
It is likely that the pilot misjudged the distance between the rotor blades and the installation rope.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The pilot did not maintain rotor blade clearance from an installation rope while maneuvering to install power lines.
Wilson Construction Company was operating the helicopter under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 133.
The commercial pilot and one passenger sustained minor injuries; the helicopter sustained substantial damage to the airframe and main rotor blades.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The operator reported that the helicopter was working on a project to construct 30 miles of high power electrical lines, which are oriented north-south.
It is not possible to pull the conductor wire through bundled travelers unless the sock line is actually in contact with the roller.
Construction crews install a hold down, which is a temporary block that they secure to a ground anchor.
They adjust the anchor rope to force the sock line to rest in the bundle block traveler when in tension.
The operator noted that it is standard industry practice to use a helicopter to install a hold down.
A lineman was on the skid of the helicopter, which was in position to install a hold down at a power line structure.
The pilot positioned the helicopter about 30-50 feet south of the structure; his flagman was facing the west.
The pilot believed that he was properly positioned near the sock line so that they could perform the task safely.
The lineman on the skid placed the larger of the two hold down ropes over the sock line, and allowed it to fall onto the west side.
The lineman allowed the hold down block to hang by the large rope just below and on the east side of the sock line.
The large rope tangled as it fell to the ground.
The lineman on the ground grabbed the end of the rope, and tried to clear the tangle.
The lineman on the skid had one hand on the hold down, and was preparing to release the second, smaller rope downward on the western side of the sock line with the other hand.
The main rotor blades made contact with the sock line rope, which wrapped around the mast as the blades pulled it in.
The pilot lost control of the helicopter, and it began an uncontrolled descent to the ground.
The helicopter came to rest upright about 10 feet south of the power line structure.
The lineman on the skid was lying on the ground, but still attached to the helicopter by her fall restraint and positioning belt.
The pilot extricated himself from the helicopter.
TESTS AND RESEARCH Investigators from the FAA, Boeing, and Rolls-Royce Allison (RR) examined the wreckage at the operator™s facilities at McLellan Airfield, Sacramento, California, on February 9, 2011.
The investigators examined the airframe and engine, with no mechanical anomalies identified that would have precluded normal operation.
