Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Sparta, TN
Accident Number:
ATL05TA055
Date & Time:
03/03/2005, 1615 CST 
Registration:
N14449
Aircraft:
Cessna T-41B
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
1 Serious
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Public Aircraft
Analysis 
The pilot stated the flight was cruising at 3,500 feet mean sea level when the engine began to 
run rough. Moments later, engine oil sprayed on the windscreen and the cockpit filled with 
smoke. Several hundred yards short of runway 4, the engine lost power completely, and the 
propeller stopped. The pilot maneuvered the airplane to avoid trees and landed in a field. The 
pilot stated when the nose wheel touched down, it sank into the soft ground, and the airplane 
nosed over. Examination of the airplane revealed the empennage was nearly separated aft of 
the baggage compartment, the fuselage was buckled aft of the firewall, and damage was 
observed on the engine crankcase. The post-accident examination of the engine revealed the 
timing reference plug was missing from the crankcase. The timing reference plug threads in the 
crankcase were not stripped. The crankshaft did not reveal any signs of movement or rotation, 
and the pistons, rings, and pins in all six cylinders revealed discoloration and mechanical 
damage. 
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
Improper installation of the timing reference plug by other maintenance personnel, which 
resulted in oil starvation, and the loss of engine power.
Page 2 of 6ATL05TA055
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE
Findings
1. (C) FLUID,OIL - STARVATION
2. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
3. (C) MISCELLANEOUS,BOLT/NUT/FASTENER/CLAMP/SPRING - MISSING
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
4. (F) TERRAIN CONDITION - GRASS
Page 3 of 6ATL05TA055
Factual Information
On March 3, 2005, about 1615 central standard time, a Cessna T-41B, N14449, registered to 
and operated by the State of Tennessee Division of Forestry, nosed over during emergency 
landing in Sparta, Tennessee. The public use flight was operated under the provisions of Title 
14 CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed. The private 
pilot received serious injuries, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The flight 
departed Nashville International Airport, Nashville, Tennessee, at 1544.
The pilot stated the flight was cruising at 3,500 feet  when the engine began to run rough. 
Moments later, engine oil sprayed on the windscreen and the cockpit filled with smoke. The 
pilot estimated he was five or six miles from the Upper Cumberland Regional Airport, Sparta, 
Tennessee, and he reported the emergency on the airport common traffic advisory frequency. 
The pilot continued flight towards the airport. The pilot ventilated the cabin by opening the 
passenger-side window, and attempted to maintain engine power but could see engine oil 
spurting out the oil service door in the cowling. Several hundred yards short of runway 4, the 
engine quit completely, and the propeller stopped. The pilot maneuvered the airplane to avoid 
trees and landed in a field. The pilot stated the field was soft with recent rains, and when the 
nose wheel touched down, it sank into the soft ground, and the airplane nosed over. 
Examination of the airplane revealed the empennage was nearly separated aft of the baggage 
compartment, the fuselage was buckled aft of the firewall, and damage was observed on the 
engine crankcase.
Post-accident examination of the engine revealed the timing reference plug was missing from 
the crankcase. The timing reference plug threads in the crankcase were not stripped. The 
aircraft oil pressure gauge reference (45-degree fitting) located below and between the 
numbers two and four cylinder was loose at the union fitting in the crankcase. The crankshaft 
did not reveal any signs of movement or rotation, and the pistons, rings, and pins in all six 
cylinders revealed discoloration and mechanical damage. The crankshaft bearings revealed 
scoring, discoloration, and mechanical damage concentrated at the number two connecting rod 
journal. The crankcase was breached above the centerline of the number two-cylinder bay. The 
plug gasket seating area position on the crankcase revealed staining adjacent the crankcase 
breach. There was no safety wire in the area of the timing reference plug. 
Review of maintenance records revealed that the last 100 hour inspection was completed on 
December 16, 2004. During the 100-hour inspection both magnetos were installed and timed 
to the engine.
Page 4 of 6ATL05TA055
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
51, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 With Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/01/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/01/2003
Flight Time:
407 hours (Total, all aircraft), 298 hours (Total, this make and model), 1 hours (Last 90 days, all 
aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N14449
Model/Series:
T-41B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
R172-0208
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
12/01/2004, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2500 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
0 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
4144 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
IO 360-D
Registered Owner:
State of Tennessee, Division 
of Forestry
Rated Power:
210 hp
Operator:
State of Tennessee, Division 
of Forestry
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6ATL05TA055
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
KBNA, 599 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 CST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Few / 5000 ft agl
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
6 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
110°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.07 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
12°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Nashville, TN (KBNA)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Sparta, TN (KSRB)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1544 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Serious
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
1 Serious
Latitude, Longitude:
36.056111, -85.530556
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Catherine E Gagne
Adopted Date:
02/28/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Rocky Davidson; FAA - Nashville FSDO - 03; Nashville, TN
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6ATL05TA055
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
