Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Rockport, WA
Accident Number:
WPR13LA003
Date & Time:
10/03/2012, 1340 PDT 
Registration:
N80140
Aircraft:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER R22 BETA
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Miscellaneous/other
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Business
Analysis 
The pilot reported that while maneuvering, the helicopter™s clutch caution light illuminated. 
The pilot initiated a precautionary descent and began to slow the helicopter in an effort to 
locate a clearing in the trees. The clutch caution light was still on after 10 to 12 seconds, so the 
pilot instructed his passenger to pull the circuit breaker. The pilot spotted a clearing, and 
shortly thereafter the low rotor rpm warning light illuminated and the horn sounded. The pilot 
lowered the collective and headed for a landing spot. About 20 to 30 feet above ground level, 
the pilot flared the helicopter and used the remaining collective control input the last 3 to 5 
feet. The helicopter subsequently landed hard in high brush surrounded by tall trees. 
During the postaccident examination, bench testing of the clutch actuator revealed that the 
actuator operated normally and within specified limitations. Further examination of the 
actuator motor found no anomalies that would have precluded normal operation. The reason 
for the illumination of the clutch light could not be determined.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
The pilot's failure to maintain sufficient rotor rpm during a precautionary landing, which 
resulted in a hard landing.
Findings
Aircraft
Airspeed - Not attained/maintained (Cause)
Personnel issues
Aircraft control - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Tree(s) - Not specified
Page 2 of 5WPR13LA003
Factual Information
On October 3, 2012, about 1340 Pacific daylight time, a Robinson R22 Beta helicopter, 
N80140, sustained substantial damage during a hard landing approximately 32 nautical miles 
north of Rockport, Washington in the North Cascades National Park. The pilot and passenger 
were not injured. The helicopter had substantial damage to the tailboom and fuselage. The 
helicopter was registered to Emerald City Aircraft Leasing and operated by Glacier Aviation 
Inc., of Burlington, Washington, under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 
91. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the local flight, and no flight plan was filed.  
The flight originated from Skagit Regional Airport, Burlington, Washington about 1230. 
The pilot reported that while maneuvering the clutch caution light illuminated and stayed on 
steady. The pilot initiated a descent and began to slow in an effort to locate a clearing in the 
trees. The light was still on after 10 to 12 seconds so the pilot instructed his passenger to pull 
the circuit breaker. A clearing was spotted and shortly thereafter the low rotor RPM warning 
light illuminated and the horn sounded. The pilot lowered the collective and headed for a 
landing spot. The pilot flared about 20 to 30 feet and utilized collective control the last three to 
five feet. The helicopter subsequently landed hard in high brush surrounded by tall trees. 
A National Park Service representatives video taped the accident site on October 15, 2012 and 
sent to the National Transportation Safety Board, investigator-in-charge. The videos show the 
helicopter in high brush surrounded by tall trees. The video revealed the separation of the 
tailboom and damage to the tail rotor blades. The fuselage was buckled in several areas. The 
wreckage was relocated to a secure facility for further examination. 
A follow-up examination of the wreckage was conducted and revealed that more of the fuselage 
was buckled. The left skid assembly was damaged and the rear cross-tube was bent. The drive 
belts were tight and properly positioned on both the upper and lower sheaves. The condition of 
the drive belts were unremarkable. The upper sheave had light marks along the outer 
circumference of the upper sheave. The drive belt contact areas on both sheaves were 
unremarkable. The clutch actuator was found in the extended position. The exposed actuator 
shaft was about 1 1/2 inches in length. The down limit screw was extended about 3/4-inches 
below its support bracket. The clutch actuator was operated from the ‚Disengaged™ to ‚Engaged™ 
switch positions. During the actuation of the clutch actuator the actuator motor made a noise 
that was not consistent in tone and had intermittent squealing throughout the actuator™s full 
range of travel. The actuator moved in both directions from stop to stop. No other anomalies 
were noted. 
The clutch actuator was removed and examined at the facilities of the Robinson Helicopter 
Company. The actuator was installed on test benches and operated normally and within limits. 
The actuator was disassembled and no anomalies were noted. The actuator motor was removed 
from the actuator and disassembled. The wiring grommet was damaged and was found in two 
parts. The magnets were removed and dusting was visible on the interior side of both magnets 
and on the rotor. The brushes and commutator showed signs of normal operation. The 
electrical cap assembly had dusting near the commutator area. The bearing on the output shaft 
side felt slightly rough when rotated by hand. No other anomalies were noted.
Page 3 of 5WPR13LA003
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Miscellaneous/other (Defining event)
Landing-flare/touchdown
Hard landing
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
39, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
Helicopter
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
None
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
05/24/2012
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
06/11/2011
Flight Time:
646 hours (Total, all aircraft), 198 hours (Total, this make and model), 553 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 20 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 8 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft), 
0 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
ROBINSON HELICOPTER
Registration:
N80140
Model/Series:
R22 BETA 
Aircraft Category:
Helicopter
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
1030
Landing Gear Type: 
Skid
Seats: 
2
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
09/04/2012, 100 Hour
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
48 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7502 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
LYCOMING
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320 SERIES
Registered Owner:
CARTER RICHARD K
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Glacier Aviation, Inc.
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5WPR13LA003
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
BVS, 144 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
50 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1335 PDT
Direction from Accident Site:
237°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
300°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.38 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
18°C / 1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration
Departure Point: 
Burlington, WA (KBVS)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Burlington, WA (KBVS)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1230 PDT
Type of Airspace: 
Airport Information
Airport:
Skagit Regional Airport (BVS)
Runway Surface Type:
Airport Elevation:
144 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Runway Used:
N/A
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
None
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
48.918611, -121.352778 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Andrew L Swick
Adopted Date:
09/12/2013
Additional Participating Persons:
Frank Baker; FAA-FSDO; Renton, WA
Thom Webster; Robinson Helicopter Company; Torrance, CA
Publish Date:
09/12/2013
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=85254
Page 5 of 5WPR13LA003
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
