Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Mansfield, MA
Accident Number:
ERA09LA496
Date & Time:
09/01/2009, 1053 EDT 
Registration:
N32146
Aircraft:
PIPER PA28-151
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Loss of engine power (partial)
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot performed a preflight inspection prior to departure, including "topping off" the fuel 
tanks, and he observed no contamination in the fuel. After departure, the pilot maneuvered in 
the local area for about 20 minutes. He performed a stall maneuver and shortly after the 
airplane™s engine started to "sputter and run rough." The pilot attempted unsuccessfully to 
troubleshoot the problem, including turning on the carburetor heat and switching fuel tanks. 
When he realized that he would be unable to make it to a nearby airport, the pilot prepared for 
a forced landing to the highway below. During the landing, the left wing struck a barrier 
resulting in substantial damage. Examination of the airplane revealed sufficient fuel in the 
right tank and the left tank was breached. Examination of the engine revealed no mechanical 
anomalies. Review of the Federal Aviation Administration carburetor ice probability chart 
revealed that the temperature and dew point at the time of the accident were conducive to 
"serious icing" conditions at glide power.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to carburetor icing as a result of the pilot's delayed use of carburetor 
heat.
Findings
Personnel issues
Use of equip/system - Pilot (Cause)
Environmental issues
Wall/barricade - Contributed to outcome
Conducive to carburetor icing - Effect on equipment (Cause)
Page 2 of 5ERA09LA496
Factual Information
On September 1, 2009, at 1053 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-28-151, N32146, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing in Mansfield, Massachusetts. The certificated 
commercial pilot and passenger were not injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, 
and no flight plan had been filed for the local flight which originated at Laurence Hanscom 
Field Airport (BED), Bedford, Massachusetts, at 1010. The personal flight was conducted under 
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91. 
According to the pilot, prior to takeoff he performed a pre-flight inspection and "topped off" 
the fuel tanks. He strained the fuel tanks and noted no contamination. The pilot also noted no 
anomalies during the pre-flight inspection or the subsequent run-up inspection. 
The pilot departed to the northeast, flew around Boston, and then toward Gillette Stadium. As 
the airplane was southeast of the stadium, the pilot performed a power-on stall at an altitude of 
2,500 feet. Shortly after recovery from the stall, the airplane's engine started to "sputter and 
run rough." The pilot turned the carburetor heat on, adjusted the airplane's pitch attitude to 
maintain "best glide airspeed," and flew toward the Mansfield Airport. The airplane's engine 
maintained 1500 RPM. The pilot noted the oil pressure, oil temperature, and fuel pressure 
were "in the green." Both fuel tanks indicated "plenty of fuel," and the pilot subsequently 
switched fuel tanks.
The pilot realized the airplane would not be able to reach Mansfield Airport and prepared for a 
landing on the highway below (I-495). During the approach, he overflew a sign and touched 
down prior to an overpass. The left wing struck a barrier during the landing, and the airplane 
came to rest on the side of the highway. 
Examination of the airplane after the accident by a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) 
inspector revealed substantial damage to both wings and the nose of the airplane. Fuel was 
drained from the right fuel tank, and no contamination was noted in the fuel. The left fuel tank 
was ruptured during the accident. The engine crankshaft was rotated, and valvetrain continuity 
and thumb compression was confirmed on all cylinders. Testing of both magnetos revealed 
spark at all terminal leads, and examination of the spark plugs revealed normal wear. No 
anomalies or contamination was noted with the fuel pump or fuel lines.
The pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for airplane single-engine land and 
instrument airplane. He also held a flight instructor certificate with a rating for airplane single 
engine. His most recent FAA second-class medical certificate was issued on January 29, 2009. 
At the time of the accident, the pilot reported 664 hours of total flight experience, 64 of which 
were accumulated in the previous 90 days. 
Examination of the airplane and engine logbooks revealed the airplane was on an Approved 
Inspection Program. The most recent inspection was performed on the airplane on August 13, 
2009 at a tachometer time of 917 hours. The engine had accumulated 774 hours since major 
overhaul. 
Weather reported at Norwood Memorial Airport, about 10 miles from the accident site, at 
1053, included wind from 350 degrees at 4 knots, 10 miles visibility, clear skies, temperature 
68 degrees F, dew point 45 degrees F, and altimeter setting 30.29 inches mercury.
Review of the FAA carburetor ice probability chart revealed that the temperature and dew 
Page 3 of 5ERA09LA496
point at the time of the accident were conducive to "serious icing" conditions at glide power.
History of Flight
Maneuvering
Loss of engine power (partial) (Defining event)
Emergency descent
Off-field or emergency landing
Landing-landing roll
Collision with terr/obj (non-CFIT)
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
24, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Without 
Waivers/Limitations
Last FAA Medical Exam:
01/29/2009
Occupational Pilot:
No
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/23/2007
Flight Time:
664 hours (Total, all aircraft), 405 hours (Total, this make and model), 502 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 64 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 24 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
PIPER
Registration:
N32146
Model/Series:
PA28-151 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-7515079
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
08/12/2009, Continuous 
Airworthiness
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
Time Since Last Inspection:
20 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
12681 Hours as of last 
inspection
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-320 SERIES
Registered Owner:
PLANE NONSENSE INC
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
PLANE NONSENSE INC
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 4 of 5ERA09LA496
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
OWD, 49 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
10 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1053 EDT
Direction from Accident Site:
20°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Partial Obscuration 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
4 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
350°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.29 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
20°C / 7°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Bedford, MA (BED)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Bedford, MA (BED)
Type of Clearance:
VFR
Departure Time:
1035 
Type of Airspace: 
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
42.033611, -71.219444 (est)
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Jill M Andrews
Adopted Date:
10/21/2010
Additional Participating Persons:
Ed Stalzer; FAA/FSDO; Lexington, MA
Richard Bunker; MA Division of Aeronautics; Boston, MA
Publish Date:
10/21/2010
Investigation Docket:
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/search/dockList.cfm?mKey=74641
Page 5 of 5ERA09LA496
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
