Page 1 of 5
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Incident Final Report
Location:
Auburn, AL
Incident Number:
ATL04IA073
Date & Time:
02/03/2004, 1400 CST 
Registration:
N125AR
Aircraft:
Cessna 208B
Aircraft Damage:
None
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Positioning
Analysis 
According to the flight crew, during the takeoff roll the co-pilot noticed that the right rudder 
and trim controls were not responding. During the flight they began to diagnose the problem. 
The pilot continued the flight and made an uneventfully landing. During the post-landing 
examination of the airplane, the right rudder cable was found broken. Examination of the 
rudder cable by the NTSB Materials Laboratory found that the wire rope portion of the cable 
was fractured just inside the clevis fitting at the forward end of the cable. The fracture of the 
wire rope portion on the control cable assembly was the result of fatigue cracking that initiated 
because of the introduction of bending loads due to the over-torque of the clevis bolt during the 
manufacturing process.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this incident to be:
The fatigue fracture of the wire rope portion on the rudder control cable assembly due to 
improper installation and inadequate procedures by the aircraft manufacturer.
Findings
Occurrence #1: AIRFRAME/COMPONENT/SYSTEM FAILURE/MALFUNCTION
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) FLT CONTROL SYST,RUDDER CONTROL CABLE/ROD - OVERTORQUE
2. FLT CONTROL SYST,RUDDER CONTROL CABLE/ROD - FRACTURED
3. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - MANUFACTURER
4. (C) PROCEDURE INADEQUATE - MANUFACTURER
Page 2 of 5ATL04IA073
Factual Information
On February 3, 2004, at 1400 central standard time, a Cessna 208B, N125AR, registered to and 
operated by Rushton Air, lost right rudder control shortly after takeoff from the Columbus 
Metro Airport in Columbus, Georgia. The repositioning flight was operated under the 
provisions of Title 14 CFR Part 91, and visual flight rules. Visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed and no flight plan was filed. The pilot and co-pilot were not injured, and the airplane 
was not damaged. The flight departed the Columbus Metro Airport, in Columbus, Georgia on 
February 3, 2004 at 1340, enroute to Auburn-Opelika Airport in Auburn, Alabama.
According to the flight crew, during the takeoff roll the co-pilot  noticed that the right rudder 
was not responding. Due to the high traffic volume at Columbus, Georgia they elected to 
proceed to the Auburn-Opelika Airport in Auburn, Alabama. During the flight they began to 
diagnose the problem. They found that the rudder trim was not responding and full deflection 
of the right rudder pedal did not have any effect. Further examination found the right rudder 
cable broken. The crew contacted their Chief Pilot and Director of Maintenance, and found out 
that there was nothing that could be done in-flight. The pilot asked that emergency vehicles 
meet them on runway 36 just as a precaution. The pilot did not declare an emergency. The 
airplane landed uneventfully on runway 36 and the pilot performed a normal shutdown. 
Examination of the rudder cable found it separated at the trailing end of its attaching clevis. 
The cable and clevice were sent to the NTSB Materials Laboratory in Washington, DC for 
further examination. 
Examination of the rudder cable by the NTSB Materials Laboratory found that the wire rope 
portion of the cable was fractured just inside the clevis fitting at the forward end of the cable. 
The strands of the wire rope had separated from each other over a distance of more than 1 foot 
from the cable end. The individual wires in most of the strands had not separated from each 
other or were separated over a much shorter distance. Visual examination of the fractured wire 
ends with the aid of a bench binocular microscope revealed that the wire fractures were aligned 
with each other within about 0.02 inch, and were located about 0.05 inch inside the end of the 
clevis fitting. Nearly all of the fractures were on a flat transverse plane, with no apparent 
necking down deformation, features typical of fatigue cracking. A few of the wires were 
fractured on a slant plane and did contain necking down deformation, features typical of 
overstress fracture; and a few of the wires had fractures with a mixture of fatigue and 
overstress features. Further examination of the clevis fitting revealed that the forward ends of 
the clevis tines were pinched together. The spacing between the tines was measured with 
calipers and found to be 0.18 inch near where the tines joined together and 0.13 inch near the 
tip. Visual examination of the inside surfaces of the tines of the clevis fitting revealed the 
presence of a dark rust-colored discoloration, typical of fretting or rubbing damage, adjacent to 
the tip of the tines. The exterior surface of the clevis fitting also contained imprint or rubbing 
marks from contact with the underside of the attachment bolt head and from the washer under 
the nut. On both sides of the clevis, the damage was found dominantly on the forward and aft 
of the attachment bolt hole (and much less on the upper and lower sides of the hole). The 
damage on this side was much more severe than on the other side. 
According to Cessna Aircraft Company, as a result of this failure, Cessna is adding a spacer to 
the production process that will be placed between the rudder cable clevis and the rod end. 
This change will also be reflected in the Cessna Illustrated Parts Catalog.
Page 3 of 5ATL04IA073
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
28, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 1 Valid Medical--no 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
02/07/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
01/16/2004
Flight Time:
3000 hours (Total, all aircraft), 2000 hours (Total, this make and model), 2500 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 150 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 50 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 4 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Co-Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
28, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Multi-engine Land; Single-engine 
Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
Yes
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Multi-engine; Airplane 
Single-engine; Instrument Airplane
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
10/13/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
10/01/2003
Flight Time:
1300 hours (Total, all aircraft), 130 hours (Total, this make and model), 950 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 150 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 40 hours (Last 30 days, all 
aircraft), 3 hours (Last 24 hours, all aircraft)
Page 4 of 5ATL04IA073
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Cessna
Registration:
N125AR
Model/Series:
208B 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal; Transport
Serial Number:
2080925
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
11
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
01/12/2003, AAIP
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
9000 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
50 Hours
Engines:
1 Turbo Prop
Airframe Total Time:
1547 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Pratt & Whitney
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
PT6-114A
Registered Owner:
Rushton Air
Rated Power:
675 hp
Operator:
Rushton Air
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
On-demand Air Taxi (135)
Operator Does Business As:
Operator Designator Code:
YRAA
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
AUO, 640 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
0 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1350 CDT
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
9 knots / 12 knots
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
280°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.18 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
15°C / -1°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Columbus, GA (CSG)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Auburn, AL (AUO)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1340 CST
Type of Airspace: 
Class D
Airport Information
Airport:
Auburn - Opelika (AUO)
Runway Surface Type:
Asphalt
Airport Elevation:
640 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Dry
Runway Used:
36
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
5000 ft / 100 ft
VFR Approach/Landing:
Traffic Pattern
Page 5 of 5ATL04IA073
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
2 None
Aircraft Damage:
None
Passenger Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 None
Latitude, Longitude:
32.616667, -85.433333
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
Butch Wilson
Adopted Date:
06/08/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Ricky Messer; Birmingham FSDO
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
