The commercial pilot departed on a local flight and began a 120-mph cruise climb. After the 
airplane cleared some high terrain, the pilot leaned the engine fuel-air mixture, but the engine 
began to operate roughly. The pilot enriched the mixture, and the engine began to operate 
smoothly but then lost total power. The pilot performed emergency procedures, which included 
an attempted engine restart. The pilot stated that he pumped the throttle twice and that the 
engine responded with "2 small bursts of 500-600 rpms," but then there was no additional 
engine power. The pilot executed a forced landing to a nearby private airfield but was unable to 
reach the runway, and the airplane impacted terrain and farm equipment. 
A postaccident examination of the airplane fuel system revealed no anomalies. The carburetor 
could not be tested because it was destroyed during the accident sequence. A postaccident 
engine examination showed no evidence of preimpact mechanical malfunctions or 
abnormalities. Thus, the reason(s) for the total loss of engine power could not be determined.
The total loss of engine power for reasons that could not be determined because a postaccident 
examination of the engine did not reveal any mechanical malfunctions or failures that would 
have precluded normal operation. 
On January 4, 2018, about 1600 mountain standard time, a Barnes RV-4 airplane, N83SB, lost 
engine power and executed a forced landing near Montrose, Colorado. The commercial rated 
pilot was not injured, and the airplane sustained substantial damage. The airplane was 
registered to and operated by a private individual under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of 
Federal Regulations 
Part 91 as a personal flight. Day visual meteorological conditions 
prevailed at the time of the accident, and a flight plan was not filed. The local flight departed 
the Clifford Field Airport (1CO4), Olathe, Colorado, about 1555.
According to the pilot, he departed 1CO4 and began a 120-mph cruise climb. After clearing 
some high terrain, the pilot leaned the engine mixture and the engine began to operate rough, 
so he began to enrich the mixture. Subsequently, the engine began to operate smoothly, and 
then lost total power. The pilot performed his emergency procedures which included an 
attempted engine restart. The pilot pumped the throttle twice, the engine responded with "2 
small bursts of 500-600 rpms", and then no additional engine power. The pilot executed a 
forced landing to a nearby private airfield; however, was unable to make the runway, and the 
airplane impacted terrain and farm equipment. 
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector and the pilot 
revealed the fuel system and fuel lines were clear of contaminants and no issues were noted. 
The engine carburetor was destroyed during the accident sequence. No mechanical anomalies 
were noted with the airframe or engine.
