National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Covington, LA
Accident Number: DFW06CA117
Date & Time: 05/02/2006, 0900 CDT
Registration: N42336
Aircraft: Cessna 182L
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The 2,000-hour private pilot of the single-engine airplane experienced a total loss of engine power during the initial climb.
The pilot reported that about 400 feet above the ground (AGL), the engine "abruptly quit," and he attempted a left turn to attempt to return to the field; however, he impacted trees and then the ground before reaching the runway.
The pilot also reported that he had topped-off the fuel tanks with 34 gallons of 100LL fuel at the airport 4 days earlier.
An examination of the wreckage revealed that the carburetor bowl was half filled with what appeared to be rusty water.
The gascolator was removed and examined.
It did not contain any fluid; however, the inside of the bowl contained a large amount of corrosion.
The wing fuel bladders tanks were empty, and no folds or obstructions were noted.
The left fuel tank was breached, and no fuel cap was present.
The vented right fuel cap was in good condition, with a pliable rubber gasket.
No other evidence of preimpact mechanical failure or malfunction was observed.
The airport fuel provider reported to the FAA that fuel samples were tested on the day of the accident and found to be within specification with no contaminants.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The total loss of engine power due to water contamination in the fuel system for undetermined reasons.
A contributing factor was the lack of suitable terrain for the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - NONMECHANICAL Phase of Operation: TAKEOFF - INITIAL CLIMB Findings 1.
(C) FUEL SYSTEM - CONTAMINATION,WATER ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 2.
OBJECT - TREE(S) 3.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
