National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Jasper, TX
Accident Number: DFW06LA121
Date & Time: 05/01/2006, 0800 CDT
Registration: N8504T
Aircraft: Air Tractor AT-802A
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 Minor
Flight Conducted Under: Part 137: Agricultural
 Analysis The turbine powered agricultural airplane was loaded with a payload of 5,500 pounds of chemicals prior to a local aerial application flight.
The 8,500-hour non-instrument rated commercial pilot reported to local authorities that while in-flight he experienced some problems with the on-board agricultural-navigation system; however, he elected to proceed to the field to be sprayed.
While en route to the field, the engine surged a couple of times and lost power.
The pilot attempted to execute a forced landing to a pasture.
During the approach, the pilot was forced to make a sharp turn to avoid colliding with a fence, resulting in a hard landing and a subsequent loss of directional control.
The payload of chemicals was found in the hopper, and the reason why the pilot did not elect to dump the load following the loss of engine power was not determined.
The 2005 model airplane sustained major structural damage in the area aft of the engine firewall.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, who traveled to the accident site, revealed less than a cup of fuel in one tank and less than 5 gallons in the other.
A completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) was never received from neither the pilot nor the operator.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The loss of engine power due to fuel exhaustion.
A contributing factor was the lack of suitable landing for the pilot to execute the forced landing.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER Phase of Operation: MANEUVERING - AERIAL APPLICATION Findings 1.
(C) FLUID,FUEL - EXHAUSTION 2.
REFUELING - NOT PERFORMED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING ---------- Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING Findings 3.
TERRAIN CONDITION - CONGESTED/CONFINED AREA 4.
(F) TERRAIN CONDITION - NONE SUITABLE Factual Information On 1 May 2006, at 0800 central daylight time, a single-engine Air Tractor AT-802A agricultural airplane, N8504T, was substantially damaged during a forced landing following a reported loss of engine power near Jasper, Texas.
The commercial pilot, sole occupant of the airplane, sustained minor injuries.
The airplane was registered to Ag Pilots, Inc., of Onalaska, Texas, and was being operated by Thrash Aviation.
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the aerial application flight for which a flight plan was not filed.
The local flight originated from the Jasper County Airport (JAS) at time unknown.
The turbine powered agricultural airplane was loaded with a payload of 5,500 pounds of chemicals prior to a local aerial application flight.
The 8,500-hour non-instrument rated commercial pilot reported to local authorities that while in-flight he experienced some problems with the on-board agricultural-navigation system; however, he elected to proceed to the field to be sprayed.
While enroute to the field, the PT6A series engine surged a couple of time and lost power.
The pilot attempted to execute a forced landing to a pasture.
During the approach, the pilot was forced to make a sharp turn to avoid colliding with a fence, resulting in a hard landing and a loss of directional control.
The payload of chemicals was found in the hopper, and the reason why the pilot was unable to dump the load following the loss of engine power was not determined.
The 2005 model airplane sustained major structural damage in the area aft of the engine firewall.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector, who traveled to the accident site, revealed less of a cup of fuel was found in one tank and less than 5 gallons were found in the other.
A completed Pilot/Operator Aircraft Accident/Incident Report (NTSB Form 6120.1) was not received from either the pilot or the operator.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
