National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Lumberton, NJ
Accident Number: NYC06CA107
Date & Time: 05/02/2006, 1020 EDT
Registration: N2549Y
Aircraft: Cessna 172D
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Instructional
 Analysis The student pilot was conducting solo takeoffs and landings in a Cessna 172D, on a 3,496-foot- long, 75-foot-wide, asphalt runway.
During his first approach to the runway, the airplane was high, and the student pilot performed a go-around.
During his second approach, the airplane touched down, and the student pilot applied the brakes.
However, the engine rpm increased, and the student pilot cycled the throttle in an attempt to reduce rpm.
The airplane subsequently traveled off the end of the runway and impacted a field.
The student pilot's flight instructor reported that after a good landing, he observed the airplane increase speed, and the tires were smoking as the airplane departed the end of the runway.
Examination of the airplane by a Federal Aviation Administration inspector did not reveal any pre-impact mechanical malfunctions.
The wind was reported as calm at a nearby airport, about the time of the accident.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The student pilot's failure to maintain aircraft control while landing, which resulted in an runway overrun and subsequent impact with terrain.
Findings Occurrence #1: LOSS OF CONTROL - ON GROUND/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 1.
(C) AIRCRAFT CONTROL - NOT MAINTAINED - PILOT IN COMMAND ---------- Occurrence #2: OVERRUN Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL ---------- Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL Findings 2.
: Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Continental ELT: Engine Model/Series: O-300 Registered Owner: Herlihy Helicopters Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
