National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location: Miami, FL
Accident Number: MIA06CA101
Date & Time: 05/01/2006, 1445 EDT
Registration: N738DW
Aircraft: Cessna 172N
Aircraft Damage: Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries: 1 None
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
 Analysis The pilot stated that approximately 20 minutes after takeoff he radioed the Kendall-Tamiami Executive Airport Air Traffic Control Tower and requested touch-and-go landings.
He reported having difficulty with the aircraft's radio and was cleared for a full stop landing on runway 9R.
He further reported,''...the landing seemed normal; the main wheels touch down, but then as I noticed the yoke not releasing from the flare, the aircraft starts to balloon, I add a little power and attempt to land but the yoke was stiff."
The airplane ballooned "...a couple of times, hitting the ground hard until I finally stopped."
He taxied the airplane to the ramp and secured it where he again noticed the elevator control still stiff.
Postaccident examination of the airplane by an airframe and powerplant mechanic revealed impact damage to the firewall, and the control yoke was displaced up and was in contact with an instrument panel support bracket.
Examination of the elevator flight control system revealed no evidence of preimpact failure or malfunction.
Probable Cause and Findings The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be: The improper flare by the pilot resulting in a hard landing and substantial damage to the airplane.
Findings Occurrence #1: HARD LANDING Phase of Operation: LANDING - FLARE/TOUCHDOWN Findings 1.
: Time Since Last Inspection: Engines: 1 Reciprocating Airframe Total Time:  Engine Manufacturer: Lycoming ELT: Engine Model/Series: O-320-H2AD Registered Owner: Palmetto Sales & Leasing, Inc.
Investigation Docket: NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s investigations.
Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s Record Management Division at pubinq@ntsb.gov , or at 800-877-6799.
Dockets released after this date are available at http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/ .
