The instructor and student were conducting a night orientation flight. According to a witnesses 
who worked for the operator, about 15 minutes after the helicopter departed, he heard what 
sounded like an engine rollback and the helicopter making an autorotation. This was followed 
by the sound of an increase in engine rpm and the drive belts squealing, culminating with the 
sound of the helicopter making a loud thud-type noise. Another witness stated that the engine 
sounded rough and that the helicopter was making a high pitch whining/squealing sound, after 
which it went silent. A third witness also heard the helicopter making high pitch noise just 
before the accident. The helicopter was subsequently located in an open field near the 
departure airport; a postcrash fire erupted, which consumed the helicopter. 
A postaccident examination of the lower coupling drive shaft showed evidence of severe wear 
completely around the forward spline that extended beyond the root of the spline teeth. Severe 
wear of the forward spline teeth could have been caused by a loss of alignment between the 
engine and the drive shaft or an inflight loss of lubrication in the rubber boot. The rubber boot 
that retains grease for the forward spline portion of the drive shaft was not recovered and was 
presumed missing. Loss of grease coverage for the forward spline, either from a rupture of the 
rubber boot or a loss of the clamp for the rubber boot, could cause sudden inflight wear and 
overheating of the spline teeth. Severe wear of the forward spline portion of the lower coupling 
drive shaft most likely led to sudden and complete loss of translational/rotational power 
between the engine and the transmission. The reason for the severe wear of the forward spline 
could not be definitively determined due to fire damage and the loss of associated components, 
which were not located during the investigation.
The loss of translation/rotational power between the engine and the transmission due to the 
severe wear of the forward spline portion of the lower coupling drive shaft. The reason for the 
severe wear of the forward spline could not be definitively determined due to fire damage and 
the loss of associated components, which were not located during the investigation.
