This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Preliminary Report
Location: West Milford, NJ
Accident Number: ERA18FA138
Date & Time: 05/02/2018, 1410 EDT
Registration: N4153R
Aircraft: PIPER PA32
Injuries: 1 Fatal
Flight Conducted Under: Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
On May 2, 2018, about 1410 eastern daylight time, a Piper PA-32-300, N4153R, was destroyed 
when it impacted terrain at the Greenwood Lake Airport (4N1), West Milford, New Jersey. The 
private pilot was fatally injured. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan 
was filed for the personal flight to Orange County Airport (MGJ), Montgomery, New York. The 
airplane was registered to IHAF Flying Mission LLC and operated by the private pilot. The 
personal flight was conducted under the provisions of Title 14 
Code of Federal Regulations 
Part 91.
A flight instructor located at 4N1, who was also a friend of the pilot stated that he talked with 
the pilot just before the accident. He stated that the pilot told him that he was having problems 
with the airplane's engine, and thought it was either the magnetos or the spark plugs. The pilot 
stated he was going to taxi to the end of the runway and perform an engine run-up. If the 
engine run-up was successful, he was going to take a short flight to MGJ and then return.
A witness, located 1 mile north of the airport, heard the airplane takeoff and then heard the 
airplane's engine sputter, then shut off. He then heard the sound of a crash and called 911.
The wreckage was consumed by a postcrash fire and located in a wooded area, about 1,100 ft to 
the left side of the departure end of runway 24. Tree branches were observed broken 
descending about a 12° angle and extending approximately 50 ft on a magnetic heading of 110° 
to the main wreckage. The main wreckage came to rest upright. The instrument panel was 
consumed by fire and no readable instruments were recovered. Both wings separated from the 
fuselage and were located about 30 ft behind the fuselage. The wings exhibited minor fire 
damage. 100LL aviation fuel was found in both wing tanks. All major components of the 
airplane were accounted for at the scene. Control cable continuity was confirmed through 
breaks, that were consistent with overload separations, to the respective controls.
The engine remained attached to the airframe. The accessories on the rear of the engine were 
consumed by fire. The propeller blades were both bent aft at mid-blade. Thumb compression 
was established on all cylinders and a lighted boroscope was used to examine all pistons and 
valves with no anomalies noted.
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
The six seat, low-wing, tricycle gear airplane, serial number 32-40468, was manufactured in 
1968. It was powered by a Lycoming IO-540-K1A5, 300-horsepower engine, equipped with a 
two-bladed Hartzell propeller. Family members stated that the maintenance logbooks were 
carried on the airplane in the luggage compartment. The luggage compartment was consumed 
by fire and all documents were destroyed.
The pilot held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane single-engine land. He held a 
third-class medical certificate, issued April 27, 2016. At the time of the medical examination, 
the pilot reported 625 total hours of flight experience. The pilot's logbook was consumed by 
fire.
The recorded weather at Sussex Airport, located 13 miles northwest, at 1353, was: wind from 
220° at 10 knots, gusting to 21 knots; visibility 10 statute miles; clear sky; temperature 30° C; 
dew point 6° C; altimeter 30.02 inches of mercury.
The airframe and engine were retained for further examination.
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make: PIPER
Registration: N4153R
Model/Series: PA32 300
Aircraft Category: Airplane
Amateur Built: No
Operator: On file
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held: None
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site: Visual Conditions
Condition of Light: Day
Observation Facility, Elevation: KFWN, 421 ft msl
Observation Time: 1753 UTC
Distance from Accident Site: 13 Nautical Miles
Temperature/Dew Point: 30°C / 6°C
Lowest Cloud Condition: Clear
Wind Speed/Gusts, Direction: 10 knots / 21 knots, 220°
Lowest Ceiling: None
Visibility: 10 Miles
Altimeter Setting: 30.02 inches Hg
Type of Flight Plan Filed: None
Departure Point: West Milford, NJ (4N1)
Destination: MONTGOMERY, NY (MGJ)
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries: 1 Fatal
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Passenger Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Fire: On-Ground
Ground Injuries: N/A
Aircraft Explosion: None
Total Injuries: 1 Fatal
Latitude, Longitude: 41.121389, -74.350833 (est)
This is preliminary information, subject to change, and may contain errors. Any errors in this report will be corrected when 
the final report has been completed.
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC): Daniel P Boggs
Additional Participating Persons: Watson Joseph; FAA; Teterboro, NJ
John Butler; Lycoming; Dallas, TX
Jon Hirsch; Piper; Witchita, KS
Note: The NTSB traveled to the scene of this accident.
