The pilot reported that, 2 hours 15 minutes after takeoff, the airplane's electrical generator 
failed and the airplane subsequently experienced electrical power failure.  He said the engine 
then began to run rough.  The recently licensed private pilot was not certain of his position and 
he made a precautionary landing at dusk on a county road.  As the airplane touched down, the 
left wing struck a street sign which deflected the airplane across the highway median and 
across the (opposite direction) traffic lanes.  The accident occurred 2 hours 45 minutes after 
takeoff.  The airway distance from the departure airport to the intended destination was 167 
nautical miles, and the distance to the accident location was approximately 142 nautical miles.   
Subsequent examination and a test run of the engine revealed no reason for the reported 
roughness. 
The failure of the pilot to maintain positional awareness, which resulted in his becoming lost 
and disoriented. Contributing factors were the pilot's delay requesting assistance from air 
traffic control and the failure of the airplane's electrical generator. 
 On January 2, 2000, at 1800 hours Pacific standard time, a Cessna 172G, N3690L, was 
substantially damaged during a precautionary landing on a county road at Victorville, 
California.  The private pilot and one passenger were not injured.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed for the personal flight, which was operated under 14 CFR Part 91 by 
Riverside (California) Air Service.  The flight departed Bullhead City, Arizona, about 1515 and 
no flight plan was filed.
The pilot reported that 2 hours 15 minutes after takeoff, as he was flying along highway 15, the 
generator fail annunciator light came on.  He reduced the electrical load and noted that the 
carburetor air temperature and exhaust gas temperature gauges were "climbing above the 
warning lines."  The pilot contacted Southern California (SoCal) Approach Control and 
explained that he was "not familiar" with the area and requested a vector to the nearest airport.  
Before SoCal could help, the electrical power failed completely and the engine started to run 
rough.  He decided to land on a road because he was "not sure" of his position and didn't know 
if the engine gauges were reading correctly.  He also reported that the engine was "running 
rough" and "sputtering" at full throttle. As the airplane touched down, the left wing struck a 
street sign, which deflected the airplane across the highway median and off the other side of 
the road.  
The accident time was 2 hours 45 minutes after takeoff.  According to a GTE DUATS flight 
plan, the low altitude airway distance from Laughlin to Riverside is 167 nautical miles, and the 
distance from Laughlin to Victorville is approximately 142 nautical miles.  The pilot had 90 
hours total flying time and received his private pilot certificate on December 9, 1999.
The operator sent the engine to an engine repair facility where it was disassembled and 
inspected, including the carburetor and magnetos.  The mechanic there told the Safety Board 
investigator that no discrepancies were noted that might have led to a power interruption or a 
rough running engine.  The engine was subsequently reinstalled in the airplane and operated 
normally.  The electrical charging system was found to be inoperative and the generator and 
voltage regulator were replaced.
