Approximately five hours and fifteen minutes into the flight, the pilot radioed Approach 
Control and requested landing. Minutes after the initial radio contact, the pilot reported that 
the airplane had run out of fuel. The pilot was issued radar vectors to the nearest airport. 
Seconds later, radio and radar contact was lost. Within about two minutes an Emergency 
Locator Transmitter (ELT) signal was reported by another airplane flying in the vicinity of the 
downed airplane. The accident airplane was located by the ground search operation the 
morning following the accident. Examination of the airframe also failed to disclose a 
mechanical malfunction or the failure of related component assemblies. Approximately 1/2 
gallon of fuel was recovered from the right fuel tank. The left fuel tank was ruptured. The 
engine operated up to 1700 rpm during the functional engine check. 
The pilot's inadequate inflight planning that resulted in fuel exhaustion and the subsequent 
loss of engine power. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On January 3, 2000, at 2130 eastern standard time, a Piper PA-24-180, N5703P, collided with 
trees in a heavily wooded area while maneuvering for an emergency landing in Cordsville, 
South Carolina. The personal flight was operated by the pilot under the provisions of Title 14 
CFR Part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual weather conditions prevailed at the time of the 
accident. The airplane was substantially damaged. The air transport pilot and left rear seat 
passenger received fatal injuries; the right front seat passenger received serious injuries. The 
flight departed the Princeton/Rocky Hill Airport in Princeton, New Jersey, at 1615. 
At 1101, the pilot of N5703P telephoned the Williamsport, Pennsylvania, Flight Service Station 
and requested an abbreviated weather briefing from Princeton, New Jersey to Key West, 
Florida. According to the Air Traffic Control Specialist, the pilot was briefed in the existing and 
forecast weather conditions for the requested route of flight. No significant enroute weather 
conditions were reported during the briefing.  
According to the Fixed Base Operator (FBO) at Princeton/Rocky Hill Airport, the fuel tanks 
were topped-off with aviation fuel before the flight departed. The FBO also reported that the 
pilot had stated that his destination was Key West, Florida, and the pilot planned an enroute 
stop in Savannah, Georgia. Approximately five hours and fifteen minutes into the flight, the 
pilot radioed Charleston Approach Control and requested landing. About two minutes after the 
initial radio contact, the pilot reported that the airplane had run out of fuel. The approach 
controller immediately issued the pilot radar vectors to the nearest airport. Seconds later, radio 
and radar contact was lost. Within about two minutes an Emergency Locator Transmitter 
(ELT) signal was reported by another airplane. 
At approximately 0230, on January 4, 2000, the accident airplane was located by the ground 
search operation.  
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The pilot held an Air Transport Pilot certificate with an airplane multi-engine land, and 
instrument ratings. The pilot also held a commercial pilot's certificate with an airplane single 
engine land and glider aero tow certificate. His total flight time was 16,000 hours and 
approximately 850 flying hours in the Piper PA-24-180. The pilot held a current first class 
medical certificate, dated July 20, 2000. There were no medical limitations associated with the 
pilot's flight privileges. 
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The Piper PA-24-180, N5703P, was owned and operated by the pilot. N-5703P was a low-wing 
airplane powered by an Avco Lycoming O-360-A engine. The airplane was equipped with two 
30 gallon fuel tanks. A review of the airplane maintenance logbooks showed that the airplane 
was maintained in accordance with applicable Federal  Aviation Regulations. 
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Charleston 2156 weather observation reported sky clear, visibility 10 miles, wind 020 
degrees at four knots. The accident site was about 28 miles north Charleston, South Carolina. . 
AIRPORT   INFORMATION 
Berkeley County Airport is an uncontrolled local airport located one mile southwest of the city 
of Moncks Corner, South Carolina. The asphalt runway surface is 3,801 feet long and 75 feet 
wide. The elevation at the airport is 74 feet above sea level. 
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
Examination of the accident site disclosed that wreckage rested in a heavily wooded area 
approximately seven miles east of Moncks Corner Airport. Wreckage debris was scattered over 
an area 130 feet long and 45 feet wide, and was orientated on a 300 degree magnetic heading. 
The main wreckage was also oriented on a northwesterly magnetic heading. The main 
wreckage rested upright in a 30-degree nose low attitude against a tree. The main wreckage 
was located at 33 degrees 09.919 north latitude and 079 degrees 53.943 west longitude. 
The examination of the main wreckage at the accident site disclosed that the left horizontal 
stabilator assembly was separated from the airframe and was located south of the main 
wreckage. Further examination of the left horizontal stabilator showed leading edge 
compression damage. Freshly broken tree debris was scattered in the immediate vicinity of the 
left horizontal stabilator. The right horizontal stabilator and the vertical fin assemblies 
remained attached to the airframe.   
The stabilator and rudder flight control cables remained attached to their respective actuator 
rod and bellcrank assemblies. Rudder and stabilator flight control cable movement was 
established between the flight control surface and the base of the flight control column. 
Deformation to the lower instrument panel and the cabin flooring restricted flight control cable 
movement in the vicinity of the flight control column.  
Further examination of the airframe revealed that the left wing assembly was displaced aft 
from the normally installed position, and that the left fuel bladder was ruptured. No notable 
amount of fuel was recovered from the 30 gallon fuel tank. The left wing also sustained semi-
circular compression leading edge damage at the wing root attach point. The wing root damage 
extended aft through mid-chord of the left wing structure. Examination of the aileron flight 
control cable revealed that the cable had fractured at the mid-span position of the left wing. 
The left main landing gear was found in the extended position.
The right wing remained attached to the airframe, and the right flap and aileron assemblies 
remained attached at their respective positions.  The right wing also exhibited compression 
damage along the leading edge. The right fuel tank was intact and approximately 1/2 gallon of 
fuel was recovered from the tank. The right main landing gear was found in the extended 
position. 
The cockpit flooring was displaced in an aft and up direction. The remainder of the cockpit 
structure was ruptured and the occupants were exposed to ambient conditions. The instrument 
panel was also displaced aft into the pilot and co-pilot stations; the front seat occupants were 
fatally injured. 
The examination and functional run of the engine failed to disclose a system malfunction or a 
component failure.  Prior to the engine run, the propeller governor and the carburetor fuel line 
inlet fitting were replaced. The engine functional check was successfully up to 1,700 rpm. 
Propeller vibration prevented the engine run above 1,700 rpm. 
Examination of the remainder of the airframe also failed to disclose a mechanical malfunction 
or the failure of related component assemblies. 
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
On January 4, 2000, the postmortem examination on the pilot was performed by Dr. Melissa 
Sims at the Charleston Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, South Carolina. 
The forensic toxicology was performed by the FAA Toxicology  and Accident Research 
Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The tests were  negative for carbon monoxide, cyanide, 
drugs and alcohol. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
A review of the Piper PA-28-180 performance charts disclosed the following fuel consumption 
rates:  at 75% power- 10  gph (gallons per hour)  at 65% 
power- 8.8 gph  at 55% power- 7.5 gph. 
Reportedly, the fuel tanks were topped-off with 60 gallons of aviation fuel when the flight 
departed. Approximately, 5.2 hours into the flight the pilot reported the lost of engine power 
and that the airplane was out of fuel. Cruise flight fuel conservation procedures used by the 
pilot were not determined. 
The airplane wreckage was released to Mr. Mark Thompson, an insurance adjuster, Atlanta, 
Georgia.
