He stated the local winds were gusty and alternating between east and southeast, and he used 
runway 17 for takeoff.  He stated engine power was normal, but he was unable to maintain a 
climb when he reached the south end of the runway which was bordered by trees.  The airplane 
began a descent near the end of the runway.  The lower right wing contacted a tree just south of 
a highway which bordered the south end of the airport.  The pilot stated that after the accident 
he noted the winds at the south side of the airport were out of the south and the wind sock at 
the north end of the airport was indicating winds from the northeast. 
the pilot's inability to maintain a climb after takeoff as a result of wind shear.  Factors 
associated with the accident were the variable, gusty wind conditions, and the tree which was 
contacted. 
 On June 3, 1999, at 1007 central daylight time, a DeHavilland Tiger Moth DH 82A, N9393, 
operated by a private pilot settled into trees during an initial takeoff climb from the Maize 
Airport, Maize, Kansas.  The pilot received minor injuries and the sole passenger was not 
injured.  The airplane was substantially damaged.  The 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight was 
operating in visual meteorological conditions without a flight plan.  The flight was originating 
when the accident occurred and the intended destination was Bartlesville, Oklahoma.
The pilot stated that he received a weather briefing prior to taking off.  He stated the local 
winds were gusty and alternating between east and southeast.  The pilot reported that the 
winds being reported at Wichita, 9 statue miles south of the Maize Airport, were from 150 
degrees at 14 knots.  The takeoff was being made on runway 17 (2,000' x 70', grass).
The pilot stated that engine power was 2,100 rpm and oil pressure was normal during the 
takeoff.  He reported, "As the tail came up, the airplane quickly lifted off and rolled slightly to 
the right - I added more left aileron, which rolled the airplane back level - the power of the 
gusts surprised me, as this was not the case before takeoff and at the north end of the field.  
The airplane seemed initially to climb well."  The pilot stated the runway had trees along the 
left side and he was looking out of the cockpit to assure clearance with them.  The pilot stated 
that as they reached the south end of the runway, which is lined on both sides by trees, the 
airplane seemed as though it would not climb.  He stated he looked at the tachometer and the 
needle was bouncing between 2,100 rpm and 2,200 rpm so he applied full throttle.  
The pilot stated he maintained just enough back pressure to keep the airplane airborne.  The 
pilot stated, "As we approached the area of trees south of the runway and across the highway, 
the airplane simply had gained no altitude, and was continuing a slight descent."  The right 
lower wing on the airplane contacted an 8-inch diameter tree about 20 yards south of highway 
K-96, which borders the south end of the runway.  The airplane rotated to the right and 
descended to impact with the terrain.
The pilot stated that after the accident, while standing south of the airport, the wind was from 
the south. He noticed the wind sock at the north end of the runway at this same time and it was 
indicating that the wind in that location was out of the northeast.
