About 150 feet agl and 60 knots, as the helicopter was accelerating, the pilot heard a loud 
'bang,' and the low rotor rpm and engine out audio warning activated.  The pilot initiated an 
autorotation to a grassy area, 'flared the aircraft, and placed it in six to eight inches of water.'  A 
main rotor blade contacted the tailboom, partially separating it aft of the horizontal stabilizer.  
A passenger reported that the pilot 'pulled pitch right before the landing and we landed with 
one medium bump and then followed very quickly with another medium bump with a loud 
sound with it.'  The passenger further reported that the landing attitude was 'relatively normal;' 
however, 'it was possibly a little more pitched up than normal.'  An examination of the engine 
revealed that the Spur Adapter Gearshaft was fractured at the forward splines.  According to 
the engine manufacturer's metallurgist, 'severe spline wear led to [the] spiral fatigue failure of 
the Spur Adapter Gearshaft and Compressor Adapter Coupling.'  The reason for the spline wear 
was not determined. 
The pilot's improper touchdown procedure, resulting in a main rotor blade contacting the 
tailboom.  Factors were the soft and wet terrain conditions, and the loss of engine power due to 
the spiral fatigue failure of the gas generator turbine shafting due to spline wear. 
 On June 1, 1999, at 1448 central daylight time, a Bell 206B helicopter, N7131U, was 
substantially damaged during a forced landing, following a loss of engine power near Venice, 
Louisiana. The helicopter was owned and operated by Chevron USA, Inc., of New Orleans, 
Louisiana.  The commercial pilot and the two passengers were not injured.  Visual 
meteorological conditions prevailed, and a company VFR flight plan was filed for the 14 Code 
of Federal Regulations Part 91 aerial observation flight.  The local flight originated from the 
West Delta 30 platform located in the Gulf of Mexico, at 1426.
The pilot reported that he flew the helicopter at an altitude of about 150 feet agl and an 
airspeed of 60 knots, while inspecting a pipeline, which was reported to have a possible oil 
leak.   After completing the inspection, as the helicopter was accelerating (to return to West 
Delta 30), he heard a loud "bang," and the low rotor rpm and engine out audio warnings 
activated.  The pilot further reported that he "entered autorotation, flared the aircraft, and 
placed it in six to eight inches of water.  It was a grassy area, so I didn't pop the floats."  
The passengers reported hearing a loud "bang," and the aircraft began to "shudder/shake."  
The passenger in the rear seat reported that after the bang, he heard a "metallic grinding 
screeching sound."  The helicopter "lurched," yawed to the left, and "pitched forward."  The 
pilot maneuvered the helicopter to the "edge of open water and onto a grassy mat in the 
marsh."  The pilot "pulled pitch right before the landing and we landed with one medium bump 
and then followed very quickly with another medium bump with a loud sound with it."  The 
rear seat passenger further reported that the landing attitude was "relatively normal;" however, 
"it was possibly a little more pitched up than normal."  The rear seat passenger also reported 
that the landing was "reasonably soft."
Examination of the helicopter by the FAA inspector revealed that the tailboom was partially 
separated aft of the horizontal stabilizer, and the tail rotor assembly was damaged.  Both main 
rotor blades were damaged.  A piece of blade, aft of the main spar and outboard of the trim tab, 
was separated from one main rotor blade.  The outboard section of this blade was bent upward.
A teardown examination of the Allison 250-C20J engine, serial number CAE270491, was 
conducted at the operator's maintenance facility in New Orleans, Louisiana, under the 
supervision of the FAA.  A continuity check of the compressor through the accessory gearbox 
revealed a disconnect.  Removal of the compressor section revealed that the Spur Adapter 
Gearshaft (SAG) was fractured at the forward splines.  The accessory gearbox was torn down 
revealing "major" damage to the #2-1/2 roller bearing.  The lower magnetic plug had a "large" 
amount of flaking type debris adhering to it, and the upper gearbox magnetic plug had a 
"small" amount of sliver type debris adhering to it.  According to the engine manufacturer's 
metallurgist, "severe spline wear led to [the] spiral fatigue failure of the Spur Adapter 
Gearshaft and Compressor Adapter Coupling."  The damage to the #2-1/2 bearing "appeared to 
be secondary" to the failure of the SAG.  The metallurgist reported that "no metallurgical cause 
was determined for the spline wear."  The compressor had accumulated a total time of 11,898.2 
hours, with 2,694.9 hours since overhaul.  See the excerpts of the enclosed manufacturer report 
for details of the examination.
