The certificated commercial helicopter pilot reported that during a northerly departure from 
atop a 4,200 feet msl mountain, the rotor rpm dropped, and the low rotor warning horn 
sounded.  He said that in an attempt to regain rotor rpm and arrest the decent, he rolled the 
throttle to the high position, increased collective pitch, and lowered the nose to gain airspeed.  
He said that the rotor rpm continued to decay, the helicopter impacted uneven terrain, and 
rolled over.  The pilot stated: 'I just got into a downdraft on takeoff.'  He added that there were 
no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the helicopter.  The helicopter sustained substantial 
damage to the rotor system, and fuselage. 
The pilot's failure to maintain rotor RPM during takeoff. Factors associated with the accident 
were a downdraft, and uneven terrain. 
 On June 1, 1999, about 1800 Alaska daylight time, a skid equipped Robinson R22 helicopter, 
N1929T, sustained substantial damage during takeoff, about 35 miles west of Glennallen, 
Alaska.   The helicopter was being operated under Title 14, CFR Part 135, when the accident 
occurred.  The certificated commercial pilot, and the sole passenger aboard, were not injured.  
Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and company flight following procedures were in 
effect.  The flight originated about 0930 from a private airfield approximately 35 miles west of 
Glennallen.
During a telephone conversation with the National Transportation Safety Board investigator-
in-charge on June 2, the pilot reported that he was conducting an on-demand charter flight for 
the State of Alaska, and that the passenger was a wildlife biologist employed by the State of 
Alaska.  The pilot added that the purpose of this particular flight was to locate and retrieve 
electronic tracking collars that had been dropped by previously tagged moose.  He said that the 
wildlife biologist had electronically tracked a collar located atop a 4,200 feet msl mountain.  An 
uneventful landing and engine shutdown was made, and the biologist recovered the radio 
collar.  The pilot stated that during a northerly departure, the rotor rpm dropped, and the low 
rotor warning horn sounded.  He said that in an attempt to regain rotor rpm and arrest the 
decent, he rolled the throttle to the high position, increased collective pitch, and lowered the 
nose to gain airspeed.   He said that the rotor rpm continued to decay, the helicopter impacted 
uneven terrain, and rolled over.  The pilot stated: "I just got into a downdraft on takeoff."  He 
added that there were no preaccident mechanical anomalies with the helicopter.
The helicopter sustained substantial damage to the rotor system, and fuselage.
