The airplane sustained substantial structural damage to the nose wheel well aft bulkhead 
during a hard landing.  The en route flight from New York to Phoenix was uneventful.  About 3 
seconds before touchdown, at the termination of a visual approach, the airplane's pitch attitude 
increased to 5.8 degrees.  The captain, who was the flying pilot, described the first touchdown 
as being 'firm,' and in the runway's touchdown zone, close to the centerline.  There was a 
maintenance carry over (MCO) disabling the auto-spoiler deployment system, so the first 
officer manually deployed the spoilers upon touchdown.  The captain stated he then applied 
forward pressure to the control yoke.  The captain additionally reported that he 'felt a jolt' as 
the nose gear returned to the runway.  After landing, the airplane taxied to the gate.  It was 
subsequently examined and substantial damage was observed to the airplane's nose gear wheel 
well aft bulkhead, associated underlying structure, and skin panels.  The digital flight data 
recorder was read out and it revealed that approximately 3 seconds prior to touchdown, the 
pitch attitude started increasing in response to nose up elevator inputs to a maximum pitch of 
about 5.8 degrees, and the airplane touched down (transitioned from air to ground) then 
became airborne again.  The second air to ground transition occurred 3 seconds later and the 
elevator positions changed over the next second from plus 6 degrees to minus 16 degrees as the 
pitch attitude rapidly decreased to -0.7 degrees at a rate of 4 degrees per second.  There was no 
evidence of any mechanical malfunctions during the landing event. 
The pilot's excessive and rapid forward control column movement in response to a bounced 
landing, which resulted in the hard touchdown of the nose wheel. 
 HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On June 2, 1999, about 2026 hours mountain standard time, a Boeing 757-232, N656DL, was 
substantially damaged during a hard landing at the Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, 
Phoenix, Arizona.  The airline transport certificated captain, first officer, 6 flight attendants, 
and 119 passengers were not injured.  The flight was operated by Delta Air Lines, Inc., on an 
instrument flight plan under 14 CFR Part 121 as Flight 491, a scheduled domestic passenger 
flight.  The flight originated from the John F. Kennedy Airport in New York about 1831 eastern 
daylight time.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed during the landing at Phoenix.
Air traffic control cleared the airplane for a visual approach to runway 26R.  The captain, who 
was handling the flight controls, reported that all phases of the flight up to the landing were 
uneventful.  He described the landing as being "firm," and in the runway's touchdown zone, 
close to the centerline.  There was a maintenance carry over (MCO) disabling the auto-spoiler 
deployment system, so the first officer manually deployed the spoilers upon touchdown.  
Thereafter, the airplane's nose pitched upward.  The captain stated he then applied forward 
pressure to the control yoke.  The captain additionally reported that he "felt a jolt" as the nose 
gear returned to the runway.
The first officer also provided a statement regarding the landing events.  He concurred with the 
captain's statements.  After landing, the airplane taxied to the gate.  The event was originally 
reported by Delta as being a hard landing incident.  However, a subsequent examination of the 
airplane revealed substantial airframe damage.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Captain.
The captain had about 17,000 total flight hours.  His experience flying the Boeing 757 was 
about 1,446 hours.  He had flown this type of airplane for about 185 hours during the preceding 
90 days.
First Officer.
The first officer had about 8,000 total flight hours.  His experience flying the Boeing 757 was 
about 1,007 hours.  He had flown this type of airplane for about 52 hours during the preceding 
90 days.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The airplane was maintained by Delta on a continuous airworthiness program.  Its total 
airframe time was about 32,594 hours.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
At 1956, Phoenix reported its surface wind was from 240 degrees at 10 knots, and the visibility 
was 10 miles.  There were few clouds at 20,000 feet.
AIRPORT AND GROUND FACILITIES
Runway 26R is 11,001 feet long by 150 feet wide.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The airplane was equipped with a digital flight data recorder (DFDR), which was removed from 
the airplane and read out by the National Transportation Safety Board's Vehicle Recorders 
Laboratory in Washington, D.C.  Data for various parameters including altitude, indicated 
airspeed, magnetic heading, vertical acceleration, engine power, and control surface and 
airplane orientation (i.e. pitch, roll) was extracted.  The parameters for the positions of the 
control columns and spoilers was not recorded.   
The DFDR data indicates that approximately 3 seconds prior to touchdown, the pitch attitude 
started increasing in response to nose up elevator inputs.  The aircraft was descending at 650 
feet per minute at approximately 125 knots.  When the aircraft was 33 feet agl and at 2.6 
degrees pitch, the elevators start to be increased from approximately 0 degrees.  The pitch of 
the airplane increased as the elevators are deflected to 8.5 degrees airplane nose up.  The 
airplane reached a maximum pitch of about 5.8 degrees, a roll right attitude of 3 degrees.  The 
airplane initially touched down (transitioned from air to ground) at an indicated airspeed of 
124 knots, and reached a maximum vertical acceleration of 1.36 g's.  The next DFDR sample of 
the air to ground parameter showed a transition back to "air" while the pitch remained close to 
5 degrees and the vertical acceleration dropped to 0.6 g's over the next 2 seconds.
The second air to ground transition occurred 3 seconds after the first transition.  The indicated 
airspeed was 121 knots, and the vertical acceleration quickly changes from 0.6 g's to 1.64 g's in 
0.5 seconds.  The elevator positions changed over the next second from plus 6 degrees to minus 
16 degrees and reached a maximum of -20 degrees 1 second later.  In response to the elevators, 
the pitch attitude rapidly decreased from 3.5 degrees to -0.7 degrees at a rotation rate of 4 
degrees per second.  As the airplane rotated nose down, a maximum vertical acceleration of 
1.77 g's is reached as the longitudinal acceleration increases from zero to -0.28 g's.  (See the 
Flight Data Recorder Factual report for additional details.)  The Delta participant reported no 
evidence of any mechanical malfunctions during the landing event.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airframe examination revealed no evidence of a tail strike.  The main landing gear was 
undamaged.  A summary of principal airframe structural damage is as follows:  
1.  Buckled nose gear wheel well aft bulkhead; 2.  Buckled skin on both sides of the nose gear 
wheel well bulkhead; and 3.  Damage to associated underlying structure.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The Safety Board did not take custody of the airplane.
