Another pilot in the airport traffic pattern saw the accident airplane, and requested the 
accident pilot's intentions. There was no response, but the accident airplane appeared to enter 
a right base for the active runway.  The airplane overshot the runway, then turned back, and 
entered a left base for the same runway.  It overshot the final approach course, but corrected 
with a steep turn, and continued making 'S' turns during the final approach.  The airplane then 
pitched up and mushed into trees about 200 yards short of the runway.  The airplane's canopy 
was found about 2 miles from the accident scene, and the latching mechanism exhibited no 
sign of overstress, or of being latched.  Another owner of a Long EZ stated that the airplane 
would have been difficult to control without a canopy. 
The separation of  the airplane canopy for undetermined reasons, the diminished 
controllability of the airplane, and the pilot's failure to maintain airspeed resulting  in a 
stall/mush into trees short of the runway. 
 On June 2, 1999, at 0937 Eastern Daylight Time, a homebuilt Long EZ, N555L, was destroyed 
during an emergency approach to Potomac Airfield (VKX), Friendly, Maryland.  The 
certificated private pilot was fatally injured.  Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the 
time of the accident.  No flight plan was filed for the flight, between Washington 
Executive/Hyde Field (W32), Clinton, Maryland, and Middle Georgia Regional Airport (MCN), 
Macon, Georgia.  The personal flight was conducted under 14 CFR Part 91.
According to witnesses, the airplane departed Clinton about 0830, and was later seen north of 
Potomac Airfield, flying low.  Another pilot in the traffic pattern at Potomac saw the accident 
airplane, and requested the pilot's intentions.  There was no response, but the accident airplane 
appeared to enter a right base for Runway 24.  The airplane overshot the runway, then turned 
back, and entered a left base for the same runway.  It overshot the final approach course, but 
corrected with a steep turn, and "continued making 'S' turns down final approach.  [It] started 
getting very close to the trees; I could see [the] shadow almost touch the plane."  The airplane 
then "pitched up...and mushed down into trees about 200 yards short of 24.  It appeared the 
prop was windmilling a few seconds before [the airplane] hit the trees." 
According to a Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Inspector, cut trees were found leading 
to the wreckage, one blade of the wooden propeller was fractured while the other had split a 
small tree trunk, and fuel was found onboard the airplane.  The airplane's canopy was found 
about 2 miles away, in the Potomac River. 
The inspector further stated:  
"There were no visible marks or concerns pertinent to the canopy or latching mechanism....  
The latching mechanism operated normally - the safety latch appeared functional.  The screw 
holes on [the] canopy hinges were enlarged due to screws that were pulled through holes when 
canopy separated from aircraft."
Another Long EZ owner informed the Inspector that the latching mechanism consisted of three 
latches with a safety lock.  He also noted that a Long EZ would be difficult to control without a 
canopy.
Maintenance information about the airplane was not recovered.
Winds, reported at an airport 6 nautical miles to the northeast, 14 minutes after the accident, 
were from 200 degrees magnetic, at 11 knots.
