Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Palmdale, CA
Accident Number:
LAX04LA112
Date & Time:
02/01/2004, 1627 PST 
Registration:
N4861F
Aircraft:
Piper PA-28-181
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
4 None
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The airplane collided with power lines during a forced landing following a loss of engine power.  
After about 2 hours 40 minutes of flight, the pilot retarded the throttle to begin his descent into 
an airport where he planned to refuel.  The engine immediately lost power, and he felt 
roughness and a vibration.  He turned the electric fuel boost pump on, and switched fuel tanks.  
The engine continued to sputter.  He could not make a nearby airfield, and set up to land on a 
road.  The airplane collided with power lines on the way down and the rudder separated from 
the airplane.  The pilot was able to land on the road and then collided with multiple obstacles 
during the ground roll.  Examination revealed that the fuel selector valve was on the right tank.  
The left fuel tank did not sustain mechanical damage, but the right tank was ruptured.  There 
was about 1 quart of fuel in the left tank.  There was about 50 milliliters of fuel in the gascolator 
and the carburetor contained about 75 milliliters of fuel.  Fuel was added to the airplane and 
the engine was test run using the airplane systems.  The engine started immediately.  There 
were no leaks, and the engine did not hesitate, sputter, or backfire.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
loss of engine power for undetermined reasons.
Page 2 of 6LAX04LA112
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER
Phase of Operation: DESCENT
Findings
1. (C) REASON FOR OCCURRENCE UNDETERMINED
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: IN FLIGHT COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
Findings
2. OBJECT - WIRE,TRANSMISSION
----------
Occurrence #4: ON GROUND/WATER COLLISION WITH OBJECT
Phase of Operation: LANDING - ROLL
Findings
3. OBJECT - FENCE POST
4. OBJECT - POLE
Page 3 of 6LAX04LA112
Factual Information
On February 1, 2004, at 1627 Pacific standard time, a Piper PA-28-181, N4861F, collided with 
power lines during a forced landing following a loss of engine power at Palmdale, California.  
Continental Flight Center was operating the rental airplane under the provisions of 14 CFR 
Part 91.  The commercial pilot and three passengers were not injured; the airplane sustained 
substantial damage.  The personal cross-country flight departed Bullhead City, Arizona, about 
1445 mountain standard time, en route to Agua Dulce, California.  Visual meteorological 
conditions prevailed, and no flight plan had been filed.
The pilot submitted a written report.  He stated that he climbed to 4,500 feet after departure.  
He descended to 3,500 feet near Barstow, California.  He climbed again south of Palmdale.  He 
had just retarded the throttle to begin his descent into Agua Dulce where he planned to refuel.  
The engine immediately lost power, and he felt roughness and a vibration.  He turned the 
electric fuel boost pump on, and switched fuel tanks.  The engine continued to sputter.  He 
tried to contact Palmdale's air traffic control tower, but determined that he could not make the 
field.  He set up to land on a road.  The airplane collided with power lines on the way down.  
The rudder separated from the airplane, but the pilot landed the airplane on the road.  The 
nose gear separated at the curb.  The right wing collided with a tree, and part of the wing 
separated.  The airplane came to rest in a parking lot.
The left fuel tank did not sustain mechanical damage, but the right tank was ruptured.  The 
recovery agent drained about 1 quart of a blue fluid from the left tank.
The National Transportation Safety Board investigator-in-charge (IIC) examined the airplane 
at Aircraft Recovery Service, Littlerock, California, on February 10, 2004.
The fuel selector valve was on the right tank.  The IIC drained about 50 milliliters of a blue 
fluid that smelled like aviation gasoline from the gascolator.
The carburetor air box was not contaminated.  The throttle and mixture controls at the 
carburetor were in the closed position and moved freely.
The IIC removed the top spark plugs.  All of the electrodes were oval and gray.  The electrodes 
for cylinders no. 3 and 4 were lighter gray than the others.  All of the gaps were similar, and 
none of them exhibited mechanical damage.
The IIC removed the rocker covers.  He manually rotated the crankshaft with the propeller.  
The vacuum pump and accessory gears rotated freely.  He obtained thumb compression on all 
cylinders in firing order.  He observed spark in firing order from the top ignition harness leads.
The IIC removed the drain plug from the carburetor and drained about 75 milliliters of a clear, 
light blue fluid that smelled like aviation gasoline.
The IIC installed the drain plug, rocker covers, and spark plugs.  Both of the propeller blades 
were bent aft.  A mechanic plumbed a fuel can into the fuel system.  He ran the engine, which 
started immediately, for about 1 minute at 750 rpm.  The IIC did not observe any leaks, and the 
engine did not hesitate, sputter, or backfire.  The IIC had the mechanic shut the engine down 
with the mixture control due to heavy vibration from the unbalanced, damaged propeller.
Page 4 of 6LAX04LA112
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Flight Instructor; Commercial
Age:
61, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Right
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
Airplane Single-engine
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 2 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
09/01/2003
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
09/01/2003
Flight Time:
1800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1300 hours (Total, this make and model), 1600 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft), 6 hours (Last 90 days, all aircraft), 1 hours (Last 30 days, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Piper
Registration:
N4861F
Model/Series:
PA-28-181 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
28-7790068
Landing Gear Type: 
Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
 Unknown
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2550 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
7126.08 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Lycoming
ELT:
Installed, not activated
Engine Model/Series:
O-360-A4M
Registered Owner:
Continental Flight Center
Rated Power:
180 hp
Operator:
Continental Flight Center
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6LAX04LA112
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
PMD, 2559 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
4 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
1553 PST
Direction from Accident Site:
0°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
5 knots / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
260°
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
29.99 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
14°C / -6°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
No Obscuration; No Precipitation
Departure Point: 
Bullhead City, AZ (IFP)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Agua Dulce, CA (L70)
Type of Clearance:
None
Departure Time:
1445 MST
Type of Airspace: 
Class G
Airport Information
Airport:
Auga Dulce Airpark (L70)
Runway Surface Type:
Unknown
Airport Elevation:
2660 ft
Runway Surface Condition:
Unknown
Runway Used:
NA
IFR Approach:
None
Runway Length/Width:
 
VFR Approach/Landing:
Forced Landing
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 None
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
3 None
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
4 None
Latitude, Longitude:
34.566667, -118.116667
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
HOWARD D PLAGENS
Adopted Date:
10/31/2006
Additional Participating Persons:
Dennis McCracken; Federal Aviation Administration; Van Nuys, CA
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6LAX04LA112
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
