Page 1 of 6
National Transportation Safety Board
Aviation Accident Final Report
Location:
Immokalee, FL
Accident Number:
MIA04LA050
Date & Time:
02/03/2004, 1015 EST 
Registration:
N252WF
Aircraft:
Mooney M20K
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Defining Event:
Injuries:
2 Minor
Flight Conducted Under:
Part 91: General Aviation - Personal
Analysis 
The pilot stated that  the airplane was in cruise flight, at an altitude of 4,500 feet, when he 
detected a slight engine vibration. He noted that the fuel consumption had increased from the 
usual 12.5 gals/hr to 15.7 gals/hr, at 2,300 rpm and a manifold pressure of 30.00. Shortly 
thereafter he said the engine ceased operating. and he made a forced landing to the field. 
During the landing rollout the airplane incurred damage. An FAA airframe and powerplant 
mechanic with an inspection authorization rating, who responded to the scene of the accident 
stated that he found the B-nut on the inlet side of the fuel flow divider loose, about one full 
turn. In addition he said he saw signatures consistent with a leak which originated at the B-nut 
and ran down the right front of the engine case. Follow-on examination of the accident airplane 
revealed that at the connection of the B-nut on the fuel inlet line to the manifold, there was 
torque putty on the threaded connection on the manifold side, and no putty was observed on 
the B-nut. In addition, when conditions were recreated and the engine given a test run, when 
the electric fuel boost pump turned on, fuel leaked from around the B-nut. According to the 
airplane's engine log book, the engine had been rebuilt by Teledyne Continental Motors, and 
shipped to Mod Works Inc., Punta Gorda, Florida, who installed it in the accident airplane on 
March 03, 2003. At the time of the accident the engine had accumulated a total time of 80 
hours since installation, and had received two previous oil changes, all of which had been 
performed by Mod Works Inc.
Probable Cause and Findings
The National Transportation Safety Board determines the probable cause(s) of this accident to be:
A loss of engine power due to the airplane mechanic's improper maintenance/installation and 
failure to ensure that the B-nut on the inlet side of the fuel manifold was properly tightened, 
which resulted in a fuel leak, and fuel starvation.
Page 2 of 6MIA04LA050
Findings
Occurrence #1: LOSS OF ENGINE POWER(TOTAL) - MECH FAILURE/MALF
Phase of Operation: CRUISE - NORMAL
Findings
1. (C) MAINTENANCE,INSTALLATION - IMPROPER - OTHER MAINTENANCE PERSONNEL
2. FUEL SYSTEM,LINE FITTING - LOOSE PART/BOLT/NUT/CLAMP/ETC
3. FLUID,FUEL - LEAK
4. FLUID,FUEL - STARVATION
----------
Occurrence #2: FORCED LANDING
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY DESCENT/LANDING
----------
Occurrence #3: ON GROUND/WATER ENCOUNTER WITH TERRAIN/WATER
Phase of Operation: EMERGENCY LANDING
Findings
5. TERRAIN CONDITION - PLOWED/FURROWED
Page 3 of 6MIA04LA050
Factual Information
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On February 3, 2004, about 1015, eastern standard time, a Mooney M-20K, N252WF, 
registered to and operated by a private individual as a Title 14 CFR Part 91 personal flight, 
made a forced landing in a potato field, about 7 miles east of Immokalee Airport, Immokalee, 
Florida. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed, and no flight plan was filed. The private-
rated pilot and one passenger received minor injuries, and the airplane incurred substantial 
damage. The flight originated at Kendall-Tamiami Airport, Miami, Florida, the same day, 
about 0945.
The pilot stated that he was en route to Punta Gorda, Florida, to the Mooney maintenance 
facility where he has his airplane serviced, to have a 25-hr oil change performed. He further 
stated that the airplane was in cruise flight, at an altitude of 4,500 feet, when he detected a 
slight engine vibration. He noted that the fuel consumption had increased from the usual 12.5 
gals/hr to 15.7 gals/hr, at 2,300 rpm and a manifold pressure of 30.00. He said that the 
characteristics he noted at that time were similar to those of a partially  plugged fuel  injector 
he had encountered in the past, and since he was half the distance to Punta Gorda, he elected 
to continue. Shortly thereafter he said the engine ceased operating. He said there were no 
sputtering or other noises, the engine just abruptly ceased operating, while the propeller 
continued to windmill. He said he established the proper glide attitude, while looking for a 
place to land. He said he switched fuel tanks, turned  on the boost pump, and attempted to 
restart the engine, but it did not restart. At an altitude of about 3,000 feet, he said he noticed a 
field with long furrows, and after declaring an emergency and performing prelanding tasks, 
made a forced landing to the field. During the landing rollout the airplane incurred damage.
An FAA airframe and powerplant mechanic with an inspection authorization rating, who 
responded to the scene of the accident stated that he found the B-nut on the inlet side of the 
fuel flow divider loose, about one full turn. In addition he said he saw signatures consistent 
with a leak which originated at the B-nut and ran down the right front of the engine case.
On February 10, 2004, the NTSB conducted a follow-on examination of the accident airplane. 
Assisting the NTSB was a representative from Teledyne Continental Motors, as well as the 
airplane mechanic who had responded to the scene of the accident, and had witnessed the 
loose B-nut on the inlet side of the fuel flow divider. The examination revealed that the fuel 
manifold was properly positioned, and there were no anomalies noted with the unit. In 
addition, when the fuel manifold was opened, the screen was found to be clean and fuel was 
present.  At the connection of the B-nut on the fuel inlet line to the manifold, torque putty was 
noted on the threaded connection on the manifold side, and no putty was observed on the B-
nut. In addition, the engine was given an initial test run and no anomalies were noted. The B-
nut was then placed in the position it was found at the accident scene, and the engine tested a 
second time, and during the test run, when the electric fuel boost pump turned on, fuel poured 
from around the B-nut.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
The accident airplane was equipped with a Teledyne Continental Motors TSIO-360-MB2B, 210 
horsepower engine, serial number 279325-R.  According to the airplane's engine log book, the 
engine had been rebuilt by Teledyne Continental Motors, and shipped to Mod Works Inc., 
Page 4 of 6MIA04LA050
Punta Gorda, Florida, who installed it in the accident airplane on March 03, 2003. According 
to the engine logbook, at the time of the accident the engine had accumulated a total time of 80 
hours since installation, and had received two previous oil changes, all of which had been 
performed by Mod Works Inc.
Pilot Information
Certificate: 
Private
Age:
68, Male
Airplane Rating(s):
Single-engine Land
Seat Occupied:
Left
Other Aircraft Rating(s): 
None
Restraint Used: 
Seatbelt, Shoulder 
harness
Instrument Rating(s):
Airplane
Second Pilot Present:
No
Instructor Rating(s): 
None
Toxicology Performed: 
No
Medical Certification:
Class 3 Valid Medical--w/ 
waivers/lim.
Last FAA Medical Exam:
11/18/2002
Occupational Pilot:
Last Flight Review or Equivalent:
04/22/2002
Flight Time:
1800 hours (Total, all aircraft), 1560 hours (Total, this make and model), 1800 hours (Pilot In 
Command, all aircraft)
Aircraft and Owner/Operator Information
Aircraft Make:
Mooney
Registration:
N252WF
Model/Series:
M20K 
Aircraft Category:
Airplane
Year of Manufacture:
Amateur Built:
No
Airworthiness Certificate:
Normal
Serial Number:
25-1189
Landing Gear Type: 
Retractable - Tricycle
Seats: 
4
Date/Type of Last Inspection:
03/03/2003, Annual
Certified Max Gross Wt.:
2900 lbs
Time Since Last Inspection:
80 Hours
Engines:
1 Reciprocating
Airframe Total Time:
1680 Hours at time of 
accident
Engine Manufacturer:
Teledyne Continental
ELT:
Installed, activated, aided in 
locating accident
Engine Model/Series:
TSIO-360-MB2B
Registered Owner:
George M. Darnell
Rated Power:
210 hp
Operator:
George M. Darnell
Operating Certificate(s) 
Held:
None
Page 5 of 6MIA04LA050
Meteorological Information and Flight Plan
Conditions at Accident Site:
Visual Conditions
Condition of Light:
Day
Observation Facility, Elevation:
APF, 9 ft msl
Distance from Accident Site:
28 Nautical Miles
Observation Time:
0953 EST
Direction from Accident Site:
218°
Lowest Cloud Condition:
Clear 
Visibility
10 Miles
Lowest Ceiling:
None 
Visibility (RVR):
Wind Speed/Gusts: 
 / 
Turbulence Type 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Wind Direction:
Turbulence Severity 
Forecast/Actual:
 / 
Altimeter Setting:
30.15 inches Hg
Temperature/Dew Point:
21°C / 15°C
Precipitation and Obscuration:
Departure Point: 
Miami, FL (TMB)
Type of Flight Plan Filed:
None
Destination: 
Punta Gorda, FL (PGD)
Type of Clearance:
VFR Flight Following
Departure Time:
0945 EST
Type of Airspace: 
Class E
Wreckage and Impact Information
Crew Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Damage:
Substantial
Passenger Injuries:
1 Minor
Aircraft Fire:
None
Ground Injuries:
N/A
Aircraft Explosion:
None
Total Injuries:
2 Minor
Latitude, Longitude:
26.433056, -81.401111
Administrative Information
Investigator In Charge (IIC):
John  W Lovell
Adopted Date:
09/13/2005
Additional Participating Persons:
Lorenzo Valerio; FAA FSDO; Miami, FL
Publish Date:
Investigation Docket:
NTSB accident and incident dockets serve as permanent archival information for the NTSB™s 
investigations. Dockets released prior to June 1, 2009 are publicly available from the NTSB™s 
Record Management Division at 
pubinq@ntsb.gov
, or at 800-877-6799. Dockets released after 
this date are available at 
http://dms.ntsb.gov/pubdms/
. 
Page 6 of 6MIA04LA050
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), established in 1967, is an independent federal agency mandated 
by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine 
the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate 
the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and 
decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and 
statistical reviews. 
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence 
or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a 
matter mentioned in the report.
